filename	tr #	author pid	pub date	full textfrus1964-68v15.xml	Foreign Relations of the United States 1964–1968 Volume XV Germany and Berlin Department of StateWashington, DC Editor: James E. Miller General Editor: David S. Patterson United States Government Printing Office Washington 1999 DEPARTMENT OF STATE PUBLICATION 10588 Office Of The HistorianBureau Of Public Affairs For sale by the U.S. Government Printing OfficeSuperintendent of DocumentsMail Stop: SSOPWashington, DC 20402-9328ISBN 0-16-049248-3 Preface The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted. The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991. A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State’s Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.). The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government. The statute also confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded. The editor is convinced that this volume, which was compiled in 1994–1996, meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing. Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the 5 years (1964–1968) of the administration of Lyndon B. Johnson. The subseries presents in 34 volumes a documentary record of major foreign policy decisions and actions of President Johnson’s administration. This volume documents U.S. policy toward the Federal Republic of Germany and the Berlin question. Principles of Document Selection for the Foreign Relations Series In preparing each volume of the Foreign Relations series, the editors are guided by some general principles for the selection of documents. Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary. The following general selection criteria are used in preparing volumes in the Foreign Relations series. Individual compiler-editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation. The editors also apply these selection criteria in accordance with their own interpretation of the generally accepted standards of scholarship. In selecting documentation for publication, the editors gave priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records (which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes). Selection Criteria (in general order of priority): 1. Major foreign affairs commitments made on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identify the principal foreign affairs interests of the United States; 2. Major foreign affairs issues, commitments, negotiations, and activities, whether or not major decisions were made, and including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted; 3. The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy; 4. The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the policy options brought before these bodies or their individual members; 5. The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement Presidential decisions or policies; 6. Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspondence, and other exchanges between U.S. representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy implementation on major issues; 7. Important elements of information that attended Presidential decisions and policy recommendations of the Secretary of State; 8. Major foreign affairs decisions, negotiations, and commitments undertaken on behalf of the United States by government officials and representatives in other agencies in the foreign affairs community or other branches of government made without the involvement (or even knowledge) of the White House or the Department of State; 9. The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward a nation or region or if they provided key information in the formulation of major U.S. policies, including relevant National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates as may be declassified; 10. The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions; 11. Economic aspects of foreign policy; 12. The main policy lines of U.S. military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance; 13. The political-military recommendations, decisions, and activities of the military establishment and major regional military commands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major U.S. foreign policies; 14. Diplomatic appointments that reflect major policies or affect policy changes. Sources for the Foreign Relations Series The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major U.S. foreign policy decisions and significant U.S. diplomatic activity. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government engaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. Many of the sources consulted in the preparation of this volume have been declassified and are available for review at the National Archives and Records Administration. The declassification review and opening for public review of all Department of State records no later than 30 years after the events is mandated by the Foreign Relations statute. The Department of State and other record sources used in the volume are described in detail in the section on Sources below. Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, Volume XV The editor of the volume sought to include documentation illuminating the foreign policymaking process of the U.S. Government, with emphasis on the highest level at which policy on a particular subject was determined. The documents include memoranda and records of discussions that set forth policy issues and show decisions or actions taken. The emphasis is on the development of U.S. policy and on major aspects and repercussions of its execution rather than on the details of policy execution. President Johnson made major foreign policy decisions himself with the advice of top administration officials. The editor sought to document, as far as possible, the President’s decision-making. Although the record of policy formulation in the Johnson administration is voluminous, many discussions between Johnson and his advisers were not recorded. The record of both President Johnson’s and Secretary of State Rusk’s involvement in the policymaking process was assembled by the editor from a wide spectrum of files. The volume focuses on the German issues that primarily engaged high-level U.S. policymakers: 1) U.S. efforts to retain a privileged relationship with the Federal Republic of Germany’s leadership; 2) the attempts of U.S. policymakers to provide carefully measured support for West German initiatives aimed at achieving national reunification, including its emerging Ostpolitik; 3) U.S. efforts to secure a larger offset payment by the Federal Republic of Germany to cover the costs of maintaining U.S. forces in Europe; 4) the desire of the United States to secure West German support for a Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty; 5) U.S.-French differences over policy toward Germany; and 6) the development of policy toward the Berlin question. Editorial Methodology The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted. Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume. Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. The amount of material omitted from this volume because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated. All brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes. The first footnote to each document indicates the document’s source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This note also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and, if so, this information has been included in the source footnote. Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record. Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. Although the Advisory Committee does not attempt to review the contents of individual volumes in the series, it does monitor the overall process and makes recommendations on particular problems that come to its attention. The Advisory Committee has not reviewed this volume. Declassification Review The final declassification review of this volume, which began in 1996 and was completed in 1998, resulted in the decision to withhold about 1.5 percent of the documentation selected. Three lengthy documents containing political analysis were denied in full. Despite these omissions, the documentation presented here provides what the editor is confident is an accurate account of U.S. policy toward the Federal Republic of Germany and the Berlin question during the 1964–1968 period. The Information Response Branch of the Office of IRM Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12958 on Classified National Security Information and applicable laws. Under Executive Order 12958, specific information may be exempt from automatic declassification after 25 years if its release could be expected to: 1) reveal the identity of a confidential human source, or reveal information about the application of an intelligence source or method, or reveal the identity of a human intelligence source when the unauthorized disclosure of that source would clearly and demonstrably damage the national security interests of the United States; 2) reveal information that would assist in the development or use of weapons of mass destruction; 3) reveal information that would impair U.S. cryptologic systems or activities; 4) reveal information that would impair the application of state of the art technology within the U.S. weapon system; 5) reveal actual U.S. military war plans that remain in effect; 6) reveal information that would seriously and demonstrably impair relations between the United States and a foreign government, or seriously and demonstrably undermine ongoing diplomatic activities of the United States; 7) reveal information that would clearly and demonstrably impair the current ability of U.S. Government officials to protect the President, Vice President, and other officials for whom protection services, in the interest of national security, are authorized; 8) reveal information that would seriously and demonstrably impair current national security emergency preparedness plans; or 9) violate a statute, treaty, or international agreement. The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments. Acknowledgements The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the Lyndon B. Johnson Library of the National Archives and Records Administration, especially David C. Humphrey, Regina Greenwell, and Charlaine Burgess, who provided key research assistance. The editor also wishes to acknowledge the assistance of historians at the Central Intelligence Agency, particularly Michael Warner. James E. Miller and Charles S. Sampson collected documentation for this volume. Miller selected and edited the volume, under the general supervision of former General Editor Glenn W. LaFantasie. Elizabeth Schwartz and David Geyer prepared the lists of names, sources, and abbreviations. Vicki E. Futscher and Rita M. Baker did the copy and technical editing. Breffni Whelan prepared the index. William Slany The Historian Bureau of Public Affairs January 1999 Johnson Administration Volumes Following is a list of the volumes in the Foreign Relations series for the administration of President Lyndon B. Johnson. The titles of individual volumes may change. The year of publication is in parentheses after the title. Print Volumes I Vietnam, 1964 (1992) II Vietnam, January–June 1965 (1996) III Vietnam, July–December 1965 (1996) IV Vietnam, 1966 (1998) V Vietnam, 1967 VI Vietnam, 1968 VII Vietnam, 1968 VIII International Monetary and Trade Policy (1998) IX International Development and Economic Defense Policy; Commodities (1997) X National Security Policy XI Arms Control and Disarmament (1997) XII Western Europe XIII Western Europe Region (1995) XIV Soviet Union XV Germany and Berlin (1999) XVI Cyprus; Greece; Turkey XVII Eastern Europe; Austria; Finland (1996) XVIII Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1964–1967 XIX Six-Day War XX Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1967–1968 XXI Near East Region; Arab Peninsula XXII Iran XXIII Congo XXIV Africa XXV South Asia XXVI Indonesia; Malaysia-Singapore; Philippines XXVII Mainland Southeast Asia; Regional Affairs XXVIII Laos (1998) XXIX Korea; Japan XXX China (1998) XXXI Central and South America; Mexico XXXII Dominican Crisis; Cuba; Caribbean XXXIII Organization of Foreign Policy; United Nations; Vatican XXXIV Energy Diplomacy and Global Issues Contents Preface Johnson Administration Volumes Sources Abbreviations Persons Germany and Berlin Index Sources The editors of the Foreign Relations series have complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department’s Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. When this volume was being compiled, the Department of State records consulted were still under the custody of the Department, and the footnotes citing Department of State files suggest that the Department is the repository. By the time of publication, however, all the Department’s indexed central files for these years had been permanently transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration (Archives II) at College Park, Maryland. Many of the Department’s decentralized office (or lot) files covering this period, which the National Archives deems worthy of permanent retention, are in the process of being transferred from the Department’s custody to Archives II. The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have full access to the papers of President Johnson and other White House foreign policy records. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from the Department of State and other Federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In preparing this volume, the editor made extensive use of Presidential papers and other White House records at the Lyndon B. Johnson Library. Numerous White House memoranda, including memoranda to the President, testify to President Johnson’s concern with issues relating to the Federal Republic of Germany, especially the maintenance of personal ties with successive German Chancellors. The bulk of the foreign policy records at the Johnson Library are in the country files and other component parts of the National Security File. The Department of State arranged for access to the many audiotapes of President Johnson’s telephone conversations that are held at the Johnson Library. These audiotapes include substantial numbers of telephone conversations between President Johnson and Secretary of State Rusk, Secretary of Defense McNamara, the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs McGeorge Bundy, and key members of Congress. The editor of this volume selected for publication two audiotapes of President Johnson’s telephone conversations dealing with Germany. Transcripts were then prepared. Although the transcripts give the substance of the conversations, readers are urged to consult the recordings for a full appreciation of those dimensions that cannot be captured fully in a transcription, such as the speakers' inflections and emphases that may convey nuances of meaning. Second in importance only to the White House records at the Johnson Library were the records of the Department of State. The Department’s central files contain the cable traffic recording U.S. diplomatic relations with the Federal Republic of Germany, memoranda of diplomatic conversations, and memoranda proposing action or providing information. Some important documents are found only in the Department’s lot files. The Conference Files maintained by the Executive Secretariat contain briefing materials as well as records of conversations. Documentation on initiatives that were not approved is often found only in desk or bureau files. The Rusk Files contain records of Secretary Rusk’s telephone conversations. The Central Intelligence Agency provides access to Department of State historians to high-level intelligence documents from those records in the custody of that Agency and at the Presidential libraries. This access is arranged and facilitated by the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, pursuant to a May 1992 memorandum of understanding. Department of State and CIA historians continue to work out the procedural and scholarly aspects of identifying the key portions of the intelligence record. The editor included a selection of intelligence estimates and analyses seen by high-level policymakers, especially those that were sent to President Johnson. Among the intelligence records reviewed for the volume were files of the Directors of Central Intelligence, especially John McCone,CIA intelligence reports and summaries, retired files of the Department of State’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research containing National Intelligence Estimates, and the INR Historical Files. Almost all of this documentation has been made available for use in the Foreign Relations series thanks to the consent of the agencies mentioned, the assistance of their staffs, and especially the cooperation and support of the National Archives and Records Administration. The following list identifies the particular files and collections used in the preparation of this volume. The declassification and transfer to the National Archives of these records is in process. Many of the records are already available for public review at the National Archives. The declassification review of other records is going forward in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order 12958, under which all records over 25 years old, except file series exemptions requested by agencies and approved by the President, should be reviewed for declassification by 2000. Unpublished Sources Department of State Central Files. See National Archives and Records Administration below. Lot Files. These files have been transferred or will be transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration at College Park Maryland, Record Group 59. Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110 Documentation on international conferences attended by the President, Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, May 1961–December 1964. Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347 Documentation on official visits by heads of state and government and foreign ministers to the United States and on trips taken and international conferences attended by the President, Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials for 1965. Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305 Documentation on international conferences attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, January 1966–October 1966. Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586 Documentation on trips taken and international conferences attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, October 1966–May 1967. Conference Files: Lot 67 D 587 Documentation on visits to the U.S. by heads of state and government and foreign ministers, October 1966–May 1967. Conference Files: Lot 68 D 453 Documentation on trips taken and international conferences attended by the President, Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, May 1967–January 1968. Conference Files: Lot 69 D 182 Documentation on trips taken and international conferences attended by the President, Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials for 1968. German Desk Files: Lot 76 D 170 Files of the Office of German Affairs and the Country Director for Germany. Kohler Files: Lot 71 D 460 Files of Foy D. Kohler for 1962–1968, including memoranda of his discussions with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin and Foreign Minister Gromyko. NSC and Cabinet Files: Lot 72 D 318 Files on NSC Meetings, 1966–1968, the Cabinet, 1967, and the NSC Special Committee, 1967. Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204 Correspondence of the President and Secretary of State with their counterparts in the Federal Republic of Germany and other countries, 1953–1964. Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 294 Correspondence of the President and Secretary of State with foreign officials, 1961–1965. Presidential Correspondence: Lot 71 D 370 Correspondence of the President with foreign officials, 1961–1969. Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163 Correspondence of Presidents Kennedy and Johnson with leaders of the Soviet Union, 1961–1969. Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Memoranda of conversation of the Secretary and Under Secretary of State, 1961–1964. SIG Files: Lot 74 D 344 Records of the Senior Interdepartmental Group and Interdepartmental Regional Groups, 1966–1969. S/P Files: Lot 71 D 273 Subject Files of the Policy Planning Council, 1960–1968. S/S-I Files Lot 79 D 246 Microfilmed master files of international conferences attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, 1956–1966. Thompson Files: Lot 67 D 2 Files of Llewellyn E. Thompson, Jr., as Ambassador at Large, 1962–1966. National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland Record Group 59, General Records of the Department of State Subject-Numeric Indexed Central Files Following are the principal files used for this volume: DEF 18–6, arms control and disarmament: control measures INCO GRAINS EEC, grain issues concerning the European Economic Community NATO 3 BEL (BR), North Atlantic Treaty Organization meetings, Brussels NATO 3 FR (PA), North Atlantic Treaty Organization meetings, Paris NATO 3 LUX, North Atlantic Treaty Organization meetings, Luxembourg NATO 3 UK (LO), North Atlantic Treaty Organization meetings, London ORG 7 S, trips by Secretary Rusk POL EUR E–EUR W, political affairs and relations between East and West Europe POL EUR E–GER, political affairs and relations between Eastern Europe and Germany POL FR–GER W, political affairs and relations between France and West Germany POL GER W–US, political affairs and relations between the U.S. and West Germany POL US–USSR, political affairs and relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union POL 1 EUR E–GER W, general policy and background concerning Eastern European- West German relations POL 1 GER E–GER W, general policy and background concerning inner-German relations POL 1 GER W, general policy and background concerning West Germany POL 1 GER W–US, general policy and background concerning U.S.-West German relations POL 7 GER W, visits and meetings concerning West Germany POL 7 GER W–US, visits and meetings between U.S. and West German officials POL 14 GER B, elections in Berlin POL 14 GER W, elections in West Germany POL 15 GER W, West German government POL 15–1 GER W, head of state, executive branch in West Germany POL 15–2 GER W, West German legislature (Bundestag) POL 17 GER W–US, West German diplomatic and consular representation in the U.S. POL 17–8 US, US contacts with Communist representatives POL 23–4 GER, internal security issues involving Germany POL 23–10 GER, travel control to Germany POL 23–10 GER B, travel control to Berlin POL 28 GER, government of occupied Germany POL 28 GER B, government of Berlin POL 32–1 GER, territory and boundary disputes, violations, and incidents in Germany POL 32–3 GER-POL, partition of territory between Germany and Poland POL 32–4 GER, unification of German territories POL 38–6, quadripartite organizations on access to Berlin POL 38–8, harassment and blockage of access to Berlin PPV 7 GER W–US, news agencies and press associations in West Germany and the U.S. RG 220, Gift Collection Papers of Robert S. McNamara Lyndon B. Johnson Library, Austin, Texas Papers of Lyndon B. Johnson National Security File Country File Head of State Correspondence Memos to the President National Intelligence Estimates National Security Council Meetings File Walt W. Rostow Files Special Head of State Correspondence Special Files Meeting Notes File President’s Daily Diary Recordings and Transcripts of Telephone Conversations and Meetings Other Personal Papers Francis M. Bator Papers Clark M. Clifford Papers Dean Rusk Papers Personal Appointment Book John F. Kennedy Library Papers of John F. Kennedy National Security Files Countries Series, Germany Published Sources Adenauer, Konrad. Reden, 1917–1967: Eine Auswahl. Edited by Hans-Peter Schwarz. Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 1975. Brandt, Willy. My Life in Politics. New York: Penguin Books, 1992. Current Digest of the Soviet Press. 1964–1968. De Gaulle, Charles. Discours et Messages. 5 vols. Paris: Plon, 1970–1971. Europa Archiv, 1964–1968. Griffith, William E. Sino-Soviet Relations, 1964–1965. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967. Johnson, Lyndon B. The Vantage Point: Perspectives of the Presidency. New York: Holt, Rinehart, Winston, 1971. McGhee, George C. At the Creation of New Germany: From Adenauer to Brandt, an Ambassador’s Account. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1989. Meissner, Boris, ed. Die Deutsche Ostpolitik, 1961–1970. Kontinuitat und Wandel: Dokumentation. Cologne: Verlag Wissenschaft und Politik, 1970. Remington, Robin A., ed. Winter in Prague: Documents on Czechoslovak Communism in Crisis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969. Sulzberger, C. L. An Age of Mediocrity; Memoirs and Diaries. New York: Macmillan, 1973. U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Documents on Disarmament, 1962, 1967. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1963, 1968. U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Government Operations, Subcommittee on National Security and International Operations. The Atlantic Alliance. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1966. ————. U.S. Troops in Europe: Hearings Before the Combined Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations and Armed Services. United States Senate, 90th Congress, 1st Session. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967. U.S. Department of State. American Foreign Policy, 1950–1955: Basic Documents. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1957. ————. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents,1961–1968. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1965–1969. ————. Department of State Bulletin for 1964–1968. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964–1968. ————. Documents on Germany, 1944–1985. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1985. U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy. 3 vols. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1962–1964. ————. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson. 5 vols. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1965–1969. Summary Table of Contents: Foreword Summary Foreword (This is not an official statement of policy by the Department of State; it is intended only as a guide to the contents of this volume.) Since 1861, the Department of State’s documentary series Foreign Relations of the United States has constituted the official record of the foreign policy and diplomacy of the United States. Historians in the Office of the Historian collect, arrange, and annotate the principal documents comprising the record of American foreign policy. The standards for the preparation of the series and the general deadlines for its publication are established by the Foreign Relations of the United States statute of October 28, 1991 (22 USC 4351, et seq.). Volumes in the Foreign Relations series are published when all the necessary editing, declassification, and printing steps have been completed. The documents in this volume are drawn from the centralized indexed files of the Department of State and the decentralized Bureau, Office, and other lot files of the relevant Departmental units. The volume also includes records from the Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency. In addition, the editor made extensive use of the Presidential and other papers at the Lyndon B. Johnson Library in Austin, Texas. Almost all of the documents printed here were originally classified. The Information Response Branch of the Office of IRM Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, in concert with the appropriate offices in other agencies or governments, carried out the declassification of the selected documents. The following is a summary of the most important of the issues covered. Parenthetical citations are to numbered documents in the text. Summary Between 1964 and 1968, the Johnson administration was a participant in the process that Ambassador George C. McGhee called the creation of a new Germany. In the field of foreign affairs, Germany adopted a more activist and more European policy and searched for a new relationship with the Soviet Union and the states of Eastern Europe that would lay the groundwork for eventual reunification. In supporting this new German policy, the United States reinforced some of its own major policy objectives, including improving relations with the Soviet Union, “bridge building” to the East, a reduction of tensions over Berlin, continued European integration, and the reorganization of Western defenses. Reduction of Tensions Over Berlin and German Reunification The key to Germany’s new activism in foreign affairs was the decline of East-West tensions over Berlin. The Christmas 1963 accord that permitted family visits across the divided city signaled a reduction in the level of confrontation. While pleased with this development, the United States and its allies remained very concerned about future Soviet and East German actions. (1, 4) Sensing an opportunity where its allies saw none, the government of Chancellor Ludwig Erhard proposed in mid-January 1964 that the Western powers launch an initiative with the Soviets to lay the basis for eventual reunification of Germany. (2) Germany’s proposal met with great skepticism on the part of its major Allies. (3, 5–7, 9–10, 14) Secretary of State Dean Rusk commented that the proposal “did not have enough meat in it. It would risk “waking sleeping dogs” and stimulating the Soviets.” (13) Another major inhibiting factor from Washington’s perspective was two incidents in which U.S. aircraft that strayed into East German air space were shot down. Each incident had the potential to ratchet up tensions between East and West. (8, 19, 27) Nevertheless, under insistent German prodding (11–19), the Allies sought to find a way to meet German desires, strengthen the proposal, and time it to correspond to a more evident Soviet readiness to talk. (26–30) U.S. desire to win German support for a number of important policy initiatives, including its international economic projects, influenced its readiness to accommodate the German Government. (15, 22, 24) As part of U.S. diplomacy toward Germany, President Johnson attempted to improve the already warm personal relations he enjoyed with Chancellor Erhard. In personal messages, the President kept the German leader informed of overall U.S. policy and U.S. dealings with the Soviet Union on German-related matters. (15, 32) The reunification initiative remained key to meeting German desires. The Allies, however, were still unable to agree on an approach. At the NATO Foreign Ministers meeting at The Hague in May 1964, the Allies disagreed on the timing of such an initiative but managed to reach accord on a public position. (37) High-Level Meetings in Washington The onset of electoral maneuvering in Germany intensified pressures for a reunification initiative. In May, West Berlin Mayor Willy Brandt, the opposition Social Democratic Party leader, visited Washington. Brandt’s visit was both a campaign kick-off and the opportunity to exchange views that U.S. leaders took very seriously. (39–41) Chancellor Erhard followed Brandt to Washington within a month. Again U.S. preparations for the meeting were intense. (42, 45) In meetings with the President and other senior U.S. officials, the German delegation discussed plans for new initiatives in Eastern Europe, reunification projects, trade, and Soviet positions. (46–55) In a meeting with Secretary of Defense McNamara, Erhard reviewed differences over the level of German “offset” payments designed to reduce the burden on the United States of stationing U.S. troops in the Federal Republic of Germany. (53) The Washington meetings strengthened German-U.S. cooperation. American officials continued their efforts to craft a policy that would support a German reunification initiative. (57) Senior officials discussed and endorsed German initiatives to improve relations with the Soviet Union. Ambassador McGhee and Secretary Rusk agreed that these moves reinforced the U.S. “bridge building” policy. (63, 65) Emergence of Ostpolitik Willy Brandt was among those urging greater attention to improved German ties with the East. In late August 1964, he forwarded a memorandum outlining his ideas for an “Ostpolitik” initiative. (67) McGhee gave a favorable estimate of the emergence of a more constructive German East European policy. (71) The Ambassador, however, remained concerned about possible flare-ups of tension over Berlin, urging the U.S. military to avoid actions that might fuel a confrontation. (68, 70, 92) He moved to restrain former Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, another potential barrier to better relations with the Eastern states. (72) The December 1964 NATO Foreign Ministers meeting at Paris provided another opportunity to review the state of German plans for a reunification initiative. (74–76) Walt Rostow of the Policy Planning Council suggested a scenario for meeting German desires (81), while Ambassador McGhee pressed Washington on the need for meeting Germany’s request. (83) Secretary Rusk outlined U.S. concerns for McGhee. (84) Continuing German pressure on the issue (79, 80, 85) produced a blunt January 1965 response from an irritated President Johnson who stated that he had done his best to meet German requirements and saw no justification for any German “crisis of confidence” in U.S. policy. (86) McGhee, an experienced diplomat, soothed his superiors while moving the discussion forward toward a common ground between U.S. and German approaches to reunification. (87–89) In a February 1965 meeting with President Johnson, German Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein further smoothed out disagreements. (94) U.S.-French Tensions Over Germany Discussions of German policy took place against a background of deepening disagreements between the United States and France over a wide range of policy issues. French efforts to reduce both U.S. involvement in European affairs and its ties to Germany displeased Washington. Secretary Rusk bluntly told French leaders that the United States would continue its role as an “essential participant in all matters affecting German reunification and Berlin.” (11, 95, 96) U.S.-French disagreements over German policy were the cause of the Allies' failure to issue an agreed policy statement on German reunification in the Spring of 1965. (99, 102–106) After the French blocked a coordinated statement, the Western states made separate declarations to mark the May 8 anniversary of the founding of the Federal Republic. (107, 109–110) Chancellor Erhard’s Visits to Washington In June 1965, with German elections approaching, Chancellor Erhard again visited Washington. Germany’s ongoing problems with a Gaullist France dominated discussions. (112, 114–118) Shortly after the Erhard visit, a new clash over West German rights in Berlin led to a policy review in Washington and discussions with Bonn about the best manner to confront East German harassment of West German officials. (119–123, 125–126) The rise of tension over Berlin, in turn, refocused attention on the nature of U.S. and Allied efforts to advance German reunification. (124–125, 130, 132, 133) The Allies discussed German policy at the December 1965 Paris meeting of NATO Foreign Ministers. (134–136) Another visit by Chancellor Erhard to Washington in December 1965 gave U.S. officials the opportunity to try to expand German support for the Johnson administration’s top foreign policy priority, Vietnam. (138, 143) In 1966 Willy Brandt emerged as a more active proponent of a new policy approach to East Germany. As a first stage, he expanded and intensified his contacts with Soviet representatives in Berlin. (147) Johnson administration policymakers were generally favorable to a policy that would reduce Cold War barriers between the two Germanies. The impact of these initiatives was discussed at NATO’s June 1966 Brussels meeting. (148) Deadlock on the Offset Issue After the Brussels meeting, Secretary Rusk visited Bonn for wide-ranging talks that confirmed agreement on most issues. The essentially smooth relationship between the Johnson and Erhard governments ran into serious turbulence over the issue of offset payments. (149–150) Washington was then incensed when Erhard in a subsequent press conference gave his explanation of Germany’s position on this issue. (153) Both the President and the Chancellor acted to calm ruffled feathers (154, 155), and McGhee offered an assessment of the sources of disagreement between the two allies. (156) The deadlock on offset between the two sides continued, and McGhee expressed concern about its ultimate impact. (160–161) President Johnson continued to press U.S. views. (162) In September, with his political future menaced by domestic developments, Chancellor Erhard again traveled to the United States, seeking to play the “American card” in the form of a successful meeting with the President. (167–168, 170) Erhard’s September 25–29 visit to Washington failed to gain his objectives. The two nations remained divided on the offset question, and U.S. officials continued to seek a greater German involvement in support of the Vietnam war effort. Only discussions on German-Soviet rapprochement achieved a full accord. (172–180) In the end the two leaders turned to the drafting of a press communiqué to put the best face on their meeting. (179) The Kiesinger-Brandt Leadership Chancellor Erhard fell in October 1966, and was succeeded by a government of “grand coalition” comprising the Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union and the Social Democrats. Kurt Georg Kiesinger (CDU) became Chancellor and Willy Brandt became Vice Chancellor and Foreign Minister. Even prior to assuming his new position, Brandt had gained the interest and appreciation of U.S. officials through his continuing discussions with Soviet representatives on ways to improve East-West relations. (183) McGhee’s initial meeting with Foreign Minister Brandt focused on policy planning and on differences that had arisen over elements of Berlin policy. (188) McGhee analyzed the outlook for Ostpolitik in December 1966. (190) Brandt presented his views to the NATO Foreign Ministers meeting that same month. (191) President Johnson’s Discussions With the New German Leaders The emergence of new leadership in Germany gave impetus to one of McGhee’s major policy goals, a Presidential visit to the Federal Republic. Erhard had repeatedly signaled his desire for such a visit, but President Johnson, while agreeable in principle, failed to schedule the trip. McGhee pressed for a visit to solidify relations with the new German leaders, but the President declined to commit to a trip. (192) Meanwhile, Kiesinger held his meeting with French President Charles de Gaulle. Analyzing the results of the encounter, Rostow commented with satisfaction that “Bonn’s heart still belongs to Daddy.” (195) Foreign Minister Brandt arrived in Washington in February 1967 for talks. In addition to East-West relations, U.S. desire to win German approval for a multilateral Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) dominated the agenda. (199) In March the Johnson administration moved to develop more personal contacts with the German leaders. Vice President Humphrey visited Bonn for talks. (206, 208) The long-awaited Presidential visit followed a few weeks later when President Johnson arrived for the funeral of Konrad Adenauer. Johnson’s talks with Kiesinger April 23–26 covered the entire range of bilateral and multilateral issues before the two states. They established a good personal relationship. (212–214) The settlement of differences over an offset agreement in the fall of 1967 reinforced the relationship. The United States had turned to former High Commissioner for Germany John McCloy to secure an agreement. (223) Kiesinger meanwhile visited Washington for talks August 14–16 that included discussion of offset but centered on the NPT issues. (224–228) Reaffirmation of Allied Rights in Berlin During the first half of 1968, Ostpolitik, the NPT, differences with France over policy toward Germany, and concerns about possible Soviet moves against Allied rights in Berlin dominated the Johnson administration’s agenda. (207–211, 213–218) German sensitivity about U.S. views of FRG policy reappeared, and Johnson administration officials sought to reassure the Germans. (253, 255, 256) McGhee, in a final assessment, concluded that the relationship was working well. (258) In June new difficulties arose in Berlin, sparked by East German desire to limit West German access rights. (259–277) Secretary Rusk met three times with senior Soviet representatives to impress them with U.S. determination to guarantee Allied rights in Berlin. (261, 270, 277) U.S. policy toward Germany and Berlin was refined at senior levels of the government, including the National Security Council. (262, 266) The Czech Crisis Discussions within the Alliance over Berlin and German policy were well-advanced (278–282) when the Czech crisis exploded in August 1968. German and U.S. officials agreed on the need for a tough line with the Soviets not only to show disapproval for military intervention in Czechoslovakia but also to warn the Soviet Union about the dangers of trying to increase pressures on Berlin. (287–289, 291–295) As the Johnson administration left office, Soviet policy on the German and Berlin issues remained a troubling issue. Office of the Historian Bureau of Public Affairs March 1999 Abbreviations ABC, atomic, biological, chemical ABM, antiballistic missile ACDA, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency AEC, Atomic Energy Commission AG, Attorney General AID, Agency for International Development AK, Allied Kommandatura AL, Ambassador at Large ANF, Atlantic Nuclear Force APAG, Atlantic Policy Advisory Group BAOR, British Army on the Rhine BASC, Berlin Air Safety Center BKC/L, Berlin Kommandatura Commandants' Letter BNA, Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State BQD, Berlin Quadripartite Document BTF, Berlin Task Force BUSEC, series indicator for telegrams from the Department of State to the Mission to the European Community in Brussels CDU, Christlich-Demokratische Union (Christian Democratic Union) Cedto, series indicator for telegrams from the Mission to European Regional Organizations in Paris to the Department of State CEMA, Council for Mutual Economic Assistance ChiCom, Chinese Communist CIA, Central Intelligence Agency CINCEUR, Commander in Chief, Europe CINCUSAREUR, Commander in Chief, U.S. Army, Europe CM, Career Minister COCOM, Coordinating Committee on Export Controls CSSR, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic CSU, Christlich-Soziale Union (Christian Social Union) DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission DDR, Deutsche Demokratische Republik (German Democratic Republic) DepFonMin, Deputy Foreign Minister Dept, Department Deptel, Department of State telegram Disto, series indicator for telegrams from the U.S. delegation to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee in Geneva to the Department of State DM, Deutschemark DOD, Department of Defense DPC, Defense Production Committee EC, European Community ECE, Economic Commission for Europe EconMin, Economics Minister EE, Office of Eastern Europe Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State EEC, European Economic Community EFTA, European Free Trade Association Emb, Embassy EmbOff, Embassy office ENDC, Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee EUCOM, European Command EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State EURATOM, European Atomic Energy Community EUR/RPM, Office of NATO and Atlantic Political-Military Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State E/W, East-West FDP, Freie Demokratische Partei (Free Democratic Party) FE, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State FedRep, Federal Republic of Germany FOB, forward operating bases FonMin, Foreign Minister FonOff, Foreign Office FRG, Federal Republic of Germany FYI, for your information G, Deputy Under Secretary of State of Political Affairs GARIOA, Government and Relief in Occupied Areas GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade GDR, German Democratic Republic GER, Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State GNP, Gross National Product GOF, Government of France HE, His Excellency HMG, Her Majesty’s Government IAEA, International Atomic Energy Agency ICBM, inter-continental ballistic missile IMF, International Monetary Fund INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State IRBM, intermediate range ballistic missile ISA, Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense; Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs IZT, interzonal trade JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff KGB, Komitet Gesudarstvennyi Bezoibastnosti (Committee on State Security, Soviet Secret Police) KR, Kennedy Round LBJ, Lyndon Baines Johnson LDC, less developed countries MD, missile driver ME, Middle East MFN, most favored nation MinPres, Minister President MLF, Multilateral Force MOD, Minister of Defense MSAS, Military Sponsored Air Service NAC, North Atlantic Council NARA, National Archives and Records Administration NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization NATUS, series indicator for telegrams from the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization NAVCON, Naval Contingency NCO, non-commissioned officer NE, Near East NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State NIE, National Intelligence Estimate NKF, Neues Kampfflugzeug NPD, Nationaldemokratische Partei Deutschlands (National Democratic Party) NPG, Nuclear Planning Group NPT, Non-Proliferation Treaty NSAM, National Security Action Memorandum NSC, National Security Council OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OEEC, Organization for European Economic Cooperation P, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State PCI, Partito Communista Italiano (Italian Communist Party) PM, Prime Minister PNED, Peaceful Nuclear Explosive Device POL, petroleum, oil, and lubricants POLAD, Political Advisor R/Adm, Rear Admiral RIAS, Rundfunk im Amerikanischen Sektor (Radio in American Sector) RPM, Office of NATO and Atlantic Political-Military Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State RSB, Office of Research and Analysis for Soviet Bloc, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State S, Office of the Secretary, Department of State SACEUR, Supreme Allied Commander, Europe SACLANT, Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic S/AL, Ambassador at Large SDS, Students for a Democratic Society SE, Southeast SEA, Southeast Asia; Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Sec, Secretary Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State when he is away from Washington SED, Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands (Socialist Unity Party of East Germany) SHAPE, Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers, Europe SIG, Senior Interdepartmental Group SNIE, Special National Intelligence Estimate SOV, Soviet; Office of Soviet Union Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State S/P, Policy Planning Council, Department of State SPD, Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands (Social Democratic Party of West Germany) S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State TASS, Telegrafnoye Agentstvo Sovyetskovo Soyuza (Telegraphic Agency of the Soviet Union, Soviet News Agency) TEA, Trade Expansion Act TTD, temporary travel document Todis, series indicator for telegrams to the U.S. delegation to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee in Geneva from the Department of State Tosec, series indicator for telegrams to the Secretary of State when he is away from Washington U, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs; Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs UAR, United Arab Republic UK, United Kingdom UN, United Nations UNCTAD, UN Conference on Trade and Development UNESCO, UN Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization UNGA, UN General Assembly UPI, United Press International USA, U.S. Army USAFE, U.S. Air Force, Europe USAREUR, U. S. Army, Europe USBER, U.S. Mission in Berlin USCINCEUR, U.S. Commander in Chief, European Command USCOB, U.S. Commander, Berlin USG, U.S. Government USIB, U.S. Intelligence Board USIS, U.S. Information Service US/MC, U.S./Memorandum of Conversation USMLM, U.S. Military Liaison Mission USNATO, series indicator for telegrams from the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Department of State USNMR, U.S. National Military Representative USNMRSHAPE, U.S. National Military Representative at the Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers, Europe USRO, Office of the Mission to North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics USUN, U.S. Mission to the United Nations V–E, Victory in Europe Vipto, series indicator for telegrams from the Vice President WE, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State WEU, Western European Union Persons Abrasimov, Pyotr A., Soviet Ambassador to East Germany Acheson, Dean, former Secretary of State Adenauer, Konrad, former Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany; CDU Chairman until March 1966 Alphand, Herve, French Ambassador to the United States until October 1965; thereafter Secretary General of the French Foreign Ministry Ausland, John C., member of the Berlin Task Force in the Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until June 1965; Director of Combined Policy in the Office of Politico-Military Affairs from December 1967 Bahr, Egon (SPD), chief of the Berlin Press and Information Office until December 1966; then personal adviser to Foreign Minister Brandt; Special Ambassador in the Foreign Office from July 1967; chief of the Planning Staff in the Foreign Office from November 1967 Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State until September 30, 1966; Permanent Representative to the United Nations, June 26–September 25, 1968 Barber, Arthur W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Arms and Trade Control) Barzel, Rainer (CDU), Deputy Chairman of the CDU/CSU Bundestag Fraction until November 1964; then Chairman Bator, Francis M., Senior Economic Adviser at the Agency for International Development until April 1964; Senior Member of the National Security Council Staff, April 1964–September 1967; Deputy Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs from October 1965 until September 1967 Beaumarchais, Jacques de, Director for the Cabinet of French Foreign Minister Couve de Murville to 1964; Director of Political Affairs in the French central administration from 1965 Behrendt, Heinz, head of the Inner-German Trade Division (Hauptabteilung) of the East German Ministry of Foreign (and Inner-German) Trade; then Deputy Minister of Foreign (and Inner-German Trade) and Deputy Foreign Minister Beitz, Berthold, General Director of the Krupp concern in Essen Berger, Hans, West German Ambassador to the Netherlands; then head of the Office of the Federal Presidency Birrenbach, Kurt, CDU foreign policy expert Blessing, Karl, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank Boeker, Alexander, head of Subdivision B in the Second Political Division I of the West German Foreign Office Bohlen, Charles E., Ambassador to France until February 9, 1968; Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs after February 11, 1968 Bowie, Robert J., Counselor of the Department of State from September 21, 1966 to April 1, 1968 Brandt, Willy (Herbert Frahm), SPD Chairman from February 1964; Governing Mayor of Berlin until December 1, 1966; thereafter West German Vice Chancellor and Foreign Minister; SPD candidate for Chancellor in the 1965 Bundestag election Braun, Baron Sigismund von, West German Observer at the United Nations; also Minister in the West German Embassy to the United States until June/July 1968 Brown, George, British Foreign Secretary, August 10, 1966–March 15, 1968 Bruce, David K. E., Ambassador to the United Kingdom Brunner, Guido, First Secretary of West German Observer Mission to the United Nations Bundy, McGeorge, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs until February 28, 1966 Butler, Richard A., British Foreign Minister until October 16, 1964 Calhoun, John A., Assistant Chief of the US Mission in Berlin until January 1967 Carstens, Karl, First State Secretary (Political and Administrative Affairs) in the West German Foreign Office until December 1966; then First State Secretary in the Defense Ministry until January 1968; thereafter head of the Federal Chancellery Castro Ruz, Fidel, Premier of Cuba Cleveland, Harlan, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until September 8, 1965; then Chief of the US Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations at Paris from September 1, 1965 (after July 1, 1967 Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Brussels) Clifford, Clark M., Secretary of Defense after March 1, 1968 Cohen, Wilbur J., Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare from March 1968 Couve de Murville, Maurice, French Foreign Minister until June 1, 1968; then Minister of Finance and National Economy until July 10; thereafter French Prime Minister Creel, Robert C., Director of the Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, until July 1964; then Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until September 1965; thereafter Consul General in Munich Dahlgruen, Rolf (FDP), West German Finance Minister to October 27, 1966 De Courcel, Geoffroy Chodron, French Ambassador to the United Kingdom De Gaulle, Charles, President of France De Jong, Piet, Dutch Minister of Defense until April 3, 1967; then Prime Minister Debre, Michel, French Finance and Economic Affairs Minister from January 9, 1966 to June 1, 1968; thereafter Foreign Minister Dobrynin, Anatoly F., Soviet Ambassador to the United States Douglas-Home, Sir Alex, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom until October 16, 1964 Duckwitz, Georg Ferdinand, West German Ambassador to India until August 1965; then leader of the West German Delegation to the Offset Negotiations with Great Britain and the United States; First State Secretary (Political and Administrative Affairs) in the Foreign Office from October 1967 Erhard, Ludwig (CDU), Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany until December 1, 1966; CDU candidate for Chancellor in the 1965 Bundestag election; CDU Party Chairman, March 1966–May 1967 Erler, Fritz, SPD Deputy Chairman, February 1964–February 1967; also Chairman of the SPD Bundestag Fraction, March 1964– February 1967 Eshkol, Levi, Israeli Prime Minister; also Minister of Defense until June 2, 1967 Finn, Richard B., Deputy Director of the Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until July 1966 Foster, William C., Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Fowler, Henry H., Secretary of the Treasury, April 1, 1965–December 23, 1968 Fried, Edward R., member of the Policy Planning Council, Department of State, until October 24, 1965; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, October 24, 1965–August 15, 1967; thereafter member of the National Security Council staff Fulbright, J. William, Senator (D-Arkansas); Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations Garran, Peter, British Ambassador to the Netherlands from 1964 Gerstenmaier, Eugen (CDU), President of the Bundestag; CDU Deputy Chairman Goldberg, Arthur J., Permanent Representative to the United Nations, July 28, 1965–June 24, 1968 Gore-Booth, Paul H., Permanent Under Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office from 1965; also Head of the Diplomatic Service from March 1968 Greenhill, Denis A., Minister in the British Embassy to the United States until 1964; then Assistant Under Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office until 1966; thereafter Deputy Under Secretary of State Grewe, Wilhelm, West German Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Groepper, Horst, West German Ambassador to the Soviet Union to March 1966; then Ambassador to Turkey Gromyko, Andrei A., Soviet Foreign Minister Guttenberg, Karl Theodor Baron von und zu (CSU), Parliamentary State Secretary in the West German Federal Chancellery from April 1967 Hand, J. M. Colton, Assistant Chief of the Special Trade Activities and Commercial Division, Office of International Trade, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, from June 1964 Harlech, Lord (William David Omsby-Gore), British Ambassador to the United States until April 1965; then Deputy Leader of the Conservative Party in the House of Lords to 1967 Hase, Karl-Guenther von, head of the West German Press and Information Office (government spokesman) until November 1967 Hassell, Kai-Uwe von (CDU), West German Defense Minister until December 1, 1966; then Minister of Displaced Persons, Refugees and War Wounded; CDU Deputy Chairman Herter, Christian A., Special Representative for Trade Negotiations until December 30, 1966 Hohmann, Karl, head of the Office of the Chancellor in the West German Federal Chancellery until December 1966 Holthoff, Horst H., Second Secretary in the West German Embassy to the United States until June/July 1965; then First Secretary Hornig, Donald C., Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology Humphrey, Hubert H., Senator (D-Minnesota) and Senate Majority Whip to December 29, 1964; Vice President of the United States from January 20, 1965; Democratic candidate for President, November 1968 Johnpoll, Alexander C., Deputy Director of the Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, from April 1967 Johnson, Lyndon Baines, President of the United States Kastl, Hans Jorg, Press Secretary of the West German Foreign Office; then head of the Department on Eastern Europe (Subdivision A5) in the Second Political Division to 1966 Katzenbach, Nicholas deB., Deputy Attorney General until September 4, 1964; then Attorney General until September 30, 1966; thereafter Under Secretary of State Kennedy, Robert F., Attorney General to September 3, 1964; Senator (D-New York) from January 1965 to June 6, 1968 Khrushchev, Nikita S., Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers (Premier) and First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union until October 15, 1964 Kiesinger, Kurt Georg (CDU), Minister President of Baden-Wurttemberg until December 1, 1966; then Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany; CDU Chairman from May 1967 Kissinger, Henry A., Professor, Department of Government, and Director, Defense Studies Program, Harvard University; also consultant to the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency to 1967 and consultant to the Department of State from 1965 Klein, David, senior member of the National Security Council staff until August 1965 Knappstein, Heinrich, West German Ambassador to the United States Kohler, Foy D., Ambassador to the Soviet Union until November 14, 1966; Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs, November 29, 1966–December 31, 1967 Kosygin, Alexei N., Vice Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers until October 15, 1964; thereafter Chairman (Premier) Krag, Jens Otto, Danish Prime Minister until January 24, 1968; also Danish Foreign Minister, November 28,1966–October 1, 1967 Krapf, Franz, head of the Second Political Division in the West German Foreign Office; then West German Ambassador to Japan Kratzer, Myron B., Director, International Affairs Division, Atomic Energy Commission, 1964–1967; Assistant General Manager for International Activities, Atomic Energy Commission after 1967 Krone, Heinrich (CDU), West German Minister for Special Tasks until October 26, 1965; then Chairman of the Federal Defense Council until December 1, 1966; thereafter special adviser to Chancellor Kiesinger Kutscher, Ernst, head of the Department for Soviet Affairs (Subdivision A4) in the Second Political Division of the West German Foreign Office; then advisor to the West German Permanent Representative at the European Economic Community in Brussels until June 1967 Kuznetsov, Vassily V., First Deputy Soviet Foreign Minister Lahr, Rolf, Second State Secretary (Trade, Development, and Cultural Affairs) in the West German Foreign Office Leddy, John M., Representative to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development until June 15, 1965; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs Lemnitzer, General Lyman L., Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers in Europe; also Commander of the U.S. European Command Leusse, Pierre de, French Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Paris, 1965–1967 Leusse de Syon, Bruno de, Minister Counselor of the French Embassy in Washington until January 1966; then Director for the Cabinet of the French Foreign Minister (Couve de Murville/Debre) to July 1968; then Director for the Cabinet of the French Prime Minister (Couve de Murville) Lilienfeld, Georg von, West German Minister to the United States until 1967 Lodge, Henry Cabot, Ambassador to Vietnam until June 28, 1964, and August 25, 1965–April 25, 1967; Ambassador to West Germany from May 27, 1968 Lucet, Charles, Director for Political Affairs in the French central administration until December 1965; then French Ambassador to the United States Luebke, Heinrich (CDU), President of the Federal Republic of Germany Malik, Yakov A., Soviet Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs to 1967; Soviet Permanent Representative to the United Nations from March 1968 Manning, Robert J., Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs until July 31, 1964 Mansfield, Michael J., Senator (D-Montana); Senate Majority Leader Marks, Leonard H., Director of the U.S. Information Agency, September 1, 1965–December 6, 1968 McCarthy, Eugene J., Senator (D-Minnesota) McCloy, John J., former U.S. High Commissioner for Germany; special presidential consultant on NATO affairs from April 1966; also U.S. representative to the trilateral offset negotiations with West Germany and Great Britain, October 1966–April 1967 McGhee, George C., Ambassador to West Germany until May 21, 1968 McIntyre, Stuart H., member of the Berlin Task Force in the Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until September 1965, thereafter political officer at the United States Mission to the European Community in Brussels McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense until February 29, 1968 McNaughton, John T., General Counsel of the Department of Defense until June 25, 1964; Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, July 1, 1964–July 19, 1967 Mende, Erich, FDP Chairman; West German Vice Chancellor and Minister of All-German Affairs until October 28, 1966 Messmer, Pierre, French Minister of Defense Monnet, Jean, French political economist; founder and president of the Action Committee for a United States of Europe (a non-governmental organization) Nguyen Cao Ky, Air Vice Marshal, Prime Minister of South Vietnam, July 1965–October 1967 Osterheld, Horst, head of Division II (Foreign and Inner-German Relations, and External Security) in the West German Federal Chancellery Penberthy, Grover W., international relations officer in the Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, from July 1968 Pompidou, Georges, Prime Minister of France until July 10, 1968 Puhan, Alfred, Director of the Office of German Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, August 1964–June 1968; thereafter Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Rapacki, Adam, Polish Minister of Foreign Affairs until December 20, 1968 Reedy, George, Special Assistant and Press Secretary (from March 1964) to the President to July 1965 Rostow, Eugene V., Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs after October 14, 1966 Rostow, Walt W., Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, Department of State, to March 31, 1966; Special Assistant to the President from April 1, 1966 Ruete, Hans Helmuth, head of Subdivision A (East-West Relations) in the Second Political Division of the West German Foreign Office, July 1964–October 1966; then head of the Second Political Division Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State Russell, Richard B., Senator (D-Georgia); Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee Sahm, Ulrich, West German Deputy Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization until October 1966; then Director of Subdivision A (East-West Relations) in the Second Political Division of the West German Foreign Office Schaetzel, J. Robert, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until September 16, 1966; thereafter U.S. Representative to the European Communities in Brussels Scheske, Ulrich, head of the Department on NATO and Defense Affairs (Subdivision A7) in the Second Political Division of the West German Foreign Office; from July 1967 West German Ambassador to Thailand Schiller, Karl (SPD), West German Minister for Economic Affairs from December 1, 1966 Schmueker, Kurt (CDU), West German Minister for Economic Affairs and Finance Minister, October 28, 1966–December 1, 1966 Schnippenkoetter, Swidbert, Deputy Chief of the Planning Staff of the West German Foreign Office, November 1964–August 1965; then Director of Subdivision B (General Disarmament and European Security) in the Second Political Division and Representative of the West German Government for Questions of Disarmament and Arms Control Schroeder, Gerhard (CDU), West German Foreign Minister until December 1, 1966; thereafter Minister of Defense Schuetz, Klaus (SPD), Berlin Senator for Federal Affairs and Berlin Plenipotentiary in Bonn until December 1966; then First State Secretary (Political and Administrative Affairs) in the West German Foreign Office until October 1967; thereafter Governing Mayor of Berlin Semenov, Vladimir Semyonovich, Soviet Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Seydoux Fornier de Claussone, Francois, French Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization until 1965; then French Ambassador to West Germany Spiers, Ronald I., Deputy Director of the Office of Atlantic Political and Military Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until September 1965; then Director until June 1966; thereafter Political Counselor (Chief of the Political Section) at the Embassy in the United Kingdom Spivy, Lieutenant General Berton E., Jr., USA, Director of the Joint Staff, April 1967–July 1968 Staden, Berndt von, Counselor of the West German Embassy in the United States until March/April 1968 Stewart, Michael, British Foreign Secretary, January 22, 1965–August 10, 1966, and after March 15, 1968; Deputy Prime Minister, August 10, 1966–March 18, 1968 Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, September 1965–July 1968 Stoltenberg, Gerhard (CDU), West German Minister for Scientific Affairs from October 26, 1965 Stoph, Willi (SED), Chairman of the East German Council of Ministers (head of government) from September 24, 1964 Strauss, Franz Josef, CSU Party Chairman; Chairman of the CSU Bundestag Group until December 1, 1966; then West German Finance Minister Symington, Stuart W., Senator (D-Missouri) Thompson, Llewellyn E., Ambassador at Large until December 26, 1966; Acting Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, July 1964–October 1965; Ambassador to the Soviet Union after January 23, 1967 Tito, Marshal Josip Broz, President of Yugoslavia Tsarapkin, Semen K., Soviet Representative to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee in Geneva until 1966; then Soviet Ambassador to West Germany Tyler, William R., Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until May 18, 1965; Ambassador to the Netherlands after June 23, 1965 Udall, Stewart L., Secretary of the Interior Ulbricht, Walter, SED First Secretary and Chairman of the East German Council of State (head of state); also Chairman of the National Defense Council Weber, Heinz, interpreter and deputy chief of Language Services in the West German Foreign Office Wehner, Herbert, SPD Deputy Chairman from February 1964; SPD Deputy Chairman of the Bundestag Fraction until December 1966; West German Minister of All-German Affairs from December 1, 1966 Westrick, Ludger (CDU), head of the West German Federal Chancellery and Minister for Special Tasks, June 1964–November 1966 Wilson, James Harold, British Prime Minister after October 16, 1964 Winzer, Otto (SED), East German Foreign Minister from June 24, 1965 Germany and Berlin 1. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 23–10 GER. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Penberthy; cleared by McGhee, Tyler, GER, EUR, and Thompson; and approved by Ausland. Repeated to Berlin, Paris for the Embassy and USRO, London, Moscow,USAREUR, CINCEUR, SHAPE, and USELMLO. Washington, January 1, 1964, 3:59 p.m. 1849. Subj.: Permanent Arrangements for Passes to East Berlin.For documentation regarding the Berlin pass agreement, signed December 17, 1963, see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XV, Documents 245, 251, and 252. McGhee discussed the issue in At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 119–121. Ref.: Bonn’s 2315; Berlin’s 806 to Bonn.Telegram 2315 from Bonn, January 1, recommended a tripartite meeting to discuss Allied policy on the passes question. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 36 GER) Telegram 806 to Bonn, January 1, reported on the meeting of Allied Deputies concerning the pass issue. (Ibid., POL 23–10 GER) 1. Due to swiftness with which events are moving on above subject Dept prefers at this time to confine itself to following general guidance. If specific problems requiring Dept’s views arise Emb should submit recommendations. 2. Dept would welcome creation of permanent arrangements for West Berliners to visit East Berlin if this can be worked out on acceptable terms. 3. We have no objections to continued use of Korber-Wendt channel for discussion this subject. 4. We hope to avoid becoming enmeshed in conflicts of views between Senat and FRG, between political parties in Germany or between contesting German political figures on this highly political subject. Dept believes that existing machinery in Berlin and Bonn should be used to coordinate views of Allies, Senat and FRG. We would not, however, object to ad hoc presence of Senat representative at quadripartite meetings in Bonn on this issue. 5. Timetable proposed by Senat (Berlin’s 805 to Bonn)Dated December 31, 1963, it reported on German consultations with the Allies regarding visitation policy. (Ibid., POL 26 GER) seems probably to be too short to permit adequate consultations with Germans and among Allies. At same time we believe Allies should make every effort consistent with adequate consultations to proceed as quickly as Germans desire. Rusk 2. Paper Presented by the German Government to the Washington Ambassadorial GroupSource: Department of State, German Desk Files: Lot 76 D 170, Pol 32–4. Secret. In telegram 2465 from Bonn, January 14, the Embassy reported that the plan had been handed to representatives of the Allied powers by the German Foreign Office the same day. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 28 GER) The Washington Ambassadorial Group comprised representatives of the United States, Federal Republic of Germany, France, and Great Britain. Washington, January 15, 1964. BDQ-111 DRAFT FRG INITIATIVE ON BERLIN AND GERMANY (Official German translation) Recognizing that continuance of the division of Germany will lead to continued tension and insecurity in Europe, the government of the Federal Republic of Germany deems it necessary to submit new proposals for the solution of the problem of Germany. It bases its proposals on the assumption —that the safeguarding of peace and security is today more than ever a vital problem for all nations, —that peace and security in Europe will remain in danger as long as the German nation is denied self-determination, —that the right of self-determination constitutes a legal, political and moral principle which is indivisible and therefore must find application everywhere, —that the people in all parts of Germany feel that they are members of one nation wanting to live in one state, —that the Germans on the other side of the wall and of the demarcation line are unable to manifest their own will freely and without hindrance, and —that the age of colonialism is coming to an end and should not be replaced by any new form of colonialism. In taking this new initiative the Federal Government bears in mind that the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of GermanyFor text of the Basic Law, approved May 8, 1949, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 221–258. and the moral responsibility of free men make it incumbent on the people of free Germany to work also for the freedom of those of their fellow-citizens to whom such freedom is denied. The Federal Government therefore proposes a settlement of the German problem based on the following principles. 1. Transitional settlement The intricate nature of the German problem requires agreement on a transitional settlement which aims at restoring German unity in freedom. Such transitional settlements are nothing new. Transitional settlements in 1955 and 1956 enabled a settlement of the Saar problem which conformed to the interests of all concerned.For text of the agreement respecting the status of the Saar, signed by the Federal Republic of Germany and France, October 27, 1956, see ibid., p. 494. Similar to the procedure adopted for the settlement of the Saar problem, an attempt should be made to agree upon fixed dates for the duration of a transitional period and for an ultimate referendum on the procedure of reunification in the whole of Germany. 2. Establishment of a Permanent Council of the Four Powers Under international law particular responsibility for Germany as a whole has fallen to the Four Powers. The continued existence of that legal responsibility finds, as is known, its visible expression in political institutions and contacts of the Four Powers. In the interest of a lasting peace in Europe, a Permanent Council of the Four Powers should be set up for Germany on the basis of experience gathered by the Four Powers while working out a State Treaty for Austria. Amongst other duties and responsibilities such a Council would have to (a) fix the time-schedule for the transitional period and the date for the ultimate referendum in the whole of Germany, (b) work out a plan that would guarantee reunification and European security, (c) prepare, in cooperation with German agencies, an electoral law for the holding of all-German elections which, for practical purposes, should be along the lines of the German electoral law of 1924, (d) supervise the implementation of these and any additional arrangements, (e) pending the conclusion of a peace treaty, settle any differences of opinion arising among the Four Powers during the implementation of such arrangements. 3. Referendum The plan worked out by the Four Powers for the implementation of reunification and the electoral law will be referred to the German people to vote upon. The referendum may take place in all of Germany as one single electoral district, or separately on both sides of the wall and the zonal border under international supervision, not excluding that of the United Nations. The following is stipulated for the preparation and implementation of the referendum: —all political parties admitted in either part of Germany may become active in all parts of Germany, —press, broadcasting and television services may become active in all parts of Germany without restriction, —in no part of Germany must individuals or families be prejudiced because of their membership [in] a political party or organization or of an administration. 4. Humanitarian commissions For reasons of humanity and notwithstanding any political aspects, humanitarian commissions should be set up immediately under the auspices of the Four Powers. Such mixed commissions should be assigned the duty immediately to ease the lot of Germans suffering from the division. This includes in particular the facilitation of personal contacts: —families must no longer remain separated, —members of the same churches or the same communities must not be hindered in the free practising of their religion or in participating in ecclesiastic self-administration, —everybody must have the right to visit and maintain the graves of his next-of-kin, —free contacts must be guaranteed in the cultural and vocational spheres and in the domain of sports. Anyone wanting reunification will first of all call for milder conditions for the people suffering from the division. Any truly humanitarian policy will refrain from securing political advantages in talks on humanitarian questions. The Federal Government will do its utmost to facilitate the coming into existence of such humanitarian commissions. 5. Amnesty A general political amnesty, in particular an amnesty for all those detained for attempted escape, for aiding refugees, or for offences or resistance against the political order in either part of Germany, is a dictate of humanity. When the time has come, the Federal Government will for its own sphere of jurisdiction propose to the legislative bodies that such an amnesty be proclaimed. 6. Extension of economic relations inside Germany Once a minimum of human rights is guaranteed for the whole of Germany, the Federal Government, being conscious of its responsibility towards all Germans, will be prepared to make concrete economic contributions. This includes the granting of credits in interzonal trade, the extension of clearing time-limits, and other measures. 7. Friendship with East European nations The Federal Government, which endeavours to strengthen the confidence between Germany and all other nations in the world, also seeks to establish good neighbourly and friendly relations between the German people as a whole and the peoples of East Europe. A peace conference, at which the problem of the German-Polish border will have to be clarified and a just decision on the German regions on the other side of the Oder and Neisse freely agreed upon,For text of the Potsdam Accords relating to the status of Germany’s border with Poland, see ibid., p. 63. should be preceded by an improvement of the human, economic and political relations between the German people and its neighbouring nations in the East. Improvement of those relations must be possible. There have been examples of this in the recent past, such as the reconciliation between the German people and its neighbours in the West, particularly the French people. Now that Franco-German friendship has become an established fact, it should be possible, by means of a binding renunciation of the use of force and through recognition of the right of self-determination and domicile for all nations, to place the relations between the German people and the East European nations, too, on a new foundation. 8. European security The Federal Government knows that there can be no constructive policy with regard to Germany without clarification of the existing European and Atlantic security problems. The restoration of German unity and the safeguarding of security for all countries and groups of countries concerned with the German problem are closely interrelated. The union of the Germans in secure freedom should not shift the balance nor impair the security of other European nations. 9. Disarmament In connexion with the settlement of the German problem the Federal Government is prepared to do anything conducive to reducing conflicting elements, to overcoming tensions and to achieving internationally controlled disarmament. The overcoming of tensions includes the elimination of their causes one of which—and not the smallest one—is the division of Germany. 10. Peace For Germany, reunification is not a means to strengthen her national power. After being reunified, Germany will use all her strength to render, within the family of nations, an increased contribution towards safeguarding peace and raising the prosperity of all nations. 3. Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 1. Confidential. Washington, January 16, 1964. SUBJECT The German “Peace Plan” The Germans finally tabled their heralded peace plan. Document 2. As you will see from a copy I have attached, it is really a “non-plan.” It deals with German reunification but has nothing in it of possible interest to the Soviets. The understanding at yesterday’s meeting was that the Ambassadorial Group would reassemble early next week to discuss the proposals. (Knappstein said he couldn't handle questions at this meeting.) My suggestion to Thompson and our Germans was that Knappstein should be asked at the next meeting how he would make this proposal more salable to the Soviets, and that a working group be given the job to convert this non-starter into a negotiable package. On the U.S. side, we have been working with some ideas (including Adenauer’s standstill proposal, the Pell and Mansfield plans),For extracts of the relevant portions of Adenauer’s May 5, 1962, standstill proposal, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 698–700. In December 1963, Senator Pell suggested that the Western powers exchange recognition of the German Democratic Republic for guarantees of free passage to Berlin. Senator Mansfield had, on a number of occasions, most recently in August 1962, suggested that recognition of the East German regime could lead to a settlement of the Berlin question. and I think we probably can re-fashion this German widget into something more negotiable. However, there is a clear tactical advantage in keeping the project a German initiative—if only to keep the French involved and the Germans on board. Unless major scenario changes are ordered by the 7th floor, this operation will get under way early next week—the object being to produce a useful plan in the shortest possible time. If nothing else, this will insure that some of us will be working while you all are sunning yourselves in the far south.A handwritten notation by Bundy next to this paragraph reads: “Good. Keep it up.” A second notation at the bottom of the page reads: “Told Mr. Klein 1/16/64 M. Z.” (Mildred Zayae, Bundy’s secretary) D Klein 4. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 23–10 GER B. Confidential. Repeated to Berlin, Paris, Moscow, London, Rome, Bremen, Dusseldorf, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Munich, Stuttgart, USAREUR,CINCEUR, and USELMLO. Bonn, January 18, 1964, 3 p.m. 2532. Subject: Significance of Berlin pass arrangements. 1. Embassy is pouching to addressees on January 20 an airgram analyzing political significance of Berlin pass arrangement in West Germany.Airgram A–1185 from Bonn, January 20. (Ibid., POL 23–10 GER) Assessments of local reactions provided by Consulates have been taken into account. Following are main conclusions reached: A. Public reaction—while West German press has tended to highlight dangers involved in Christmas pass protocol, public generally has been favorably impressed by humanitarian achievement and considers that pass arrangement was a gain for the Western side. There is awareness that caution is required in dealing with East Germans but idea of contacts with them is not rejected per se. Public identifies Brandt with pass arrangement and he appears to have gained somewhat in popularity as result. B. Position of political parties—The FDP is the most enthusiastic and unequivocal of three parties in its support for pass agreement and for continuation of such contacts. In spite of doubts in the party executive, the SPD has also endorsed the arrangement and will support further efforts to reach agreement with the GDR along lines of Dec. 17 protocol. The CDU/CSU is in basically defensive position since most of its leaders have serious reservations about pass negotiations and are fearful that FRG’s German policy has already been jeopardized. They are prevented from attacking agreement and present efforts to extend it because Erhard has concurred in them and public opinion favors them. CDU/CSU can therefore be expected to go along with continuation Korber-Wendt talks but to oppose any elevation of level of contact or the establishment of further channels of negotiations with GDR, except under quadripartite auspices. C. Government’s policy—The immediate FRG objective is to maintain and extend such gains as the Western side achieved in the pass arrangement while minimizing the price paid. It will make every effort to counter any impression that FRG policy has changed and can be expected to reinforce the competence of the IZT Treuhandstelle and to oppose higher level contacts with the GDR. FRG will cooperate with the Allies in maintaining a fairly stable situation in which both can handle Berlin matters in accordance with their varying interpretations of the city’s status. The FRG does not view Berlin pass arrangement as bringing reunification any closer but it does not rule out the possibility that an amelioration of conditions in Berlin and the Soviet Zone might at some point be achieved by dealings with East German representatives and the extension of West German credits. It will move extremely cautiously to avoid unwarranted jeopardy to its present German policy, but it will do what it can to encourage a political relaxation in East Germany. 2. Subsequent messages will be submitted on the implications of the pass issue for US policy and the motivation and tactics of the GDR. The latter will first be coordinated with USBER.Not further identified. McGhee 5. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–1 GER. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Moscow. Bonn, January 21, 1964, 8 p.m. 2571. Ref: Embtel 1650; Moscow’s 2221.Telegram 1650 from Bonn, November 11, 1963, is ibid., POL 32–4 GER. Telegram 2221 from Moscow, January 17, 1964, is ibid., E 8 USSR. For the Secretary and Under Secretary and Ambassador Kohler from the Ambassador. 1. Our last conversation,According to Secretary Rusk’s Appointment Book, he and McGhee met on January 2. (Johnson Library) No record of their conversation was found. reflecting both your and the President’s deep desire to achieve a break-through in East-West relations, has preoccupied me since my return to Bonn. My reflections have understandably focused on the German problem, which remains the principal obstacle to any lasting Central European settlement. It seems clear that the German proposal just tabled in the Ambassadorial Group is a non-starter, Document 2. The Embassy provided its analysis of the proposal in telegram 2513 from Bonn, January 17. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER) intended essentially for domestic political purposes. Negotiations with the Soviets on partial aspects of disarmament, or aimed at limited relaxation of tensions, are but way stations toward the goal we seek. I have, accordingly, been giving thought as to whether some really new approach to a settlement is not possible. The odds of success of any overall approach to the basic conflict between the West and the Soviets are undoubtedly slight. However the reward could be correspondingly great. I would, therefore, like to offer for your consideration the following analysis and proposal. While admittedly a long shot, its possibilities are believed to be enhanced by the present conjunction of three independent but supporting circumstances: (A) Present Soviet economic weakness; (B) Pressure in the West to exploit the Soviet market; (C) Possible German willingness to make financial sacrifices for reunification. 2. I will deal with each in turn: (A) Soviet economic weakness: The CIA report on the state of the Soviet economyReference is to SNIE 11–5–64, “Soviet Economic Problems and Outlook,” January 8, 1964, scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XIV. A copy is in NARA, RG 263, National Intelligence Estimates. seems to indicate a far greater degree of structural weakness, particularly in agriculture, than we have heretofore suspected. The effect of this weakness on Soviet policy is obviously accentuated by their current difficulties with Communist China. We are in no position here fully to evaluate the significance of current Soviet economic difficulties. Moscow 2221 indicates, however, that the policy implications may be “profound.” Even a partial revision of Soviet economic philosophy could entail political changes—including revision of their doctrine on relations with the capitalist states. This could hardly take place overnight, but might over a period of a decade or more. I would suggest that a National Intelligence Estimate be prepared, with the assistance of Embassy Moscow, assessing the possibilities and probabilities of such a change and what we may realistically expect its effects to be, given the existing conflict between dogma and fact. NIE 11–5–65, “Soviet Economic Problems and Prospects,” January 22, 1965. (Ibid.) (B) Western pressure to “exploit” this weakness: The United Kingdom’s determination to grant long-term credits to the Soviets is symptomatic of commercial restlessness and incipient pressure throughout Western Europe to exploit Soviet economic needs. As Ambassador Finletter has pointed out (Polto 118),Not found. the British action may signal the start of an uncoordinated credit race among the Western nations for an imagined trade plum. France has already indicated it will follow England’s lead. Chancellor Erhard has indicated to me that, were this to happen, he would find it very difficult to restrain German industry (Embtel 2383).Dated January 8. (Department of State, Central Files, FIN 11–1 COMBLOC–GER) (C) German payment for reunification: I consider the fact that Chancellor Erhard raised with the President in their private meeting his idea of granting economic assistance to the Soviets as a means towards reunification,See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XV, Document 250. which he had expressed to us before very cautiously, as probably the one most significant feature of the Texas talks. The Chancellor obviously continues to be bemused with the hope that he can “buy” a solution to the German problem [garble]through some further economic “sacrifice” by the German people. He keeps returning to it despite the domestic political and budgetary difficulties it would involve, and an agreed policy with us against the extension of long-term credits to the Soviets. 3. Any initiative of the kind envisaged by Erhard could be frustrated from the outset if it seemed to be merely a large-scale German involvement in the credit race for commercial objectives. Any Western plan for economic assistance to the Soviets must, if it is to succeed, be related to the more commercially based desires of the British and French, so as to provide a basis for unity rather than competition. I would suggest, therefore, that we seriously examine how we can achieve, within the framework of the proposal made in this telegram, a unified and broadly based Western position on trade and credits to the Soviet Union, including a more positive position for the US than we have thus far taken. 4. Under the assumption that there is a possibility, over a period of years, to influence Soviet readjustment, and that a unified Western position in the economic sphere is possible (and I realize what considerable assumptions these are), I propose consideration of a plan along the following lines: (A) A unified Western program of grants and credits to the Soviet Union and European satellites would be secretly agreed, which would take place over, say, a 10-year time period, if certain conditions were met. This program would start out modestly, but might reach $5 billion per annum, with a total up to, say, $40 billion. The focus of the plan would be on the furnishing of industrial plants for the production of fertilizers, synthetic materials and products for consumer use. The Europeans would, basically because of the greater incentive of the Germans, be expected to finance the bulk, say 80 percent of the plan. We would agree to finance the remaining 20 percent. Of the European contribution, the German share might be as much as 60 percent, or about 50 percent of the total. State Secretary Westrick has spoken in terms of a possible German contribution of this magnitude. (B) Major changes in the status quo have usually seemed to hinge on someone’s ability and willingness to pay the bill. In the case of the Marshall Plan it was our willingness to pay $17 billion. The possible German willingness to pay a large amount is the very core of this plan. Much as in the Marshall Plan days, the utilization of these funds could be worked out by agreement between the grantors and the recipients. Some mechanism similar to the OEEC might be established to provide the framework. (C) The trick, of course, would be to obtain from the Soviets political benefits of a magnitude sufficient to justify such an initiative and assure its execution. Experience would indicate that the Soviets will not make any formal exchange of political for economic benefits. Instead of spelling out concrete desiderata in advance, therefore, I would think it preferable to talk initially in terms of a gradual easing of tensions in Central Europe, under circumstances which would be tolerable to both Western and Soviet security. This would have to include, at least implicitly, an understanding that German reunification would occur at some point, on terms acceptable to the West but with some concession having been made by the West. There would also have to be some assurance of progress on disarmament, since large-scale economic assistance would lessen pressure on the Soviets to disarm. (D) This plan could be carried out by a series of reciprocal but unilateral actions, not necessarily directly related to each other. Each stage would have to be synchronized, to assure that the benefits to the East are in some way compensated by comparable benefits to the West. The expectation of German reunification would have to become increasingly explicit as the plan was implemented. (E) Economic assistance can be halted at any time. Once the Soviets had made plans based on the expected assistance, however, there would be a strong incentive on their part to assure its fulfillment. The whole endeavor would be under the continuing control of both sides, and could be halted by either at any time if performance were unsatisfactory. The plan would not depend upon the element of trust on either side. 5. This plan is believed to offer major advantages in achieving a break-through in the East-West stalemate. The idea exploits the Soviets' most obvious weakness. It could also provide a vehicle by which, over a long period of time, the Germans would have an opportunity to demonstrate by their actions that the Soviets' traditional distrust of them is no longer well founded. The fact that Germans were in Russia helping to carry out the program, and plants for Russia were being built in Germany, would, in a sense, provide the Russians with some assurance of Germany’s peaceful intentions. Finally, it might provide a framework for Western unity on credit and trade policy towards the Soviet Union and satellites—a prospect we do not otherwise have. A potential liability could be converted into an asset. 6. I am aware too that there are serious disadvantages in a proposal along these lines. My telegram 1650 of last November points out, for example, that Erhard may not be able to develop support for his plan in the Federal Republic, as well as the adverse implications for German defense spending and NATO strategy. There are other questions as well. The German position is still inchoate. The Chancellor has been thinking largely in terms of achieving German reunification. It is not known how he would react to an organized Western effort in which this objective was less clearly defined and guaranteed. We do not know if the Germans would be prepared to pay anything like the amounts they have indicated. 7. I realize that it is not possible to make any immediate decision on this proposal as a whole. We can, however, undertake immediately the two studies I have proposed. I believe, moreover, that we could make two moves in low key: (A) I could inquire of Chancellor Erhard whether he had further developed his thinking on assistance to the Soviets. Depending on his answer, I could inquire further whether he would be agreeable to a discreet United States approach in Moscow suggesting that, if the Soviet Union were prepared to consider what action it might take to remove the causes of tension in Central Europe, the Western powers, for their part, would be prepared to consider a possible major initiative in the trade and credit field; (B) If Erhard were agreeable to this, and after consultations and agreement with the British, which should not be difficult, Ambassador Kohler could make a discreet approach in Moscow, on a highly tentative basis, to test Khrushchev’s reaction. I would appreciate your comments, as well as Foy Kohler’s in Moscow. McGhee 6. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Bonn. Moscow, January 24, 1964, 5 p.m. 2302. Bonn’s 457.Telegram 2571 from Bonn, Document 5, was repeated to Moscow as telegram 457. I have read with interest Ambassador McGhee’s skillful development of Erhard’s essentially commercial approach to the problem of German reunification. I wish I could agree that the idea were a plausible approach to a break-through in East-West relations, but in all honesty, I do not believe it has any chance of success. The following are my principal reasons: 1. Soviet acceptance of the idea would mean, in effect, bartering major long-range political objectives for relatively short-range economic gains. The Soviets have never been prepared to engage in this sort of deal with West; witness their rejection of Marshall Plan aid (with no political strings attached) at a time when their economic needs were much more pressing than they are now and, more importantly, at a time when their supremacy in the World Communist Movement was unchallenged. If they were not interested then in Western offers of economic assistance, objections now on policy grounds would be all the more compelling in the context of their vital competition with the ChiComs for leadership. There is little question in my mind that at this stage Soviets feel obligated to filter all foreign policy moves through the litmus of their quarrel with the Chinese. They are acutely sensitive to ChiCom charges of Soviet willingness to sacrifice the objectives of the World Communist Movement for selfish national reasons; they feel a compelling need, therefore, to handle their avowed policy of coexistence with delicacy and restraint to minimize their vulnerability to ChiCom attack. Certainly any such deal with West would be promptly rejected on the basis of this test alone. 2. Thus, while it is tempting to speculate that aid in meeting current economic difficulties might induce the Soviets to accept a radical reorientation of their political aims, I think we must dismiss this as a realistic possibility. Perhaps, I should assume some of the blame if this speculation has taken root. Embtel 2221,See footnote 2, Document 5. however, should not be read as reflecting a considered judgment by this Embassy that economic problems will force the Soviets to abandon their major political objectives; in this sense, use of “profound” in predicting effects on Soviet policy was perhaps ill-advised. The Soviet economic machine is clearly in bad shape. To permit time for necessary repairs, to enable Khrushchev to make some progress toward fulfilling his commitments to his own people, and to facilitate the possibility of Western assistance, particularly in the form of credits, toward these ends, the Soviets will eschew any dangerous adventurism in foreign policy for the foreseeable future. But for Western policy makers to go beyond this in predicting the impact of current economic difficulties on Soviet policy is certainly neither prudent nor realistic. 3. Furthermore, Khrushchev must feel fairly confident that a break in the Western credit policy is inevitable. Evidence of how far the British are prepared to go is available to him as well as to us. He is not likely to pay a political price for something he believes to be in the cards. But even without what must appear to him to be a fairly reliable prospect of Western help, the Soviets know—and we must recognize—that they can in the long run and by their efforts alone, put their economy in satisfactory shape. The process will be slower and the machine, when repaired, may be creaky and backward by Western standards, but it will probably meet Soviet requirements. 4. A final word on the German problem, itself. Naturally, I concur in the judgment that the key to any real break-through in East-West relations is a lasting Central European settlement. Unfortunately, since this depends on Soviet concurrence in a reasonable approach to reunification, such a settlement must remain a distant possibility and there is little we in the West can do to expedite its achievement. It depends in the final analysis either on Soviet willingness to write-off the GDR as an economic and political liability or on Soviet confidence that a unified Germany will result in an extension rather than curtailment of Soviet influence. We in the West cannot force the Soviets to make this decision now; nor can we expect them to commit themselves to a policy which pre-judges the outcome. The most we can do, it seems to me, is to exploit all available opportunities for influencing the course of events and the development of what the Marxists would call “objective conditions” so that in the end the Soviets will be confronted with only one choice—permitting the German people to decide. In sum, I am bearish now—despite the economic problems facing the Soviets—as I was in Bonn last fall on the Erhard-Adenauer approach. I am hopeful that the Soviet Union will in the long run become a less troublesome, more responsible performer on the world stage, and I think we can influence progress in this direction, or at least the pace thereof, by our own policies, including exchange programs, purposeful use of trade to obtain indirect political benefits, and restrictions on credit to compel Soviets to face up to hard decisions on resource allocations. (Embtel 1653, sent Bonn 114, of November 14, 1963,For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XV, Document 241. touched on some of these points.) At same time, it must be recognized that process of reorienting Soviet behavior probably will be more influenced by developments which neither they nor we can control, such as restiveness in Eastern European countries, growing conflict with China, and demands of Soviet people for a better life. 5. As footnotes on methodology envisaged in program outlined in Bonn’s 457, I would say (A) all of our experience has demonstrated that it is both fruitless and dangerous to attempt do business with Soviets on basis of implicit and undefined understanding of actions they are supposed to take, and (B) it is unrealistic to conceive that a deal of size and import envisaged could be kept secret. Kohler 7. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B. Secret. Drafted by Burdett. Washington, January 24, 1964. SUBJECT German Proposal on Berlin PARTICIPANTS U.K.: Sir David Ormsby Gore, British Ambassador Nigel Trench, Counselor, British Embassy U.S.: The Secretary The Under Secretary William C. Burdett, EUR Henry T. Koren, SEA The Ambassador inquired how we thought the German proposal on Berlin should be handled in the Ambassadorial group. In the British view the German draft had too much of the flavor of an internal political document. In the first place it should be recast in a form suitable for presentation to the Soviets. The Secretary agreed. He said that the matter was now more urgent because there were some indications that the Russians were working on a proposal of their own and it was important to get in ahead of them. The Ambassador suggested sharing the drafting task. Mr. Greenhill was seeing Ambassador Thompson this afternoon to discuss British views. The Secretary wondered whether it would be preferable for Mr. Greenhill to talk to EUR No record of these meetings was found. because if the press should learn of the meeting between Mr. Greenhill and Ambassador Thompson there would immediately be speculation that Berlin was under discussion. 8. Editorial Note On January 28, 1964, Soviet aircraft intercepted and shot down a U.S. T–39 trainer aircraft that had strayed into East German airspace. Three U.S. servicemen were killed in the attack. For text of the Soviet note protesting the U.S. incursion, January 29, and the U.S. response condemning Soviet use of force, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pages 526–527. Secretary of Defense McNamara briefed President Johnson about the incident in a 4-minute telephone conversation beginning at 12 p.m. on January 28. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Conversation Between President Johnson and Secretary McNamara, January 28, 1964, 12 p.m., Tape 64.08, Side A, PNO 6) 9. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Creel; cleared by Tyler, Thompson, and SOV; and approved by Ball. Repeated to Moscow. Washington, January 30, 1964, 9:02 p.m. 2109. Bonn’s 2571, Moscow’s 2302. Documents 5 and 6. Plan for settlement German problem outlined Bonn’s 2571 has been given careful study here and will continue receive our serious consideration. Meanwhile, we have following comments: 1. As specified in para 4 Bonn’s 2571, plan as outlined depends on validity two basic assumptions: a) that there is possibility, over period of years, to influence readjustment of Soviet long-range political objectives and basic political philosophy through device of offering economic assistance to USSR, and b) that it would be possible develop unified Western position on trade and credits to USSR along lines and on scale outlined in plan. 2. We are impressed by arguments advanced in Moscow’s 2302 to support conclusion that there is no realistic basis for believing Soviets can be induced to accept radical reorientation of their long-range political objectives in exchange for Western assistance in overcoming their current economic difficulties. This is same conclusion arrived at in SNIE 11–5–64 dated Jan 8, 1964 on “Soviet Economic Problems and Outlook,”See footnote 5, Document 5. which, after expressing view that current economic pressures in USSR are likely be productive of foreign policy of “relative restraint,” goes on to state (para 22): “We do not, however, believe that the Soviets would make major concessions in exchange for expanded Western credits or reduced Western defense expenditures.” 3. On this basis, plan as outlined would seem afford no basis for hoping that result desired re German settlement could be achieved. Moreover, as seen from Washington, there are truly formidable difficulties in way of trying reach agreement at this time on unified Western program of grants and credits to USSR, especially on scale contemplated (total of $40 billion of which US contribution would be $8 billion). Even an attempt to seek agreement on such a program could bring about stimulation of credit race to point of greatly easing Soviet economic difficulties and thereby removing major restraining factor in Soviet foreign policy. 4. In view above considerations we do not believe Erhard should be encouraged at this point to solicit US approach to Soviets on behalf scheme for major Western initiative in trade and credit field. At same time we should avoid any course of action tending discourage Germans from coming up with new ideas and there would be no objection to inquiring of Erhard, in low key and on non-committal basis, whether he had further developed his thinking on ways and means to settle German problem.In telegram 2855 from Bonn, February 12, McGhee offered further comment on the possibility of finding a basis for agreement over Germany with the Soviet Union and reported that he would pass on U.S. views to Erhard. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER) Rusk 10. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Tyler. Prime Minister Home visited Washington February 12–14 for talks with President Johnson. Preparatory documents, briefing papers, and memoranda of conversation from the visit are ibid., Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2368–2369. Washington, February 12, 1964. SUBJECT Berlin and Germany PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Mr. Tyler Mr. Bundy Prime Minister Douglas-Home Foreign Secretary Butler After the Secretary’s dinner for the Prime Minister at Blair House, he outlined to the Prime Minister and to the Foreign Secretary the three-phase proposals on Berlin and Germany. He told them that he could not leave the paperNo copy of the paper was found. with them because the proposals merely represented tentative ideas on a bolder approach to the problem, and could not be considered as a US Government position. The Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary expressed interest in the idea, but the Prime Minister said he strongly doubted whether the German Government would ever be willing to move decisively on the major issues, such as the boundaries question and security, which would be the condition for any Soviet acceptance of proposals by the West. There was some discussion of how it might be possible to talk to Schroeder about this kind of approach without having the Germans go through the roof. Mr. Butler said he thought his personal relations with Schroeder were good and getting better, and that he might be able to talk to him alone (and he emphasized that this meant without anyone else being present) when they met again in March for the next WEU meeting. Another possibility might be for Schroeder to come to Geneva from his skiing vacation in Switzerland to see Mr. Butler when the latter goes there in another ten days. Mr. Butler said he would think the matter over. The Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary both lamented the negative state of mind of the Germans with regard to observation posts and said they hoped that some way might be found to bring them around to a more positive attitude. Mr. Tyler commented that the Germans probably saw in the observation posts proposal the thin end of a wedge which might lead to a reduction of forces and other types of “thinning out” in Central Europe before an acceptable political solution had been negotiated with the Soviet Union. He added that, in his view, any direct or implicit linking of observation posts with “thinning out” would merely confirm German suspicions and increase their opposition. The Secretary said we should persevere in our search for a possible initiative on Germany. This should be done by the kind of discussion they were now having and should be very tightly held. These matters should not be dealt with in the Ambassadorial Group. The Secretary suggested that we go back over the last three years and take a look at all the ideas and suggestions which the Germans have floated at one time or another on the Berlin and Germany question, and which have not been subsequently followed up. He thought that proposals could be put together on such a basis, which would contain many of the elements in the package which he had just described to the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary. Mr. Bundy, who had joined the group halfway through the talk, emphasized the desirability of examining every possibility of coming up with a peace initiative in the course of this year which would win widespread public support. 11. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 7 GER W. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to London, Rome, Paris for the Embassy and USRO, Moscow, Taipei, and Tokyo. Bonn, February 13, 1964, 9 p.m. 2882. (Conversation with Chancellor Erhard) (For Dept: Part I of IV)Part III, telegram 2884 from Bonn, February 13, is printed as Document 12. Telegram 2883 from Bonn, February 13, dealing with German-Italian conversations on MLF, labeled as Part II, and telegram 2885 from Bonn, February 13, labeled as Part IV, dealing with Cyprus, Cuba, and the Communist Bloc are in Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 GER W. McGhee commented on these discussions in At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 138–139. On eve of his departure today for Paris, Chancellor Erhard requested me to call on him for a general review of current problems, in which he ranged for an hour and a half over his forthcoming visit with President de Gaulle, French recognition Communist China, MLF situation, Passierschein problem, and a number of miscellaneous subjects being reported by separate telegrams. I took the opportunity to raise a number of points from our side, as indicated in Part IV. Meeting with de Gaulle. 1. The Chancellor said that his visit to Paris should be regarded as one of the regular meetings agreed to under the Franco-German Treaty “to maintain contacts.” He could assure me that no change of policy was involved on the part of the German Government (I assumed he meant particularly with respect to Communist China), nor any change in the loyalty and friendship of the German Government toward the United States. Dr. Westrick, who was present, added that the large number of the group accompanying the Chancellor did not signify anything with regard to the importance of the visit, but merely reflected the obligations under the treaty to consult at particular levels. 2. The Chancellor commented that I should not believe everything that the press was saying with regard to the visit. (Although I do not know precisely what he was referring to, it may have been the article in the international edition of The New York Times Feb. 12, to the effect that he was going to Paris in an atmosphere of “improved Franco-German relations” and of “increasing respect” for de Gaulle’s policies. The article also appears to presage a change in policy on the part of Germany towards Communist China.) 3. The Chancellor assured me that he would much prefer to be going to the U.S. than to France. The Germans were in agreement with de Gaulle, he said, on the question of friendship between France and Germany and in all-German and Berlin matters. Looking at it broadly, however, he attached a great deal more significance to his relations with the U.S. and United Kingdom. He expected that de Gaulle would tell him in Paris that he seeks a Europe not controlled by the U.S. He would tell de Gaulle that he does not feel Germany to be controlled by the U.S., but indeed protected by the American Alliance. Referring to the de Gaulle press conference of January 31,For text of de Gaulle’s January 31 press conference, see Charles de Gaulle, Discours et Messages, vol. 4, pp. 162–182. the Chancellor voiced the opinion that de Gaulle had in fact said nothing new. The Chancellor had been shocked, however, at the hardness of de Gaulle’s attacks against the UK and the U.S., which he construed as being more anti-Anglo-Saxon in their intent than pro-French. French recognition of Communist China.France announced its intention to accord diplomatic recognition on January 14. 1. On the subject of Communist China, the Chancellor said that he felt de Gaulle’s recognition of Peking was a dangerous act, the consequences of which cannot be foreseen. (He also had misgivings about de Gaulle’s prospective visits to Latin America and South-East Asia. de Gaulle visited Mexico March 16–19 and Latin America September 21–October 15. His East Asian tour took place in August–September 1966. He wondered what de Gaulle’s motives were, since he could not increase his economic assistance to these areas without overstraining the French economy. The Chancellor foresaw additional problems that would be created by these visits.) 2. In response to his question about the consequences of French recognition of Communist China, I gave him my own interpretation in terms of (A) its effect on the nations of Southeast Asia and U.S. efforts to check Communist subversion and aggression there, and (B) the disruptive effects in the North Atlantic Alliance as a result of such an important matter not being discussed in the Council. The Chancellor added “not even with the Germans under the Franco-German Treaty,”For text of the Franco-German Treaty on Organization and Principles of Cooperation, signed at Paris on January 22, 1963, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 834–838. and pointed out the adverse effect French recognition would have on the question of recognition of the so-called GDR. 3. He asked what effect, in my view, this act of recognition might have on Chinese-Russian relations. Disclaiming any expert opinion in such matters, I expressed the view that it could be interpreted by the Soviets as an effort on the part of France to exploit the Russian-Chinese split. This was something we had scrupulously avoided doing, since the Russian reaction to such a move might well be to take steps to repair the split. Erhard wondered whether it could not have the opposite effect, i.e. if Western recognition and economic aid were given to Communist China, Khrushchev might consider this to be an attack on him and he might thereby be forced to talk to the West. 4. I gave the Chancellor the background leading up to the break in relations by the Government of the Republic of China with France on February 10, as given in Depcirtel 1479.Circular telegram 1479, February 17, reported that the Chinese Nationalists had decided to sever diplomatic relations with France following French recognition of the People’s Republic of China. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 CHINAT) The Chancellor expressed regret that the break had not been at French initiative. I pointed out that in the light of the démarche by the French Charge in Taipei, which the Charge himself had interpreted as meaning that France intended to sever its relations with Taipei, the French really had taken the initiative. McGhee 12. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 7 GER W. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Berlin, London, Moscow, Paris for the Embassy and USRO, and USAREUR for POLAD. Bonn, February 13, 1964, 10 p.m. 2884. (Conversation with Chancellor Erhard) (For Dept: Part III of IV)See footnote 2, Document 11. Passes to the East Sector of Berlin. 1. During a brief interruption in the conversation, when the Chancellor had been called away, State Secretary Westrick referred to the Berlin Passierschein situation. He said that the German Government had reached the decision that they did not wish to repeat the Christmas pass precedent. It was quite clear that the Communists were only trying to make political capital out of a renewal of the Christmas pass arrangements, and this the German Government wished to avoid. The East German radio had said that East German officials had actually performed consular type functions in West Berlin. The German Government was interested in a continuation of visiting arrangements only if conditions could be improved over those for the Christmas passes. 2. One possible improvement, Westrick said, lay in prohibiting East German officials from coming to West Berlin, by their granting the necessary authority to appropriate West Berlin officials. The fact that the East Germans resist this proves that what they desire is only a political result. The East Germans have proposed the creation of an office in West Berlin for the handling of hardship cases. The German Government has asked why passes in such cases cannot be granted by telegram. The Federal Government will not accept any new arrangements which will have the effect of advancing the “three state” theory, with the city of West Berlin as the third state. 3. Westrick reported a difference in views within the Senat with respect to future visiting arrangements. Senator Arndt had resigned, pre-sumably in expression of his own differences with the Governing Mayor. Senator Schiller also proposed to resign. (The British Ambassador informs me that Arndt has in fact resigned because of ill health, and Schiller is considering merely the carrying out of long-held plans.) The Chancellor had that day conveyed to Mayor Brandt the views of the German Government and asked him to come to Bonn next week to discuss the matter further. According to Westrick, Brandt himself may show a greater tendency than the FRG to compromise on issues with the East German officials. The difficulty lay in keeping a human problem from becoming a political problem. Westrick admitted that the FRG decision may have an effect on other existing arrangements, such as interzonal trade. 4. The Chancellor, who rejoined us at this point, added that the German Government was encountering considerable adverse reaction about the Christmas pass policy. Representatives of other nations (unspecified) had asked why they could not have relations with East Germany, since the West Germans themselves had established relations with East German officials in connection with the Christmas passes. The Chancellor said that he had that day told Mayor Brandt and Wehner, the deputy leader of the SPD, that Germany would be exposed to national disaster if the political parties were not able to agree on the question of further exchanges in Berlin. 5. In thanking the Chancellor for informing me about the latest developments, I said that, as at the time of the pre-Christmas negotiations, we had no wish to intervene in this matter, since in its present context we did not consider that it endangered Allied interests. As the FRG and the Berlin Senat were fully aware of the risks involved, as well as the opportunities, we had confidence that any arrangements they made between them would provide adequate safeguards. McGhee 13. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Exdis; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Tyler. Washington, February 25, 1964. SUBJECT Germany and Berlin PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Lord Harlech, British Ambassador Mr. Tyler Lord Harlech asked whether the Secretary had yet received a reply from Mr. Butler to his message. Rusk’s message regarding an approach to the German Foreign Minister was transmitted in telegram 5244 to Bonn, February 19. (Ibid.,POL 28 GER B) The Secretary said that nothing had yet come in. He pointed out that any suggestion of an Anglo-Saxon combine on proposals for the reunification of Germany would be deadly. For this reason he wanted to be able to tell the truth when he said there had been no exchange of papers between the UK and the US Government. He was not going to give the Ambassador any document but would limit himself to discussing ideas with him. Otherwise we would certainly lose the Germans and the French. The Secretary said he was concerned about surfacing the present German proposal. It did not have enough meat in it. It would risk “waking the sleeping dogs” and stimulating the Soviets at a time when we don't really have anything much in our position. He said it appeared that Foreign Minister Schroeder felt that it would not be enough for him to make a speech on German reunification and that he needed, politically, to put forward some specific proposals. The Secretary then gave Lord Harlech an oral outline of the “dream package.” He said that the way to deal with the various elements of the proposals was on the basis of “building blocks,” which could be discussed individually, e.g., European security, mixed commissions, and access problems pending reunification. He emphasized there should not be the slightest hint to the Russians that we had anything specific in mind. He and Lord Harlech agreed on the foregoing, and that no offer should be made which might hint that our thinking lay in the direction of a reunified but neutralized Germany. There was then some discussion of the possibility of a reduction of forces in Central Europe by “mutual example.” So far there had been no evidence of any pullback of Soviet troops even though there had been some reductions on the Western side. Lord Harlech asked about a possible timetable. The Secretary said we should go right ahead and talk over the issues one by one, as he had already suggested, and we might eventually reach the stage where we found that we had the elements of a package. He thought there was a possibility that the Soviets might be planning to take an initiative. Also there was the possibility that the Germans themselves might feel that they must move. It was agreed that there would be further discussion in the Ambassadorial Group. Lord Harlech commented that he thought that the Ambassadorial Group machinery might make the process unduly long, and that the time might come when we would find it desirable to move in Bonn. The Secretary said we should go ahead with discussion in the Ambassadorial meeting and then perhaps we might have a quadripartite Foreign Ministers meeting in May before the NATO meeting. Lord Harlech said that if there was a hope of engaging the Soviet Union in talks some time this year, it was more likely that the Soviet Union would respond to a proposal in the form of a general agenda rather than of a detailed plan on which they would feel they must take a position right away. The Secretary said that if it were manageable it might be best to set up a Deputy Foreign Ministers group which would have some latitude in determining the course of the discussions. Lord Harlech pointed out that the Germans were disinclined to get into too much discussion with the Soviets on peripheral issues, because in proportion as these were disposed of, the problem of Germany and Berlin acquired increasingly the character of a final obstacle to general agreement. He said he thought that any group that was set up should deal with the whole German problem. The Secretary repeated that the Russians might well be preparing their own proposals on this subject. He said that the time might come when the “satellites” might be in a position to play a role. They had a direct interest in the German question and their point of view might not always coincide entirely with that of the Soviets. After the conversation with the Secretary, Lord Harlech told Mr. Tyler that HMG was thinking of the question of timing in relation to the holding of elections in the UK. The timing of the latter would be a factor in determining whether it would be too late to wait until May before coming forward with some proposals to the Soviets, or at least letting it be known that such proposals were in the wind. 14. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Imhof and approved in S on March 16. The source text is marked “Part IV of IV.” Washington, February 28, 1964. SUBJECT Germany; Berlin PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Mr. William R. Tyler, EUR Mr. Johannes V. Imhof, WE Ambassador Herve Alphand, French Embassy M. Pierre Pelen, Counselor, French Embassy Ambassador Alphand, at his request, called on the Secretary at 3:30 p.m. on February 28 for a general tour d'horizon. One of the subjects discussed was Germany and Berlin. Ambassador Alphand asked about our attitude toward the German peace plan. The Secretary said that he felt this plan should be further studied and discussed in the Ambassadorial Group. The Secretary said that he felt the three Western powers should discuss the question of Berlin passes. It was important not to concede in easy stages that Bonn is responsible and competent on this issue. The Western powers have the ultimate responsibility for Berlin. Ambassador Alphand agreed and observed that the question of passes was becoming a domestic issue in Germany. 15. Letter From President Johnson to Chancellor Erhard Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, Germany, Chancellor Erhard, vol. 1. Secret. Drafted by Bundy. Washington, March 4, 1964. Dear Mr. Chancellor: Ambassador McGhee had told me of his recent meetings with you.In telegram 2993 from Bonn, February 20, McGhee reported on discussions with Erhard prior to and immediately after talks with de Gaulle. (Ibid., Country File, Germany, Berlin) See also Documents 11 and 12. I want to tell you how grateful I am for your thoughtfulness and candor in your discussions with him. As I mentioned at the Ranch,Reference is to Erhard’s December 28–29 meetings with the President at the LBJ Ranch in Texas. Documentation on the meetings is in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XV, Documents 248–256. the Ambassador has my fullest confidence, support and trust, and your use of him as a channel of communication with me, I feel, is advantageous to both of us. In this spirit, Mr. Chancellor, I have asked Ambassador McGhee to deliver to you this letter giving you my thinking on some of the problems currently concerning us here in Washington. At the outset, may I say how much I appreciate your continuing personal efforts for achieving an ever-closer relationship between a more cohesive Europe and the United States. As you know from our talks last December, we in the United States are following with sympathetic interest the efforts for strengthening European unity, and it is our sincerest hope that there will be a close identity of views between us all as we move into the very important Kennedy Round. Among the more urgent issues occupying our attention these last weeks are Cyprus, Viet-Nam and Cuba. I personally was pleased with the prompt attention you gave the question of possible German participation in the proposed peace-keeping operation on the embattled island of Cyprus.In his February 13 meeting with McGhee, reported in telegram 2885 from Bonn, February 13, Erhard stated: “He himself would have accepted the original proposal” for the employment of German forces. The plan had subsequently been modified. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 GER W) Although our original peace plan has been set aside, we continue to believe, as we have from the outset, that in the first instance peace must be restored to the island. This is not only necessary for humanitarian reasons; it is an essential prerequisite for a political solution. The issue is now before the Security Council and we are hoping for constructive action there. Events, however, continue to move rapidly and I know we can count on your constructive support in dealing with this grave problem which involves three of our NATO allies. The problem in Viet-Nam remains difficult. We are firmly committed to assist the Government and the people of South Viet-Nam in maintaining their independence and freedom against externally directed and supported subversion and aggression. We believe this struggle can be won and that the new Government of South Viet-Nam under General Nguyen Khanh is capable of bringing this about. Clearly the fight is uphill and the situation serious. And it is for these very reasons we consider proposals for neutralization unfortunate and even harmful. They can serve only to create doubts among the Vietnamese people about the determination of the Free World to help them repel the Communist aggressors. I hope therefore that you and your Government will find ways and means to demonstrate your support for the Government and people of the Republic of Viet-Nam in their struggle against Communist aggression. In connection with Cuba, I want to express my personal gratitude for the cooperation we have been receiving from the Federal Republic in limiting Castro’s access to those Free World commodities which are so important to his economy. Given the nature of this continuing and complex problem, we will be looking to you and your Government for further assistance in attempting to make clear to our other NATO partners that increased trade and transportation ties with Castro’s Cuba, as well as governmental guarantees for export and insurance credits for that regime, not only jeopardize our efforts to reduce the Cuban-Communist threat to Latin America; they also undercut our broader purpose of achieving an orderly and progressive development in Latin America. In this connection, let me say how pleased we were to learn that the Federal Republic and France were considering enlarging their economic assistance to Latin America. This is a constructive gesture, and I hope we can so coordinate our programs that our combined contributions will make for a maximum effort there. In this connection, it has occurred to us that perhaps the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD might provide a useful mechanism for this purpose. As for aid to the developing nations, I was glad to learn of the Federal Republic’s increased contributions during 1963. I hope this contribution can be expanded in 1964. It is increasingly clear that such help is urgently needed for stabilization and growth in the developing areas, which, in turn, affect the Free World’s political and economic interests. At Geneva, where the resumed Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Conference has been meeting since January, there has been little significant progress thus far. But I do not feel there is any reason for pessimism or despair. On the contrary, I hope and think it likely that during the next months the Soviet Union will find it in its own self-interest to negotiate seriously on the basis of the proposals I set before the Conference on January 21. I firmly believe the proposals I made can lead to a reduction in tensions, and hope that the German Government will not only support our position but will also have additional proposals to suggest. In any event, we intend to continue to consult closely with you as we try to move forward in this very important area so vital to the security and political objectives of our countries. For there is no doubt in my mind, Mr. Chancellor, that, in the last analysis, a slowing down in the arms race is more likely to help us achieve a free and reunified Germany, than an uncontrolled arms competition which strengthens those elements in Eastern Europe determined to resist change and perpetuate the present division of your country. Before closing, I should tell you also that I have had very much in mind our exchange of views at the Ranch on defense matters. I particularly appreciated your clear understanding of the importance to the United States—in adhering to its commitment to maintain six divisions in Germany as long as needed—of continued offset purchases of military equipment by the Federal Republic. This arrangement clearly is beneficial to both countries, and, without question, should continue as long as needed. It is a matter of major importance to both our Governments that offset arrangements produce German military orders and payments to the United States fully equal to the annual levels of United States dollar defense expenditures of benefit to the Federal Republic’s balance of payments. I have been assured by my staff that discussions between our respective defense organizations for future military equipment procurement will be resumed during the next weeks. I also understand from Secretary McNamara that he will be meeting in May with Minister von Hassel to consider the results of these discussions and conclude agreements which will provide for full offset in orders and payments for the periods of 1963–64 and 1965–66. In this connection, Mr. Chancellor, I would personally appreciate your continuing support in this endeavor which is so important for the military security and financial strength of the Atlantic Community. Thank you again for your kindnesses to Ambassador McGhee. I very much want to remain in touch with you and hope you will feel free to use Ambassador McGhee for this purpose. Mrs. Johnson and I often talk about your visit last December which we enjoyed so much, and she joins me in sending personal best wishes to you and Frau Erhard.In a March 10 memorandum to the President, Bundy reported that McGhee had delivered this letter and received assurances from the Chancellor that he was “in complete agreement with all the points raised.” Bundy added: “This exercise was a net gain for us in terms of German-American relations generally, and on the specific issues raised.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, vol. 2) Sincerely,Printed from an unsigned copy. 16. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Drafted by Tyler. Washington, March 6, 1964. SUBJECT German “Peace Plan” PARTICIPANTS Heinrich Knappstein, German Ambassador William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary (Reference: Mem/Con dated March 5, 1964, by Ambassador Thompson)Not found. Ambassador Knappstein called to ask if he could have an informal talk with me about the German peace plan. He would have preferred our having a lunch together, but since I was not free for several days, he said he would like to come to my office and talk with me alone on a completely unofficial basis. To this I agreed. He asked me what was my own view of the German proposals. I said that if they were to be plausible as a serious initiative on reunification, they would have to be much more specific, particularly in the field of European security. For example, what does Bonn mean by reunification on a basis of no change in the balance of power to the detriment of either side? The Ambassador did not think it was desirable to attempt to spell this concept out in detail in the proposals because if one did, the Russians would put any concession offered in their pocket and brush the rest of the proposals aside. He said that the French had from the start taken the position that it was, in present circumstances, impossible to arrive at an acceptable practical formula whereby Germany could be reunified without a change to the detriment of one of the two sides. The Ambassador said that the proposals must be considered as constituting one single package, whose component elements could not be isolated or extracted from the rest of the package. The Ambassador went on to say that several factors had conspired to convince Bonn that proposals on German reunification should be made within the next few months. First of all, five years had elapsed since the last round of talks with the Russians on reunification, and the general impression was gradually being created in the world that reunification was something which was no longer topical, or relevant to the present evolution in East-West relations. Second, there had latterly been an increase in public pressures in Germany in favor of some initiative on the part of the government to bring reunification to the fore again. What was more interesting, he said, was that there was an unmistakable increase of interest in reunification on the part of the youth of university age, together with increasing criticism of the government for its passivity in this field. Third, there was evidence that in the rest of the world, the impression was growing that unification was becoming progressively less important to the German government, and that it was therefore increasingly possible to recognize or do business with the GDR with impunity, witness: recent developments in Ceylon, Zanzibar, and increased activities and initiatives by the GDR in the LDC’s.On February 14, the German Democratic Republic and Ceylon signed a consular exchange agreement. East Germany recognized the revolutionary government of Zanzibar on January 28 and exchanged diplomatic representatives in early February. Fourthly, there was an increasing tendency, particularly since the Moscow Test Ban Treaty,For text of the Test Ban Treaty, signed in Moscow on August 5, 1963, and entered into force for the United States on October 10, see 14 UST 1313. for East-West discussions and negotiations to be concerned with matters other than reunification, witness: commercial and cultural relations, the ENDC in Geneva, talks about observation posts and other measures in the general field of security and disarmament, rather than political solutions of the causes of tension between the Soviet Union and the West, of which the chief in Europe is the problem of Germany and Berlin. Bonn feels it is essential, for the foregoing reasons, to put reunification back in the middle of the table so as to make it clear not only to the Soviet Union but to everyone that reunification of Germany remains, and will continue to remain a major Western goal. The Ambassador said he had recently been called by Reinkemeyer (In Charge of Soviet Affairs in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Bonn), who had reflected some impatience with the slowness of discussion in the Ambassadorial Group, and had pressed to know when the next step would be taken. The Ambassador told him that the British and the French were awaiting instructions and that it was hoped to meet again early next week. Reinkemeyer had said that it was Bonn’s definite hope that four-power agreement could be reached before the NATO meeting in early May. I told the Ambassador that I was familiar with his talk with Ambassador Thompson yesterday. I wondered whether it was desirable to put forward proposals unless they were likely to appear convincing to public opinion as a sincere attempt to move forward toward a basis of negotiation with the Russians. There was also the question whether, if proposals were made now, the Russians might take the opportunity to uncork some counter proposals of their own which could stir things up in an unhelpful manner. I asked whether the Federal Government was thinking of proposals in terms of their appeal to the Soviet government, or whether it wanted to make some gesture which would focus world attention on German reunification, and which would serve to refute any charge of inactivity in this field on the part of the Federal Government. The Ambassador said his instructions made it clear that the degree of appeal the proposals might have for the Soviet Union is, in the view of the FRG, of secondary importance. The primary objective is to counteract the present trend, to which he had already referred, of talking with the Russians about everything other than German reunification. I asked whether Bonn had given any consideration to some kind of a manifesto or declaration on reunification which could be submitted to the four powers and publicized suitably, and which would serve the political purpose his government had in mind without incurring the possible dangers of putting forward an inadequate proposal which might complicate things for Germany and the West in general. I emphasized that I was not suggesting this and that I was speaking only for myself. The Ambassador said he did not know whether any such idea had been considered. Toward the end of our talk the Ambassador came back to his central point of the need “to do something about reunification.” He said we had doubtless noticed that in the present German proposals Berlin plays a minor role. He said this was because the FRG does not want to give prominence to a possible access agreement for fear that the Russians would again do what they did in Geneva in 1959, i.e.: concentrate on Berlin to the exclusion of the central issue of reunification. In conclusion the Ambassador said he appreciated this opportunity of discussing the situation with me and he repeated that he considered our conversation as private and unofficial. 17. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Paris, London, Moscow, and Berlin. Bonn, March 6, 1964, 7 p.m. 3170. Subject: FRG reunification plan. 1. As has been reported separately both Krapf and Carstens have urged during the past week that we move ahead energetically in considering the FRG reunification plan now before the Ambassadorial Group in Washington.The Embassy reported the conversation with Krapf in telegram 3025 from Bonn, February 25. (Ibid.) No record of the conversation with Carstens was found. Both have quite frankly referred to the government’s internal political need to show initiative in this field. This fits in with other reports which lead me to conclude that the FonOff, with some reason, fears that unless it can point to progress in connection with the plan, it will come under attack by the more conservative elements in the CDU/CSU (Guttenberg for example), the always experiment minded FDP, and the SPD. 2. With this in the background, I feel it would be wise to give the FRG some evidence of forward progress in reaching an agreement based on its proposal without much delay. Otherwise we can hardly expect it to accommodate us in our objective of reaching certain agreements with the USSR which, while desirable from an over-all Western point of view, are not likely to contribute directly to a solution of the German problem. A good case can also be made that the West should, in any event, keep up to date a basic negotiating position on reunification, whether or not there is any likelihood of its being accepted by the Soviets. 3. I recognize, as do the Germans, that anything within the general framework of the FRG plan will not be attractive to the Soviets as a negotiating document. In commenting on the plan earlier (Embtel 2513)Dated January 19. (Ibid.) we pointed out certain disadvantages to its official endorsement by the Allies or its presentation to the Soviets by them. As things are now developing in the FRG, however, I am inclined to feel that in the interest of progress in other areas of negotiation with the Soviets, and of our bilateral relations with the FRG, it will be difficult for us to withhold official support from some such plan indefinitely. 4. Elements of the FRG plan, from our point of view, provide an essentially sound basis for an Allied agreed plan. We have, in Embtel 2513, made various suggestions on possible modification and we understand that others are presently under discussion in Washington. We have been given to understand by the Foreign Office, moreover, that there is at least a limited flexibility in the relationship of the various parts of the proposal to the whole (para 3, Embtel 2465).Dated January 14. (Ibid., POL 28 GER B) 5. One feature of the plan which might have attraction for the Communists is its reference to the possible extension of assistance to East Germany (para 6 of the proposal). Recent statements by FRG leaders would indicate the possibility of considering this together with the establishment of humanitarian commissions. We have commented in some detail on other positive aspects of the plan in the Embassy’s A–587.Dated October 4, 1963. (Ibid., SOC 14 E GERM) The establishment of the humanitarian commissions described in para 4 of the FRG proposal could eventually have favorable results from the all-German point of view, although the Soviets will probably reject the commission concept even if isolated from the rest of the plan since the commissions are described as working “by direction of the four powers.” We cannot know for certain that they will be rejected, however, until the Soviets are tested, and, as the Secretary recently commented, it is not up to us to do the Soviets' negotiating for them. In any event, the putting forward of this plan, backed by the West, would put the FRG in a position of having taken an initiative in this area which would be helpful in view of the current efforts of the East German Communists to utilize the appeal of increased contacts for their own purposes. 6. I now feel, therefore, that it will be in our best interest to join with the other Allies and the FRG in developing some such plan, as appropriately amended through consultation, and if the FRG insists, in associating ourselves in some way with its presentation to the Russians. This latter could take the form of an FRG public initiative, which the three Allies could state was with their concurrence, or a tripartite note to the Soviets transmitting the FRG proposal as modified which the Allies would endorse. At the same time, we should make clear to the Germans our expectation that, as Chancellor Erhard agreed with President Johnson in Texas, they would cooperate with us in seeking other areas of possible agreement with the Soviets. This subject will be discussed further in a subsequent Embtel.In telegram 3190 from Bonn, March 7. (Ibid., POL 32–4 GER) McGhee 18. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Drafted by Penberthy and approved in S on March 18. Washington, March 9, 1964. SUBJECT Initiative on Germany PARTICIPANTS British Embassy Lord Harlech, British Ambassador U.S. The Secretary Mr. William R. Tyler, EUR Mr. Grover W. Penberthy, BTF Lord Harlech said that he had received by letter Mr. Butler’s views on what the Secretary had said on the above subject when Mr. Butler was in Washington.See Document 10. Butler had hoped to see Foreign Minister Schroeder in Switzerland but had not and does not see any prospect that he will see Schroeder before the WEU meeting at Brussels on April 16–17. Moreover, on reflection, Butler does not care for the role of putting to Schroeder such a far-reaching proposal for negotiations with the Soviets. Butler agrees to all that the Secretary had said in their Washington meeting and is prepared to back whatever the United States is prepared to do. But for two reasons Butler thinks that it is up to the United States to decide if it is prepared to take the initiative that the Secretary had outlined: the Germans depend more on the United States than on the UK, and the United Kingdom has not been too successful with its relationship with the FRG lately. The UK is trying hard and does not want to prejudice their efforts. The British believe therefore that we should continue the work in the Ambassadorial Group and see where we get to. Concerning timing the UK believes that the Soviets do not feel any pressure to do something but that the Germans, for domestic political reasons, do want to take an initiative on reunification. The British think that it would be unfortunate to take an initiative that would be half-baked. They hope that the Washington Ambassadorial Group can proceed quickly enough and that the discussion there can be conducted so as to turn the present document to something worthwhile, either as a diplomatic proposal to the Soviets or as a unilateral statement which the Germans could make and to which the Three Powers could appropriately refer. In particular about the outline of the proposal which the Secretary had sketched at their meeting in Washington, Mr. Butler believes that the reduction of forces in the second phase would have to be wider than just Germany. He thought the European security arrangements should be based on the 1959 proposals.For texts of the 1959 proposals exchanged by the Soviet Union and Western Allies on European security, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1959, pp. 558–601, 612–613, 618–639, and 655–664. He also thought it necessary to avoid a neutral Germany at all costs. As to the long-term-credits point, Mr. Butler wondered whether these were to come from the West in general or from the United States. The Secretary said that they would come most particularly from the Federal Republic. He recalled that Erhard had hinted that the Federal Republic would be willing to extend such credits although he had said nothing lately about this. The Secretary asked whether the Foreign Secretary or the Prime Minister felt that the prospect of elections in the UK would stimulate a desire for an initiative. He said that as far as we are concerned there is not much steam just for an initiative. Lord Harlech said that likewise there would not seem to be much steam for it in the UK. The Secretary thought that Khrushchev would be very skeptical of a Four-Power Council proposal made just before elections in the several countries. Lord Harlech said that, from a foreign policy point of view, the UK would like to move, not so much because the Soviets are in a mood to reach major agreements, but there is advantage for the West to take an initiative. It is unwise to leave the present situation alone for a long time and let the Soviets get the credit for being the only ones interested in taking an initiative. For the Western Powers the sine qua non is something serious to discuss with the Soviets. A Four-Power meeting with the Soviets is not an end in itself. Lord Harlech said that the situation in Bonn does not look hopeful for getting an elaboration of the German plan. He wondered whether the Secretary or a personal emissary might take the matter up directly with Schroeder. If he would say this package is a non-starter as a proposal, we could all look at the thing again. Mr. Tyler pointed out that the FRG is very sensitive to the charge of inertia on the subject of reunification. There is dissatisfaction particularly among the youth and press that there has been no progress on the subject in nearly five years. But the Government feels that discussion on disarmament and other issues than reunification tends to shunt reunification to the side and to make it appear to be something not of actual concern. The Secretary asked whether we should go back to the Germans, saying that this is their paper, that it mentions security and balance, and that now they must come up with ideas on what they mean. Mr. Tyler said that the Germans are afraid to put forward separately specific concessions that they might otherwise be prepared to make as part of a package. They fear the Soviets would put the concessions in their pocket and then refuse to talk about anything else. Mr. Tyler wondered whether it is really necessary that proposals be put forward. If what the Germans want is to put reunification at the center of the stage and as the goal of the West, they might publish a manifesto, to which the Western Powers might subscribe. Lord Harlech said it depends on one’s objective. Earlier on in the fall the situation in Germany and Berlin was quiet. Always before we had understood that one could not make proposals or even have talks in periods of tension. Here was a quiet moment which therefore was a good time to put forward proposals. He still thinks it is so, but it does not appear that the Germans are willing to go for anything. He wondered if the Secretary could have a blunt talk with them. The Secretary observed that he might have a talk with Schroeder as a follow-up to the Erhard talk at the LBJ ranch and said that he would give more thought to Lord Harlech’s suggestion. The Secretary said that he had suggested to Schroeder a long time ago that the initiative that the Germans have in mind might take the form of a major policy speech by Erhard or Schroeder to which we could make an appropriate response. But Schroeder had made it plain that that was not enough. The Secretary said he had cautioned Schroeder that the more the Germans talked of reunification the more the likelihood that they would face the question of reunification of what, thus raising the question of the Oder-Neisse line. Mr. Tyler recalled that the Germans always revert to the Potsdam Agreement under which the disposition of the Eastern territories is to be left to the final peace conference. Lord Harlech said that this card that the Germans hope to play is getting steadily weaker. The Secretary observed that, as far as the Russians are concerned, it is not a card at all any more. After it was noted that Ambassador Knappstein had not been able to give much of a background to the German thinking behind their initiative the Secretary wondered if we could get Carstens to come over and give more elucidation of what the Germans have in mind. Lord Harlech observed that Carstens is quite rigid and doubted that we would get much from him on Erhard or Schroeder’s view on how far the Germans might go. Lord Harlech thought that in as much as the British, French and Americans now have positions on the German proposal the discussion in the Ambassadorial Group might get down to another round of questions. The Secretary asked if the French had their instructions and Mr. Penberthy outlined them briefly as they had been given to him. It appeared to the Secretary that, if the French should make a presentation along the lines of the instructions just set forth and if the UK and US followed the views that we had expressed to each other, the discussions in the Ambassadorial Group would not be fruitful until the Germans could come up with something better. The Secretary asked whether the Germans had asked us to slow down in coming to agreements in other areas because of their desire to come to some agreement on reunification. Mr. Tyler said no, but pointed out that the Germans are very depressed about Zanzibar and Ceylon. It looks to them as though the Hallstein DoctrineReference is to the 1955 statement by Foreign Minister Hallstein that Germany would not establish or maintain diplomatic relations with any state, except the Soviet Union, that recognized the German Democratic Republic. were weakening. The Germans are feeling politically vulnerable. Lord Harlech observed that the Germans have certainly showed no enthusiasm for OPs or nondissemination at Geneva but they have not said they are holding back, in order to get reunfication back to the center of the stage. Mr. Tyler noted that they have not said it but it is implicit in their attitude. The Secretary said that he thought we had better then go ahead with the Ambassadorial Group discussions and in the meantime he would be thinking over the suggestions Lord Harlech had made about blunt talk with the Germans. The Secretary noted that Brandt and Erhard had agreed on the pass business and wondered what this meant. Mr. Tyler said they had had a meeting and had issued a communiqué which papered over their differences. The fact, however, is that there are elements in Bonn which see the prospects of increased contacts in a different light from Brandt. Brandt’s February 28 TV programIn his address, Brandt called for West German authorities to reach basic agreement on policy regarding its approach to issues like the Berlin passes. The Mission commented on the impact of Brandt’s statement in telegram 1123 from Berlin, February 29. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–10) had angered people entertaining this view. The Secretary then asked about the flurry that had occurred in Parliament when Wilson got home relative to the use of British forces under the UN. Lord Harlech said that this had been distorted out of proportion but that it had all blown over now. The Secretary noted that he had been embarrassed in his press conference about this, since we had been encouraging small countries like Sweden to put their military under UN control. 19. Telegram From the Headquarters, U.S. Air Force, to the Commander in Chief, U.S. Air Force in Europe Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, RB–66. Secret; Immediate. No time of transmission is on the source text. The message was written by General William F. McKee, USAF. On March 10, Soviet aircraft intercepted and shot down a U.S. RB–66 airplane that was in East German air space. Washington, March 10, 1964. Personal for General Disosway from General McKee. This message refers to the RB–66 incident which occurred this morning. The President wants you to know that he is deeply concerned. He does not understand how this could have happened, particularly in light of the recent T–39 incident. He further wants to know why we violate East German air space this frequently when the Russians appear to be able to prevent similar incidents with respect to our Allied air space. Or do they and, if so, how frequently? Immediate answer to the above needed.The U.S. Command in Europe provided an initial appraisal of the incident in a March 10 telephone report. A transcript of this report, provided to the White House, is included in a memorandum from Arthur McCafferty of the NSC Staff to McGeorge Bundy. (Ibid.) Subsequently, Headquarters, U.S. Air Force in Europe, provided a fuller assessment in telegram ECJO 655, March 16. (Ibid.) It is imperative that you take action to prevent similar incidents in the future. Two incidents of this nature in a short period of time are cause for deep concern. Let me know action taken soonest. 20. Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, RB–66. Secret. Washington, March 17, 1964. McGB— SUBJECT McGhee’s Proposals on Landing Signals for Intruding Aircraft On the sound assumption that the RB–66 will not be our last airplane incident, George McGhee’s proposal for reaching some understanding with the Soviets on “landing signals” might not be a bad idea (Bonn’s 3311, attached).Not printed. We, of course, would have to check this out with the Pentagon and the Department to make sure that we are not biting off a lot more than we intended. It is also clear that we cannot rush into this kind of thing so long as the RB–66 case is around. For that matter, I don't really think we can do much more about the US–USSR Air AgreementFor text of the air transport agreement, initialed at Moscow on August 21, 1961, signed at Washington and entered into force on November 4, 1966, see 17 UST 1909. while the RB–66 men remain in Soviet hands.A marginal handwritten notation by McGeorge Bundy reads: “I agree strongly and this point should be made to Sovs.” But, on the assumption that the RB–66 case will be cleared up, and that we will be going through with the Air Agreement, it would seem to make sense to talk with the Soviets about landing signals, unless there are substantial objections. (I will test this with Tommy this afternoon.) Incidentally, from my reading of the RB–66 case, it seems fairly clear that the Soviets still have the problem in hand and have not turned it over to the East Germans. I base this on the fact that the injured airman is being treated at a Soviet hospital rather than an East German institution. This makes me suspect that the Soviets may be waiting a respectable period before proposing that our “spies” be exchanged for theirs—the Ivanov whom they wanted to trade for Barghoorn last November. This clearly may not be the best route for us, but it may be the most practicable one. In this connection, I think it is most important that we keep the pressures on the Soviets—in a non-hysterical way—to return the RB–66 men.One of the three fliers, who had been injured in the crash, was returned on March 20. The other two were released on March 27. Congressional inquiries are starting to come in and the families are beginning to write the President. If nothing else is accomplished, it is necessary to have a record of seeking the men’s return, rather than one indicating non-action on our part.A handwritten notation by McGeorge Bundy reads: “Be sure we do.” DK 21. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 31–1 GER E–US. Confidential. Drafted by Valdes and approved in S on March 19. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk’s office. Washington, March 19, 1964, 10:30 a.m. SUBJECT RB–66 PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR The Secretary Mr. Philip Valdes—EUR/SOV The Secretary said he wanted to talk to Ambassador Dobrynin about the RB–66 fliers, since this could be troublesome.For text of notes exchanged between the United States and Soviet Union concerning the incident, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 528–531. He said that the plane was not where it was supposed to be. There is no denial of this, and we have already expressed our regret. How it got where it did is still a deep mystery. We have sent senior officers to make a full investigation, and have checked everything out as far as we could, short of actually talking with the crew. The plane was on a mission from Touls to just short of the North Sea. At 1358 the plane reported it was over its destination and was turning. At 1400, two minutes later, it was attacked. When it reported, therefore, it was already 150 miles off its course without knowing it. How the plane managed to make a 90 degree turn and not know it was lost we cannot explain. The Secretary said that the first point he wanted to make, therefore, was a solemn statement, for the U.S. Government, that the plane was not engaged in any mission in East Germany. Apart from our policy, which would preclude this, we have looked into the briefing and flight plan for this specific flight. We have the impression that the Soviet Government is in the process of deciding what to do. It is therefore important that Khrushchev know that the plane was off course, that we regret this, and that we have expressed our regrets. The Secretary said that the second point he wanted to make was that he thought that the Soviet military had acted too fast in shooting down the plane. When Ambassador Dobrynin commented they were merely following orders, the Secretary replied that in that case the orders called for them to act too fast. He said there is quite a gap between Soviet orders and ours. We give signals, and help the plane turn back. Ambassador Dobrynin said the Soviets do the same. The Secretary replied that they had not in this case. Unlike the T–39 case, we had some communication with the RB–66, and if they had been aware of any signals, we would have heard from them. Ambassador Dobrynin commented that someone had told him in connection with the T–39 case that there had been no warning, and then had to say he was wrong two days later. Perhaps when the US speaks with the fliers in this case, they will also find they were wrong. The Secretary said that there have been intrusions in both directions, and suggested that at some stage we ought perhaps to talk about procedures. Perhaps we would find, he added, that the Soviet procedures are better. As a third point, the Secretary noted that US medical officers have seen one of the fliers. He said that we appreciate the fact that he is getting good medical care, but do think the Soviets ought to give the fliers back promptly. If it were the other way around, we would have no problem in dealing with it as accidental. It is important that the Soviets not try to create an incident that is not there, but treat it as an accident, for it would eat into other matters, and it should not be allowed to do that. If the fliers are returned, there should not be any matter of prestige, since this would be in the same category as helping people in distress at sea. The Secretary said he was certain the Soviet military people could confirm what he had said about the plane being off course. He strongly urged Dobrynin to pass to Khrushchev and Gromyko his earnest hope that they release the fliers and get the case over with, since it is not worth the irritations it would create. Ambassador Dobrynin said he would inform Gromyko. He added that he had no new information, and could only confirm what was in the Soviet note of March 11. The Secretary said that after the last incident, one of the things that made this one so inexplicable was that we had taken measures to prevent any recurrence. Now, we are taking drastic measures. Dobrynin repeated that he would pass the Secretary’s statements to Moscow. 22. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 1. Confidential. Drafted by McGhee who had returned to Washington for consultations. The meeting was held at the White House. Washington, March 23, 1964. SUBJECT US-German Relations PARTICIPANTS The President Ambassador George C. McGhee I called on the President on March 23. Since the President was slightly indisposed following his return to Washington from a speech in Atlantic City,For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1964, Book I, pp. 408–412. I saw him in his private quarters and made my visit brief. I gave the President an overall summary of the current state of our relations with Germany, making the following points: 1. Chancellor Erhard had constantly reassured me, and in my judgment had also so indicated by his actions, that he placed primary emphasis on Germany’s relations with the United States. In this connection he had reiterated to me frequently his great confidence in the President and his desire to work very closely with him at all times. In particular, he had greatly appreciated the recent letter which the President had transmitted to him through me. Document 15. He had commented on that occasion that he was in full agreement with the letter, and that there was no question it raised which he and the President could not work out together. 2. I indicated to the President that in my judgment there were at the present time no important bilateral problems between us and Germany. There is the continuing need to reassure Germany of our interest in their fundamental objective of reunification; to consult with them fully on East-West negotiations, in disarmament and other matters; and to convince them of our continued faithfulness to our commitment to maintain the equivalent of six divisions under NATO command in Europe as long as they are required. There were, however, no serious questions being raised in Germany at the present time on these grounds. 3. I advised the President that in my judgment the most important aspect of our relations with Germany at the present time lay in enlisting German support and coordinating our common efforts with respect to certain important common objectives. These included: a. The MLF, which the Germans strongly support; b. The Kennedy Round, the success of which the Germans support and to which Chancellor Erhard is personally committed; c. The European unity movement within the framework of Atlantic partnership. Although little forward progress can be made until after the British elections, we both seek to avoid domination by any one power or group of powers, and at least to leave the door open for ultimate British entry. I observed to the President that in all of these matters we and the Germans saw eye to eye. The principal task lay in coordinating our policies and tactics. The only real divergence in views between us concerned certain aspects of agricultural policy as related to the Kennedy Round. The President followed what I said with apparent interest, asking questions on occasion. He appeared to be in general agreement with the analysis I had given and the conclusions I had reached. The President asked that upon my return I relay his personal greetings to Chancellor Erhard, and that I convey to him his great confidence in him and his desire to coordinate closely with him all matters of common interest to our two countries. I should tell him that he hoped the Chancellor would continue to convey through me his thoughts on particular issues as they arise. He would on his part continue to communicate with the Chancellor on appropriate occasions. 23. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the British Ambassador (Harlech)Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Secret Drafted by Stuart H. McIntyre on April 2. Washington, April 4, 1964. Dear David: In your letter of March 26Not printed. (Ibid.) you asked how our ideas are shaping up with regard to the German reunification plan and whether I have given any more thought to the question of letting Schroeder know in a private talk sometime before the NATO Ministerial meeting, or through a personal emissary, how we feel about his proposal. I do not expect to have an opportunity to talk to Schroeder between now and the NATO Ministerial meetings. However, when George McGhee was here, I asked him to let Schroeder know, in low-key fashion, that we simply do not feel that the German proposals are good enough. As a result of the recent Ambassadorial Group meetings I think the Germans now understand that for an initiative to be acceptable to us they will have to inject more substance into it than they already have. McGhee’s talk will also serve to make our attitude clear. As far as I know he has not yet talked with Schroeder. As Bill Tyler told Denis Greenhill,No record of this conversation was found. I am considering writing a letter to Schroeder but believe it would be best to await the outcome of the next Ambassadorial Group meeting before deciding. At that time, we should have a better idea of how far the Germans will be prepared to go on the question of European security. Please tell Rab Butler for me that I appreciate his willingness to make the necessary arrangements for a four power talk at the time of the meetings in The Hague. Depending upon developments in the Ambassadorial Group, it will probably be useful to have a good discussion on the German initiative. With warm regards, Sincerely, Dean Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original. 24. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by O'Mahony and approved in U on April 10. The meeting was held in Under Secretary Ball’s Conference Room. Washington, April 8, 1964, 11 a.m. SUBJECT Current Economic Topics PARTICIPANTS Germans Ambassador Knappstein The Minister of Economics, Mr. Kurt Schmuecker Dr. Edgar Horn, Director for Customs and Tariffs Dr. Hans Weber, Economic Advisor for Foreign Trade Americans The Under Secretary Mr. Robert Anderson, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary Mr. Jerome Jacobson, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs Mr. Robert C. Creel, Director, Office of German Affairs Mr. Deane R. Hinton, Director, Office of Atlantic Political, Economic Affairs Mr. Joseph A. Greenwald, Director, Office of International Trade Mr. Joseph E. O'Mahony, Economic Advisor, Office of German Affairs UNCTAD The Under Secretary stated that so far the Communist delegates at the Geneva talksReference is to the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development held at Geneva March 23–June 16. have engaged in less mischief than might have been expected. The Soviet Minister’s speech, in fact, was quite mild. The Minister agreed, but said he remains cautious about the future—many problems are yet to be faced. As a consequence of the discussions he has had during the past few days he has come to understand the United States position on stabilizing world commodity prices, etc. He appreciates our “reserved position” on these matters, and will take a similar line with his colleagues in Bonn. The Minister continued that he also tends to agree with the United States position regarding trade preferences for the LDC’s, but it must be recognized that certain preferences, such as those provided to a number of new nations by the EEC, are required. He has received the impression in Washington that the United States considers that the Kennedy Round will reduce the significance of these preferences. What we must guard against, the Minister warned, is the wrecking of the whole international trading system, including the GATT, by the decisions of the Geneva conference. It is gratifying to learn that no real difference of opinion exists among the US, FRG and even the IMF on matters of substance, as well as institutional issues, in connection with UNCTAD. Kennedy Round The Minister briefly outlined some of the matters he had discussed with Governor Herter during the previous hour,These talks were summarized in circular telegram 1908, April 13. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO GRAINS EEC) Christian Herter was the U.S. Special Representative for Trade Negotiations. and said he is of the opinion that American offcials are overemphasizing the technical difficulties connected with the disparities issue. He believes he got this point across to Governor Herter, and hopes that the Americans can understand why Austria, Switzerland and Denmark must be given special treatment because of their close geographic proximity and traditional economic relationships with Germany and France. The Minister’s ensuing remarks on the subject of the GATT negotiations rambled somewhat and their meaning was always not entirely clear. He said that, especially when it comes to agriculture, we must not think in terms of tariffs alone—subsidies must be taken fully into account even though it is difficult to obtain full information about them. In every country he has visited he asked about the subsidies provided to that nation’s agricultural sector, and in every country he has found that this is top secret information. He has figures which indicate that in some countries subsidies constitute 25 percent of the price of farm products. But the truth is that no one knows what subsidies the other partners are giving. One country gives subsidies to lower prices, another gives subsidies to raise prices. The Federal Republic ties its subsidies to production, other countries do not. This situation is not only confusing, it causes enormous waste. Establishment of common agricultural prices in the EEC, therefore, will take considerable time. Governor Herter, the Minister added, agrees with him that this is a subject which should be debated extensively. The wheat price cannot be settled until the subsidies problem has been solved. If a wheat price is agreed upon first, it will not be possible to bring pressures to bear to harmonize subsidies. When, the Minister asked the Under Secretary, do we really have to decide upon grains prices? Governor Herter indicated we should try to settle the price problem quickly, but he also agreed that we cannot entirely separate the price issue from other matters that must be negotiated. The Chancellor goes along with the latter point—that is, all these matters should be negotiated together during the course of the Kennedy Round. The Under Secretary asked whether the Federal Republic wouldn't find it easier from the political standpoint to come to a decision on grains prices during the next month or two, rather than some time later which would be closer to elections. The Minister said opinions differ on this question in the Federal Republic, but the Cabinet generally agrees that the time to fix grains prices will be when the gap between German and French prices has been reduced. Under present circumstances, subsidies of DM 2,000 would have to be paid per farm. This is impossible. Poor workers would have to contribute to the incomes of rich farmers. The workers would certainly demand equal subsidies. If all these matters are negotiated as part of the Kennedy Round, the Minister continued, there is no immediate need to settle such complex issues as price and subsidy-price relationships immediately. Furthermore, there is much more to the Kennedy Round than agriculture. We should not spoil our chances to accomplish something “in the big picture” simply because we have problems with agriculture. The Under Secretary pointed out we have a definite interest in the grains price problem, but we have not made their fixing a hard-and-fast precondition for beginning the negotiations. He asked Mr. Greenwald for his comments on this subject. Mr. Greenwald agreed with the Under Secretary, and added that, of course, if price unification can be worked out at a proper level now, even if implementation must be delayed, that would represent the best solution. We are not “holding out” for such a decision, however. The Minister said he agrees with this position, but again stated that agreement on prices will not be easy because no one knows enough about the varied, hidden and difficult-to-calculate subsidies that are involved in current prices. To what extent, for example, does the United States wheat price represent subsidy payments? Without this information and similar data on subsidies paid in each of the European countries, how can we relate various countries' prices? Mr. Greenwald acknowledged that it is difficult to make these calculations, and added that this is one problem we have with the Mansholt plan.Reference is to the plan for a European agricultural free trade zone that became the basis for the Common Agricultural Policy of the EEC. The Under Secretary remarked that it is not a matter of keeping the data on US subsidies secret, but calculating them is very complicated. East-West Trade The Minister referred to what appears to him to be a rethinking exercise in progress in the United States on the subject of trade with the Communist countries. It is generally considered likely, he said, that the United States will change its policies in this regard. It is speculated, for example, that the United States will extend credits to the USSR up to Bern Union limits.Apparent reference to the European Payments Union. This is somewhat puzzling to him, in as much as Americans continue to tell officials of the Federal Republic that West German trade with the Bloc is so large that no thought should be given to increasing it. The Under Secretary should not overlook West Germany’s geographic position and its traditional trade ties with the East. The Under Secretary stated that we do have our policy on trade with the Bloc under review, though it should be kept in mind that our actions in this field are not entirely governed by administrative decision, but are in many respects affected by law. We do not foresee any radical changes in our trade with the Bloc. We do feel, the Under Secretary continued, that we should distinguish between the USSR and the Eastern European countries. There may be considerable advantage in increasing trade with the latter, even if credits would be involved. Such credits, he believed, should fall within the Bern Union rules; i.e., five years, except for larger ships and aircraft where seven years' credit may be extended. The Under Secretary explained the provisions of the Johnson Act,For text of the Johnson Debt Default Act, signed on April 13, 1934, see 48 Stat. 547. The Act was amended on July 31, 1945, to exempt foreign governments who were members of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development from some of its provisions. (59 Stat. 516) and pointed out that government-guaranteed credits cannot be provided to the USSR because that country is in default on settlement of its lend-lease obligations. This is not a problem with the Eastern European countries. While the Attorney General ruled that normal 18 month credits could be provided to the USSR in the case of the wheat deal, we do not believe that we would have even this flexibility if industrial plants were involved. Perhaps we could defer payment until a plant were installed, but we could not go beyond this limit. As far as trade in strategic goods is concerned, we continue to adhere to a policy of strict compliance with COCOM and other prohibitions. Problems arise, however, with items which are not on the strategic list but involve sophisticated technology. The USSR frequently only wants to obtain prototype models of such equipment which it then copies. They do not want our production, they want our technology. It is this category of goods—non-strategic items of sophisticated technology—that requires the greatest study. While no final conclusions have been drawn, we feel that we probably will have to continue to decide each case individually on its merits. This isn't any easy policy to administer, but it is probably a necessary one. Another problem involved in establishing internal policy guidelines for trade with the Bloc results from the absence of common Western policies. For example, we recently considered a proposal to build a refinery near Moscow—an installation which would turn out products to flow through the Friendship Pipeline.Reference is to the pipeline linking the Soviet Union to Eastern European states. The sections to East Germany and Poland opened in 1963. We probably will not approve this sale, though we know that in all probability one of the Western European countries which does not look upon this matter quite as we do will make the sale. What purpose is served then, we ask ourselves, by our decision? The Under Secretary then described the various obstacles standing in the way of any large-scale increase in our trade with the USSR: the Soviets' limited financial reserves, our lack of interest in the items the USSR has for sale, our established sources of supply for most raw materials, the nature of the Soviet trading system which makes bilateral exchanges of goods with other countries necessary, our laws which prevent us from extending credits to USSR, and the Soviet demand for MFN treatment. We strongly support the resolution before NATO on limiting credits to the Bloc, the Under Secretary went on. He mentioned that we have heard a number of stories of negotiations between the British and Bloc countries for as much as 12 and 15 year credit terms. We regard such arrangements as unwise. The Minister said that the Federal Government would not guarantee any credits for the USSR. What would we be guaranteeing, he asked, and answered that it would be a guarantee given to West German traders by the Federal Government against Soviet aggression directed toward Germany. The Under Secretary then explained how from a strategic viewpoint it is to the West’s advantage to see the USSR forced to reallocate resources from military to non-military uses. We should not make it possible for the USSR to avoid such reallocations. We look at Eastern Europe somewhat differently, the Under Secretary pointed out. It is to our advantage to encourage a movement by these countries from total dependence upon the USSR. In this connection, we have looked with favor on the actions of the Federal Republic to establish trade missions in many of the Eastern European countries. We are a little disturbed, however, over the Federal Government’s attitude toward Yugoslavia. It would be in our mutual interest to see Yugoslavia move further toward the West. The Minister said he generally shares the Under Secretary’s opinion about Eastern Europe. Opportunities for improving commercial and other relations with those countries are not great, though. It will be necessary to proceed slowly. The Minister then briefly recounted the Pipe Episode,The Soviets were unable to manufacture pipe of sufficient diameter for the pipeline. Over NATO objections, Italy sold the Soviets pipeline. and concluded by saying that he has taken a very hard line in the German Cabinet as far as credits for the USSR are concerned. If the United States now proceeds to extend five or six year credits to the USSR, his position will have been made extremely difficult. The Under Secretary said he fully appreciates the Minister’s position, and explained again why it would be impossible for the US to extend such credits to the USSR. Foreign Aid The Under Secretary remarked that foreign aid is not his direct responsibility, but he has been informed that the Federal Republic’s bilateral development lending commitment authority was cut to DM 750 million this year and our Embassy in Bonn has been advised that no more than a like amount is contemplated for 1965. The Under Secretary referred to the Federal Republic’s strong financial reserve position and high level of economic activity, and said that it would seem the Federal Republic could finance a considerably larger foreign assistance program. The Minister replied that foreign aid is also the direct responsibility of another official in the Federal Republic, but he does participate in the budget discussions of the Cabinet. He called DM 60.3 billion “a magic figure” at present for the overall budget. For business cycle reasons it is impossible to raise that figure now, and, because of a great many internal problems, funds cannot be switched among accounts in the budget. Nevertheless, for 1965 he does not believe the Federal Republic will hold to only DM 750 million. There is a budget meeting scheduled for next week, and the figure being mentioned for “foreign aid” is DM 1 billion. (The Minister was not clear whether DM 1 billion represents an overall foreign aid allotment, lending commitment authority or something else.) The Minister concluded by saying one thing that has been made clear to him as a result of his talks in Washington is that the proposals of the LDC’s for achieving large-scale capital transfers by means of rigged prices or other devices in the international trade field are illusory. Capital transfers for development in excess of the real earning power of the underdeveloped countries will have to be made largely through foreign aid channels for some time to come. The Federal Republic intends to do its part in this field. 1965 Munich Exhibition As the meeting was breaking up, the Minister mentioned the 1965 Munich Transportation and Communications Exhibition, and asked the Under Secretary to do what he can to assure official US participation. The Under Secretary replied that he is not familiar with the details regarding our possible participation—other agencies are primarily concerned with fairs and exhibitions—but he will look into the matter. 25. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Exdis. Passed to the White House. Bonn, April 11, 1964, 3 p.m. 3692. I met last evening (April 10) with Chancellor Erhard for an hour and a half at my request. It was the first opportunity for a meeting since my return from the States and his return from an 18 day vacation at the Tegernsee. I told the Chancellor of my meeting with President Johnson See Document 22. and conveyed to him the warm greetings the President had sent. I told him the President looked forward very much to receiving the Chancellor on June 12 following his acceptance of a degree at Harvard. I expressed to him the President’s appreciation for having sent on to him from time to time, through me, his confidential views on the international situation as it had developed. He hoped that the Chancellor would continue to keep him advised. He would in turn communicate periodically with him. I expressed the President’s particular appreciation for the solid German support of the MLF, and hoped he had noted in this connection the Sec of State’s strong reference to the MLF in his speech of April 7.For text, see Department of State Bulletin, April 27, 1964, pp. 650–655. The President also appreciated the Chancellor’s support on the Kennedy Round and looked forward to discussing the prospects for success with him in his meeting on June 12, when the negotiations in Geneva will have revealed more clearly what some of the obstacles might be. The Chancellor expressed appreciation for the message I conveyed and said he looked forward very much to seeing the President in Washington. He thereupon raised several questions on a very confidential basis. 1. Possible Erhard visit to Russia. The Chancellor asked whether or not the possibility of his visiting Russia had been in the press prior to my meeting with the President and whether or not this had been discussed. I said that it had not, however, the German Government had before that time advised us of the suggestion made in the note conveyed to the Chancellor by Ambassador Smirnow on March 11 for bilateral German-Soviet discussions. The Chancellor said that he would consider a visit to Russia only if there was a good chance that something useful could be achieved. The fact that Mr. Adzhubei, Khrushchev’s son-law, had during his recent visit to ParisAdzhubei visited France for 2 weeks beginning on March 25. made a favorable comment with respect to the Chancellor indicated to him that the question of his visit was being discussed in Soviet circles. Alternatively, the Chancellor suggested that he was considering the possibility of inviting Khrushchev to visit Germany. 2. Possible invitation to Nasser to visit Germany. The Chancellor said he would like to float, in utmost confidence, another idea that he had had, namely, of inviting Nasser to visit Germany. He commented on the forthcoming non-aligned conferenceThe conference was held in Cairo November 28–December 5. (at which it is anticipated that a determined attempt will be made by the Bloc to get various neutral nations to recognize the GDR). He confirmed that his interest stemmed largely from Nasser’s strong position in this group as it might be related to the recognition issue. In discussing the possibility of Germany having a constructive influence on Nasser, the Chancellor commented that the Germans had never fought the Arabs and had, he believed, a considerable reservoir of good will in the Arab states. The Chancellor said the Israeli Prime Minister, Mr. Eshkol, had also suggested the possibility of a visit to Germany, however, this was not possible since Germany and Israel do not recognize each other. He had, however, met with Mr. Eshkol privately and secretly at various times and Eshkol was pressing for a meeting during his visit to the States, which it might be difficult for him to avoid. If he decided to invite Nasser, he would therefore like to get his invitation off before his visit to the States. The Chancellor said he thought he could, in the light of what the German Government had done for Israel, get by with the Nasser visit without too much strain on German-Israeli relations. He commented that if Nasser visited here it would probably be expensive for the Germans, however, this did not seem to trouble him. I suggested that he should consider the attitudes of the other Arab states who might be at odds with Nasser. He said all of this was being given careful study by the Foreign Office, however, he would welcome our own reaction. 3. Economic aid to the Soviets. The Chancellor raised again, on his own initiative, the question of possible large scale economic aid to the Soviets. He said that he hoped we would continue to follow the scene closely and would tell him if and when we saw some opportunity for Germany to achieve important political gains on the all-German problem in return for economic aid. When I queried him as to whether the recent German commitment to provide an additional 400,000 tons of fertilizer to the GDR under interzonal trade represented a beginning of what he had in mind, he shrugged this off as being more or less inconsequential. I advised him that up until now we had not been able, after careful analysis, to discern in the present situation an opportunity for such a move. However, we would continue to follow it closely. Comment: We will in a separate following telegramTelegram 3694 from Bonn, April 11. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 GER W) analyze the question of a visit by the Chancellor to Moscow or by Khrushchev to Bonn. There is no evidence, of course, of a firm Soviet invitation, however, Erhard appears to believe one would be available. We have in our recent Embtel 3619Telegram 3619 from Bonn, April 6, reported on the current status and prospects for Soviet-West German relations. (Ibid., POL GER W–USSR) analyzed Soviet-German relations in general and possibilities for their improvement. We would appreciate any advice Dept is willing to have us transmit to the Chancellor.In telegram 2908, April 17, the Department of State instructed McGhee that, if asked, he should inform Erhard that his judgment on the advisability of a meeting with Khrushchev would enjoy the full confidence of the United States. The telegram also noted that, in view of the number of issues likely to involve Allied rights, the Department would suggest quadripartite discussions prior to any initiative. (Ibid., POL 7 GER) In telegram 3322 from Bonn, April 22, McGhee reported he had passed this message to Erhard. (Ibid.) We are unable to assess here the full consequences of an invitation to Nasser. Obviously, the Chancellor conceives of it largely as a continuation of the Hallstein Doctrine. It is possible, however, that he may see it as an opportunity to provide an additional source of assistance and a new Western anchor to Nasser, which might help overcome some of the limitations imposed on us by our relations with Israel, and on the British and French by Suez, in establishing effective contacts with Nasser. We are not repeating this message to Cairo, however, the Dept may wish to in formulating its own evaluation, which I hope we will be able to provide the Chancellor.No reply was found. Telegram 3805 from Bonn, April 23, reiterated the request. (Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US) McGhee 26. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Drafted by Tyler. Washington, April 15, 1964. SUBJECT German Proposals on Reunification PARTICIPANTS Heinrich Knappstein, German Ambassador William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary At lunch with Ambassador Knappstein prior to his return to Bonn the same day for consultation, he told me that he was personally convinced that the German proposals were inadequate for an initiative to the Soviet Union by the three Western powers. He said that Bonn was not prepared to add anything to the proposals either on Berlin or in the field of European security. On the former, Bonn was afraid that the Soviets would concentrate on Berlin and relegate reunification of Germany to the background, as had been the case in Geneva in 1959. On the latter, Bonn was not prepared to commit itself to any specific security measures at this stage. The result was that the proposals would be hopelessly thin in so far as the Russians were concerned, and unconvincing to Western public opinion. He said he was going to recommend to Bonn that the German initiative take the form of a manifesto on German reunification, which the Western powers could support, but which would not constitute an actual proposal for negotiation. 27. Letter From President Johnson to Chairman Khrushchev Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, vol. 3. No classification marking. A handwritten notation on the source text reads: “To be given to Dobrynin at Pres Mtg w/him 4/17/64.” Washington, April 17, 1964. Dear Mr. Chairman: I welcome your letter of April 2, 1964,The letter is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XIV. because of the spirit in which it was written. It is certainly incumbent upon both of us to do anything we can to strengthen our relations and to prevent incidents which could adversely affect those relations. I found your letter particularly interesting because it seems to me it so clearly illustrates the ease with which misunderstandings can arise. You referred to the incidents on the autobahn which occurred last October.East German authorities stopped and delayed U.S. truck convoys heading to Berlin on November 1 and 5, 1963. For texts of the U.S. and Soviet statements regarding East German actions, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 548–555. Our investigation showed that in the six months preceding these incidents, eighteen convoys with a configuration similar to those that were stopped were processed through your checkpoints without dismounting and without difficulty, except in the case of two which were delayed for short periods of time. It was, therefore, most natural for us to consider that it was your side that had changed procedures. But I am happy that this matter has now been resolved, and trust that there will be no further difficulties. With respect to the airplane incidents, I can quite well understand your concern that within a short period of time two American airplanes crossed the demarcation line. There is little I can say about the incident involving a training plane, since the crew were killed and we are unable to ascertain what actually happened. I am disturbed that in both cases, however, there does not appear to have been justification for the rapidity with which there was a resort to force by Soviet planes. The American planes should not have been there, but I believe that this fast and violent reaction is quite unjustified. Avoidable acts of force which can bring death in peacetime do not contribute to an improvement of our relations. All of our pilots have long had rigid instructions that if by error they found themselves in Eastern Germany, they should promptly obey signals to land. The RB–66 was on a training flight from Toul Rosieres in France and was scheduled to pass over Hahn, Dortmund and Nordholz in Germany at high level, to descend to low altitude over Hamburg for a photographic exercise, and to return to high altitude on the return trip to its base. It is normal for planes on missions of this kind to test the cameras en route to see that they are in working order, but to use them only for the assigned mission. A thorough investigation has shown that the compass was faulty and that through a series of errors, adequate further checks of position were not made. Our Air Force has had procedures to prevent incidents of this kind, and when our radar station detected an unknown plane proceeding toward East Germany, the plane was ordered to turn back. The instructor navigator states he heard this instruction but says he thought that he was over Nordholz at the time and that the signal did not apply to him. Appropriate steps are being taken to deal with those responsible for the errors made. From the debriefing of the crew, we can find no basis for the conclusion that “the crew knew exactly where it was.” I was particularly interested in your statement that you had received information, according to which the American command in Europe intended to continue reconnaissance flights over Eastern Germany. I should be glad to have any additional information bearing on this statement. From our own most thorough investigation, I am convinced that any suspicion that this violation was a deliberate provocation is unfounded. I recognize that this is an astonishing series of errors, and upon my instructions the American military authorities have established the most rigorous procedures possible in order to prevent any repetition of such an incident. I think it most important that we deal with each other frankly in matters of this kind. I shall be glad to cooperate with you in reducing tension in this most sensitive area of the world. In this connection, may I tell you that I have been disturbed that the East German press has for some time been carrying on a campaign of accusations of alleged violations of traffic regulations by our military vehicles in East Berlin. After most careful investigation, it appears that, with rare exceptions relating to quite accidental episodes, these allegations have no basis in fact. I was, therefore, disturbed when your military authorities protested to ours on the basis of these allegations. For my part, I have given renewed instructions that our military vehicles take every precaution to avoid any incident in the future, and I hope that your own authorities will carefully investigate and establish, to your own satisfaction, whether or not East German allegations of this kind are well-founded. I have already sent you birthday greetingsThe message is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, USSR, vol. 1. but I would like to repeat them in this message and to close by sending you again my best wishes for continuing health and strength. Sincerely,Printed from an unsigned copy. 28. Memorandum for the FilesSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B. Secret. Drafted by Penberthy. Washington, April 21, 1964. SUBJECT German Initiative PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Undersecretary Ball Ambassador Thompson Mr. Tyler Mr. Davis Mr. Creel Mr. Penberthy Ambassador Thompson handed the Secretary a report of a conversation between Foreign Secretary Butler and Foreign Minister Schroeder on the above subject.Not found. After reading the report the Secretary asked whether Ambassador Thompson’s memorandum of April 21 on this same subject2 would need any revision. Ambassador Thompson thought not and said that, as he had pointed out in his memo, there are two conflicting objectives in the present circumstances. One of these is to attempt to bring about bona fide negotiations on the Berlin and German problems through use of the German paper. He said he thought it absurd to think we could surface the German paper as a negotiating proposal without blowing the Soviets out of the water. To do so would raise holy hell in East Germany for the Soviets would have to come back with an East German paper at the least, and might even feel forced to take some action, perhaps even to sign a separate peace treaty. It is a question of either wanting negotiations, in which case the way to get them would be not to surface the paper, or of not wanting negotiations, in which case you could go ahead with the initiative in as innocuous a way as possible. But you couldn't have it both ways. The Secretary said that, in other words, we might get back to where we were in the summer of 1961 without there being any point to it. He wondered if it were really true that there is an erosion of the position on reunification by not doing anything about it. Mr. Tyler thought that it is true that, as Schroeder had said in his talk with Butler, if we don't talk about reunification it would just melt away like ice. Ambassador Thompson said that the status in the Ambassadorial Group of the German initiative is that we have asked the Germans to list in the European security section elements from the 1959 plan rather than just mention that plan. He said he took it from the Schroeder/Butler conversation that the answer was going to be that the Germans would not do so. Minister Lilienfeld had said only a week ago that the FRG prefers a German paper, but, again, from the Schroeder/Butler conversation, it seems that Schroeder wants an Allied paper. Ambassador Thompson expressed his apprehension that we should get tied to an Allied paper at the present time through the current exercise. He said he had agreed that at the working level we would consider a UK draft for an Allied paper based on an amalgam of the German paper and the Principles Paper.For text of this U.S. paper, which was prepared in March 1962 and handed to Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko at Geneva, see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XV, Document 20. But he had made it clear that there could be no US/UK paper. The Secretary asked what is next. Ambassador Thompson replied that Lord Harlech was scheduled to see the Secretary tomorrow, April 22, and that Butler was coming in on Monday, April 27. Ambassador Thompson said that if the Germans press for action now, we could have an Ambassadorial Group meeting in order to hear the German answers to the questions we had put to them at the last meeting. Referring again to the Schroeder/Butler conversation, the Secretary noted that Schroeder had pooh-poohed the idea that the 1965 elections had anything to do with the German initiative and asked whether Schroeder had been dissimulating with Butler on the amount of pressure in Germany for an initiative. He noted that we had been led to believe for the past several months that there was considerable pressure, particularly among the youth. Mr. Tyler thought that Schroeder had not been utterly candid with Butler, for all the indications are that there is a considerable amount of pressure for some movement on reunification. The Secretary then asked whether there wasn't more to an Erhard visit with Khrushchev than Schroeder had indicated there might be to Butler. Mr. Ball thought that there was, because the FRG seems to be very concerned about the possibility that Brandt might get to see Khrushchev first. Mr. Ball thought that if Erhard could get Khrushchev to come to West Germany it would be a big plus for Erhard. Mr. Creel added that the FRG thinks Brandt got a leg up from his invitation to visit Khrushchev in East Berlin even though the visit had not come off. Mr. Ball thought it would be very difficult for Khrushchev to go to the FRG in light of his constant reference to revanchists, etc., there. Ambassador Thompson then asked whether the Secretary had seen the FRG response to the Soviet TASS statement,For text of the TASS statement, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, 1964, vol. 16, No 10, pp. 37–38. For text of the Federal Republic’s reply, see Europa Archiv, 1964, vol. 2, pp. 251–258. pointing out that the FRG statement was very strong and well written. Mr. Creel noted that the Soviets had followed the TASS statement up in a relatively mild manner and in fact had, through Smirnov in Bonn, hinted at the possibility of bilateral talks. Mr. Tyler said that he was bothered by the fact that Schroeder was not bothered by putting forward proposals to the Soviets that could not possibly be accepted as a basis for negotiations. Mr. Creel observed that Schroeder recognizes that the present paper is no basis for negotiation but nevertheless feels he must take a step that would be viewed as progress or at least motion on the subject of reunification. Ambassador Thompson wondered whether we couldn't help the Germans out by having NATO make a statement on reunification which nevertheless could be attributed to the Germans. He pointed out that the FRG paper does include the idea of a Four-Power Council and feared that if the Soviets rejected the German paper, or any initiative based on it, then the Four-Power Council idea would be virtually killed, since it would be much harder for the Soviets to accept it once they had rejected it in a paper in which it is the principal point of substance. The Secretary asked whether the FRG is really determined to keep open the question of the Oder-Neisse territories. Mr. Ball noted that certain Germans, for example, Carlo Schmid, SPD Vice President of the Bundestag. as late as four or five years ago, had talked about recovering the Oder-Neisse territories but that they do not do so any longer. Mr. Creel pointed out that, regardless of what individual politicians think, this subject will not be frankly discussed before the 1965 elections. The Secretary said that the more the Germans talked about the Oder-Neisse line in the context of reunification, the more they push into the open the question of reunification of what. Mr. Tyler agreed that the way the Oder-Neisse territory was dealt with in the German initiative was one of its major defects and said that this point plus a lack of forthcomingness on European security were really the points that made the German paper not a proper basis for negotiation. Mr. Tyler then elaborated his idea that perhaps the German paper could be turned into a unilateral German manifesto. It would be a solemn governmental statement drafted so as not to require the Soviets to respond as to an invitation to negotiation. The Three Powers could then associate themselves with this German statement. When he had floated this idea informally with Ambassador Knappstein, the latter had said he thought the manifesto idea offered the best solution. Mr. Tyler thought that Knappstein probably had been reprimanded in Bonn for voicing such an heretical idea. Mr. Creel pointed out that, even if the German initiative were converted into a manifesto, we would nevertheless probably have to indicate our willingness to participate in the Four-Power Council. Ambassador Thompson suggested that in the Secretary’s conversations with Harlech and Butler he should say that we do not see that we will be able to bring about negotiations with the Soviets by means of pursuing the initiative suggested by the Germans. Proposals for negotiations are just not appropriate now. The Secretary said he assumed that the French would be of like mind, and Ambassador Thompson replied that the French would probably object to things in the paper on European security and nondissemination. The Secretary remarked that Couve continues to be receptive to the nondissemination but does not think the Soviets will be receptive because of the MLF. The Secretary said that, if the problem is really one internal to the Federal Republic, the solution to our problem may be a speech by Schroeder or Erhard. Mr. Tyler pointed out that Schroeder had already made such a speech at Munich. Schroeder had gone deeply into the question of reunification and its meaning for Germans. The Secretary asked whether we were supposed to react to that speech, and Mr. Creel pointed out that in the letter from him to Schroeder on FRG-Yugoslav relations we had added a sentence commenting favorably about the speech. Ambassador Thompson asked if it was true that Schroeder seemed to be backing away from the initiative idea. He thought he had seen an intelligence report to the effect that the Germans don't think an initiative is such a good wicket to be on now. Mr. Tyler thought he had seen such a report. Mr. Creel pointed out that something on this point might emerge from the German Chiefs of Missions meeting now going on in the Bonn Foreign Office. The Secretary said that it seems to him that the Federal Republic wants us not to have any truck with the Soviets except on reunification, even though they, the Germans, might have any connections with the Soviets they want. Ambassador Thompson said that so far as the initiative is concerned the FRG wants to develop a package from which no part can be removed by the Soviets and pocketed. They are particularly sensitive to the inclusion of anything on access for this reason. Mr. Tyler recalled that Schroeder had, however, said to Butler that difficulties about the International Access Authority are not insurmountable. Ambassador Thompson pointed out that certain portions of the German paper, that is those on Heimatrecht, had been removed at our request. Mr. Tyler suggested that perhaps the Secretary could see Schroeder in Miami. He thought that while Schroeder had not been willing to see Ambassador Thompson or himself, Schroeder might be willing to see the Secretary. The Secretary said that he gathered that Schroeder does not expect anything to happen on this subject before The Hague meeting. Ambassador Thompson pointed out, however, that Schroeder, according to Butler’s report of their conversation, was giving a slightly different impression. He thought we should see Knappstein as soon as he gets back this weekend. Mr. Tyler added that he thought it would be desirable for us to see Knappstein before the Secretary sees Mr. Butler and thought we should see Knappstein Saturday morning. The Secretary wondered whether we shouldn't have a tripartite talk with the French and British before leveling with the Germans. Ambassador Thompson thought that Schroeder had missed the point in saying that we cannot do anything because it is quiet now in Berlin. The reasons why we are not now in a position to make progress on reunification by a diplomatic proposal are that the Soviets are having troubles on the one hand and the US and UK are having elections on the other. The Secretary asked whether there is any reason why the Federal Republic cannot wait until after the elections to launch their initiative. Mr. Tyler in response expressed the view that the Germans are very sensitive to this action now. They feel they have lost ground in their stance on relations with East Germany both in the case of Ceylon and Zanzibar. They continue to feel that Yugoslavia is moving with the nonaligned countries to get them to recognize East Germany. They feel that there is a political deterioration in the FRG in relation to its GDR policy that can only be stopped by a move on reunification. The Secretary asked Mr. Tyler to elaborate on what he had in mind by a manifesto. Mr. Tyler said that the principal thing was that it would be a statement by the Federal German Government in which it would be clear that no action is being taken, so that the Soviets would not feel compelled to take counteraction. The Secretary asked that he be provided with a full text of Schroeder’s speech. Ambassador Thompson reverted to the NATO declaration suggestion he had made earlier. Mr. Creel pointed out that for the Germans this would probably not be acceptable, since a NATO declaration would presumably not mention a Four-Power Council, which is the key provision of the German paper. Ambassador Thompson said that the thing to say to the British, as he had done himself already to Mr. Greenhill, is that if you want a Four-Power Council you should do something to get it in a separate, unpublished approach to the Soviets. You should not try to get it by using a paper that the Soviets would feel compelled to shoot down. The Secretary said that that was what the French had been saying for some time. He said he would see what Harlech has to say and indicated that he thought that this German initiative question would be the main basis at The Hague Quadripartite meeting. He wondered whether we should draft and put forward some language for the European security section. Ambassador Thompson advised against doing so, since the Germans would only be frightened and only harm could come from it. The Secretary noted with some resignation that he had been trying to get Berlin and Germany off the front pages for over three years and now that we had succeeded the Germans seem to want to put it back. Mr. Tyler said that that was the position in a nutshell. He said he was worried that a serious negotiation proposal at a time when we know the Soviets are not receptive to one can only be dangerous. For this reason he thought that the Germans should confine their initiative to the level of a manifesto, as he had outlined. Mr. Tyler continued, saying that he does not like drifting toward being associated with unworthy proposals for fear of saying no to the Germans. Ambassador Thompson thought that what the Germans are really doing was gauging our intentions with respect to reunification. He noted that the French and British have made it clear that they do not want it. Mr. Ball said that he felt that unless something really useful could come from the present exercise we should not be afraid to say “no” to the Germans. We should stick to what we think is the right course. He thought there was no reason for us, with such serious consequences possible, to help the Germans in domestic matters. The Secretary asked whether we had ever said anything concrete about what we wanted by way of disposition of the Oder-Neisse Territories. Mr. Tyler felt that our position was more implicit in what we had said than by precise statements. Mr. Creel said it was much clearer, in statements made by our government at Potsdam, that we would recognize the Soviet and Polish claims to the former East Prussian territory than what we had in mind for the territory immediately east of the Oder-Neisse rivers. He undertook to report further on what is a matter of record reflecting the American viewpoint of the disposition of this territory.An unsigned April 23 memorandum attached to the source text reads: “RHD sent the Schroeder text to the Secretary, and Franklin in the Historical Office is taking care of the action assignment in the last paragraph.” The Historical Office prepared a research memorandum, No. 677, April 1964, entitled “The United States Position on the Former German Territory East of the Oder-Neisse Line.” (Department of State, Office of the Historian, Research Memoranda) 29. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Drafted by Ausland on April 23. Washington, April 22, 1964. SUBJECT German Initiative PARTICIPANTS U.S. The Secretary S/AL—Ambassador Thompson EUR—Mr. Tyler BTF—Mr. Ausland U.K. Lord Harlech, British Ambassador Mr. Greenhill, Minister Lord Harlech opened the discussion by saying that there were five alternatives under consideration: 1) for the Allies to propose creation of a Four Power Council and then let the Germans publish their paper; 2) for the Germans to publish their paper and the Three Powers to support it; 3) for the Germans to advance their proposal to the Four Powers; 4) for the US, UK and France to advance a tripartite paper to the Soviets; and 5) to do nothing. It looked doubtful that it would be possible to reach agreement on a tripartite paper which looked like a serious negotiating proposal. The British had not been encouraged in this regard by the Butler/Schroeder talks in Brussels. One possibility, therefore, was to let the Germans publish their paper and for the Three Western Powers to support it publicly. If, however, we want at this time to get into discussions with the Soviets on Germany, we might let the Germans publish and then the US get together with the Soviets and suggest that they get their bilateral talks going again. The purpose of these talks would be to bring discussions back around to the questions raised in the US Principles Paper. Ambassador Thompson said that German Minister Lilienfeld had just been in to tell him about a talk with Ambassador Knappstein, who is in Bonn.A memorandum of the April 22 conversation is ibid. Knappstein reportedly said that Bonn has now decided that it would like a Three Power initiative. This had upset the German Embassy, which had come around to the point of view that a German proposal would be best. When Ambassador Thompson asked Lilienfeld if he thought the French would go along with this, Lilienfeld did not reply. Ambassador Thompson went on to say that with regard to the British proposal for us to follow up on a German paper, he thought this would not work, because the Soviets would have to refuse to talk under these circumstances. Lord Harlech said he had come to the conclusion we would have to let the Germans run into a brick wall in order to let them learn what they are dealing with. Ambassador Thompson said he told Lilienfeld we could understand the German desire to take an initiative on German unity but that he felt this was inconsistent with a desire for negotiations with the Soviets. Lord Harlech said the Germans were in a dilemma. They were not prepared to make negotiable proposals but at the same time were not prepared to talk on peripheral issues. They either had to make a meaningful move on German unity or make one of the kind they now have in mind and run into a stone wall. Ambassador Thompson said he thought the best thing would be to let them surface their proposal as a German declaration or as a note to the Four Powers. We would then have to expect the Soviets to blast off and allow some time to pass before we made any new proposals for negotiations. The Secretary remarked that he was not quite sure what the Germans were after. He had noted that they didn't want us to come to Miami to talk to Schroeder. Mr. Tyler said he thought Schroeder was caught between his role as Foreign Minister and domestic pressures on him. The Secretary said Ambassador McGhee had the impression that domestic issues weighed heavily with Schroeder, McGhee reported on domestic considerations weighing on Schroeder in telegram 3263 from Bonn, March 12. (Ibid., POL 32–1 GER) despite what Schroeder said to Butler to the contrary in Brussels. The Secretary asked if we knew who was working on this problem in the Foreign Office in Bonn. Ambassador Thompson said he was sure Carstens was involved and noted that their leading Soviet expert, Reinkemeyer, had recently died. Lord Harlech said he thought the best thing now to do was to suggest that the Germans get in touch with the French. The Secretary said he had discussed this question briefly with Couve in Manila,During the SEATO meeting April 13–15. A memorandum of conversation is ibid., POL 32–4 GER. who said the German idea was not a good one but didn't quite know how to say no. The Secretary added that he has been trying for several years to get Berlin and Germany off the front pages. In a certain sense we have been successful and have what might be called a modus vivendi regarding Berlin. Now the Germans want to put it back on. Mr. Tyler remarked that a modus vivendi on Berlin was all right with the Germans but not a modus vivendi on Germany. They didn't want a repetition of 1959, when Germany was discussed for about a day and then the rest of the conference was devoted to Berlin. The Secretary said if we put the heat on the Soviets now on Germany and they respond in the way they have to, we may find ourselves in the ironic position of trying to get ourselves back to the situation in which we now find ourselves, where things are quiet on Berlin and Germany. Lord Harlech said it’s hard to go further until we know more about the new German position and the French reaction. He had the impression that Ambassador Thompson feels that now is not a good time to make a move on Germany. Ambassador Thompson replied that he felt this strongly because of the situation in which the Soviets find themselves. The East Germans are pressing the Soviets for action on Germany and Berlin and an initiative on our part might only play into their hands. He added that he thought we should now try to move things back toward a German paper, which we make favorable noises about and which the Soviets recognize as propaganda. Lord Harlech said he thought Mr. Butler’s preoccupation in talking with the Secretary would be to try to make something out of the proposal for a German initiative and to get negotiations going with the Soviets such as regarding a Four Power Council. The Secretary noted that this would take a major change in the French attitude. Lord Harlech agreed. Ambassador Thompson noted that the French are at present on board on a German proposal but won't remain there if the discussion shifts to a Three Power paper. The Secretary asked if the Germans had tried to inject into their trade discussions with other East European countries the question of German unity. Mr. Tyler replied that we didn't really know. The Secretary noted that the Germans didn't want us to deal with East European countries without pressing the case for German unification, although they apparently do. The Secretary said he considered the absence of European security provisions in the German paper a fatal flaw. If someone, such as the Germans, wants to speak his piece without discussion of European security, the question is how to do this with the least harm. Lord Harlech said unless we could get a tripartite paper which goes far beyond the present German paper, he thought the UK would prefer a German paper. The situation would now have to be re-evaluated, however, in light of the new German position. He thought that Butler would still prefer to let the Germans publish their proposals and have the US get in touch with the Soviets bilaterally about a Four Power Council to discuss the questions covered in the Principles Paper.See footnote 4, Document 28. The Secretary asked why Schroeder had declined to see anyone in Miami. Ambassador Thompson replied he thought he was probably tagged as a black devil in the Ambassadorial Group for raising so many questions about the German paper. He thought, however, that Schroeder was probably still thrashing around and not yet prepared to talk to anyone. Lord Harlech asked when Schroeder would get back to Bonn. The Secretary said he thought he wouldn't get back until just before the NATO meeting.April 24–May 15. Ambassador Thompson added that Ambassador Knappstein would return to Washington next Wednesday. The Secretary remarked that it appeared that no one on the German side was terribly steamed up about their initiative. Mr. Greenhill said that the Ambassadorial Group could finish up a German paper pretty quickly now. The Secretary said he thought the Foreign Ministers should discuss at The Hague the question—if the Soviets are quiet in Europe because they have their hands full, is it a good time to press them? Mr. Tyler remarked that the Germans are not under the impression that the Soviets are going to be forthcoming. They are preparing for action on German unity because they feel that the Hallstein doctrine is slipping and because they are under public pressure to do something. The Secretary said we have been eroding the Soviet position on a separate peace treaty and settlement of the Berlin question on that basis and were much better off than we were in 1961. He recognized that little had been accomplished in this time on German unification, but not much had been accomplished on it before either. He then asked Lord Harlech if Butler believes discussions at this time with the Soviets would be useful. Lord Harlech replied he thought that Butler did. The Foreign Office has always taken the line that if there is no pressure on Berlin, it is a good time to discuss with the Soviets a possible modus vivendi. Mr. Tyler remarked that we now have a de facto modus vivendi. The question was, would talking to the Soviets make it more solid? The Secretary remarked to Lord Harlech that he was sorry we had no particular bright ideas at this point. Lord Harlech agreed that the situation was a bit murky. 30. Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 2. Secret. Washington, April 23, 1964. McGB— SUBJECT Schroeder, the German Reunification Proposal, Etc. Without over-dramatizing any particular piece of information, it seems increasingly clear that Schroeder is not as much in control of Germany’s foreign policy as we expected or he hoped he would be after Adenauer’s exit. In fact, under continuous attack from the right (Adenauer, Strauss, Krone, et al), distrusted by segments of his own party, lacking Erhard’s full support, having no personal political following, and losing foreign policy initiatives to Willy Brandt, Schroeder’s performance for the past months has been halting, ragged and unimpressive. He seems less confident, more intimidated and increasingly concerned about his political future than during the last days of the Adenauer government or even the Erhard visit to Texas. Going from the general to the specific—Schroeder went off skiing when the pass issue reached a critical point; he seemed perplexed and a little annoyed by the Secretary’s expression of concern at Germany’s relations with Yugoslavia; he turned down a suggestion that Thompson and Tyler discuss with him—during a Miami stop-over next week—the knotty German reunification plan; and now according to McGhee (see attached)Telegram 3824 from Bonn, April 22, not printed. he insists that this plan, despite its problems, be submitted to the Soviets as a Western opus “for German internal political reasons” and expects four-power agreement on this when the Foreign Ministers meet at The Hague in mid-May. The German proposal in its present form is not only uninteresting and unsatisfactory; as a Western initiative, it would be the wrong kind of proposal, in the wrong form, at the wrong time. It has nothing of interest to the Soviets and there is nothing to indicate that the Soviets would be receptive to such a gesture. Its potential mileage is absolutely zero. And despite this, Bonn has been unyielding in insisting that the plan had to remain substantially intact as now constituted. We cannot push the reunification plan aside so long as the Germans insist upon it. However, despite Schroeder’s apparent reluctance to handle this as a German creation with allied endorsement—that in effect says this is a worthy cause which we are prepared to consider sympathetically—this in fact seems to me the only way we can deal with it. As an allied proposal, it makes almost no sense. As a German product, we could pass it off as a Bonn initiative, sympathetically supported by the allies, which the Soviets, in turn, could treat for what it was worth. In any event, this is an issue to which we are going to have to face up in the next weeks and some decisions will be necessary. DK 31. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US. Confidential. Drafted by Finn and approved in S on May 5. Washington, April 25, 1964. SUBJECT German Initiative PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Ambassador Thompson Mr. William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary,EUR Mr. Richard B. Finn, Deputy Director,GER Germany Mr. Georg von Lilienfeld, Minister, German Embassy Mr. Von Lilienfeld came in at his request. He distributed a message dated April 24, 1964 from Foreign Minister Schroeder to Secretary Rusk stating that the Federal Republic has come to the conclusion that an approach to the Soviets on the German question should be a collective step by the Three Powers and not a German initiative supported by the Three Powers. (The Foreign Minister’s message in translation is attached.)The message, dated April 24, is not printed. Mr. Von Lilienfeld commented that the Foreign Minister had come to this conclusion only after considerable discussion within the German Government. The Foreign Minister had decided that it would be preferable to have full identification of the Federal Republic’s allies with any peace initiative. The Foreign Minister had been concerned that the press might misconstrue a unilateral German initiative as lacking allied support. Mr. Von Lilienfeld added that Foreign Minister Schroeder hopes that the Ambassadorial Group can develop a satisfactory paper, perhaps within six to eight weeks. The Foreign Minister will want to talk to Secretary Rusk about this at The Hague. Regarding the content of an allied initiative, Mr. Von Lilienfeld said the Germans realize that more will have to be put into the paper than would be included in a purely German initiative. According to Mr. Von Lilienfeld, Foreign Minister Schroeder was also mindful of the US elections. The Foreign Minister felt, however, that an allied initiative could be explained to the press as a restatement of the US attitude on the German question and not as a sensational new initiative. Mr. Von Lilienfeld added that the Foreign Minister thinks the French will come along, once the importance to the Federal Republic of this initiative is made clear and when the French appreciate that the US and UK fully support it. Secretary Rusk said that if the allies make a proposal along these lines to the Soviets, the Soviets might come back and say they have already made clear their position that there should be a peace settlement on the basis that there are two Germanies. The Soviets might then propose that both the allied proposal and the Soviet position be discussed. The Secretary asked whether the Federal Republic would be willing to see discussions with the Soviets conducted on that basis. He said the same problem would apply to the French. Mr. Von Lilienfeld said he did not know the answer to this question. The Secretary commented that a number of far-reaching questions are involved, such as European security; it is essential to have clear positions on these matters. Mr. Von Lilienfeld suggested that it might be useful to work out the various points that should be included in an allied initiative and devise language to cover them. Secretary Rusk commented that further consideration of the German proposal will in any case smoke out positions on the Oder-Neisse line. The Secretary concluded that he would be talking to UK Foreign Secretary Butler about this general subject in the next few days and that he would look forward to seeing Foreign Minister Schroeder at The Hague. 32. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Judd and approved in S on May 2. The source text is marked “Part 1 of 8.” The meeting was held in the Secretary’s office. Washington, April 27, 1964, 4 p.m. SUBJECT German initiative PARTICIPANTS U.S. The Secretary Ambassador Thompson, S/AL William C. Burdett, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Benjamin H. Read, Executive Secretary Thomas M. Judd, EUR/BNA UK Foreign Secretary Butler Lord Harlech, British Ambassador Sir Harold Caccia, Permanent Undersecretary, Foreign Office Denis A. Greenhill, British Minister John Henderson, Private Secretary to the Foreign Secretary Continuing the conversation of the previous day,A memorandum of conversation is ibid., Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Mr. Butler asked what points he should mention to Schroeder. The Secretary then gave him the following five points: 1. What is our primary objective to be—to bring about negotiations with the Soviets or to keep attention focused on German unification? 2. If it is to bring about negotiations, are the Germans (and French) prepared to make important additions to the German draft? 3. When would the Federal Government propose that a tripartite proposal for negotiations be made to the Soviets? 4. How are the Soviets likely to respond to a tripartite proposal and how would the Federal Government propose that we meet this response? 5. Electoral problems—U.S., UK and Germany. This was followed by a general discussion of how the initiative should be handled and its prospects, covering the same ground gone over the previous day. Mr. Butler said he would leave to us the question of Erhard going to Moscow. The Secretary said we would not want to make too much of a point of this with Schroeder. We wouldn't want the Germans to think we were pressing. 33. Editorial Note On April 18, 1964, President Johnson granted an interview to the German magazine, Quick. The interview together with a photo spread on the President was published in the May 3 edition (pages 8–12, 138–142). The President’s comment that he had told Chancellor Erhard to put himself in the Soviets' shoes when dealing with West German-Soviet relations generated considerable press commentary in Germany. The President responded to a reporter’s question regarding the remark at his May 6 press conference. For text of the Johnson comment, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1964, Book I, page 621. Commenting on the controversy, Bundy wrote President Johnson: “There is nothing wrong with the statement as a statement, particularly here in Washington. In Germany it carries a little different connotation and is bound to have some boomeranging effect, particularly with Germany’s almost paranoic concern about the ramifications of our contacts with the Soviets.” (Memorandum from Bundy to President Johnson, April 29, 1964; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 3) 34. Oral Message From President Johnson to Chancellor Erhard Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, vol. 4. No classification marking. Washington, May 5, 1964. Dear Mr. Chancellor: In recent correspondence which I have had with Chairman Khrushchev concerning the reduction in the production of fissionable material for military purposes,Seven communications exchanged by President Johnson and Chairman Khrushchev between February 22 and May 1 regarding the reduction of fissionable materials are in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XI, Documents 11, 15, 18, 23, and 26. Mr. Khrushchev raised some matters which I would like to report to you. I am most anxious that my correspondence with Mr. Khrushchev remain entirely confidential, but Mr. Khrushchev raised matters directly concerning your country and I want you to know in the strictest confidence what he has said and what I have said in reply. In a letter to me in the middle of April, after a discussion of our separate decisions to cut back in the production of fissionable material, Mr. Khrushchev turned to the subject of our troops in Europe, in the following passage: “This is not a disarmament measure. However the very fact that we have succeeded in undertaking certain practical steps as a matter of mutual example—I have in mind both the present agreement and mutual reduction of military budgets—shows that this approach can also be applied beneficially in a number of other instances. “Why, for example, do we not attempt to agree in the same manner on the reduction of foreign troops on others' territories? I am familiar with the declarations to the effect that the U.S.A. intends to withdraw from Western Germany 7,500 soldiers and officers transferred there additionally in 1961. We welcome this step of yours. If you would be prepared to go farther and proceed to the reduction of those American troops which are permanently stationed on the territory of the FRG, then I can say right now: we in that case will also be prepared to reduce our troops stationed on the territory of the German Democratic Republic with the provision, naturally, that the reduction of your troops would not be compensated by the further increase in the number of the armed forces of the Federal Republic of Germany itself. It is no secret that recently the West German Bundeswehr is swelling quickly. Your Minister of Defense declared recently that the number of NATO troops in Europe already exceeds the number of troops of the countries of the Warsaw Pact and we understand that this on the whole is directly connected with the rapid growth of the West German Army. All this we must naturally take into consideration. “I would be happy to know your views on this score.” From time to time in other messages, Mr. Khrushchev had commented on similar matters in a more general way and I had made no comment in my replies, but the rather specific character of the remarks I have just quoted led me to make the following comment in my answering message: “You refer to the problem of the reduction of troop levels, especially in Germany. I am sorry to have to tell you that I do not think this subject is one on which we can expect to make progress by private discussion between us at this time. The American forces in Germany are there for entirely defensive purposes, and their presence is a matter of great importance for the people and government of West Germany. For there to be any substantial additional reduction in the level of the U.S. forces in Germany there would have to be changes in the situation which would make it possible for the Germans and others in Western Europe to feel secure in other ways. In the meanwhile, I hope we can continue to cooperate in reducing the level of tension in Central Europe. “The problem of the future of Germany is a most important one, and nothing could be better for the peace of the world than a real settlement. We on our side remain ready for such a settlement, which could serve the legitimate interests of the German people as well as the other peoples involved, including your own.” I have had no further comment from the Chairman on this matter, and I assume that he will understand from what I have said that the United States is not interested in making arrangements about Germany that do not take full account of the interests of the German people, and of the Federal Republic in particular. It remains true, as you know from our talks in Texas,December 28–29, 1963. For documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XV, Documents 248–256. that I am determined to miss no opportunity for honorable agreements which truly serve the cause of peace. In the light of the close and frank relations which you and I have with each other, I want you to know exactly what the Chairman recently suggested and how I have dealt with it. If you have any views to express on these matters, Ambassador McGhee will report them to me most privately. Let me merely repeat in closing that the privacy of these exchanges with Chairman Khrushchev is a matter of the greatest importance to me, and that I therefore hope that this message may be treated as a matter entirely between the two of us. Sincerely,Printed from an unsigned copy. 35. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to Moscow, London, Paris, and Berlin and passed to the White House. Bonn, May 8, 1964, 9 p.m. 4100. Dept also pass White House. Subject: FRG reunification proposal. Embtel 3953 and 4099.Telegram 3953 from Bonn, April 25, reported that Schroeder expected to discuss reunification issues at the Quadripartite meeting and outlined possible U.S. responses. (Ibid.) Telegram 4099 from Bonn, May 8, reported on discussions with influential Germans regarding the Federal Republic’s reunification initiative. (Ibid.) Chancellor Erhard, during my meeting with him today, raised with me a question which he said was of great importance. He hoped that I would convey his views to the President before Secretary Rusk departed for the NATO Ministerial Meeting in The Hague.May 10–14. It concerned the German reunification proposal now before the Ambassadorial Group. As a result of rumors to the effect that the FRG proposal had not been well received by the other three and that they had suggested that the proposal be presented by the FRG on its own, he had experienced increasing pressures from within his party which he found difficult to hold down. If there is no agreement on the basis of the FRG proposal, or if it is not put forward jointly but the FRG is forced to present it alone, it would appear to all that ground had been lost in the solution of the German question. This posed not only a general problem but an acute internal German political problem. If it should be suspected that it was the US which had blocked agreement on a proposal which France would have accepted, he would find it extremely difficult to control the pro-French group, which was small but very powerful. The Chancellor expressed his firm conviction that the presentation to the Soviets of a suitable agreed proposal by the three powers in conjunction with the FRG would not bring about a deterioration of US or Western relations with the Soviets. He pointed out that the Russians continued to put forward their proposals on all German and Berlin matters and that there was no reason why the West should not do the same. He favored the policy of seeking limited understandings with the USSR as he and the President had agreed in Texas. Indeed, the FRG had just made it possible for the Bolshoi Ballet to appear in the FRG and West Berlin and it would probably accept an exchange of West and East German newspapers. However, the German people would not understand it if efforts to seek agreement were limited to peripheral issues, since they would conclude that the reunification issue had been forgotten. The Chancellor understood there was little likelihood that anything put forward at this time would be negotiable with the Soviets. It was necessary, however, from both a psychological and political point of view, to put forward something concrete. The Chancellor urged strongly that the President discuss this matter with the Secretary before the latter’s departure for The Hague. He urged further that every effort be made to reach Quadripartite agreement on a proposal which could be presented to the USSR by the three powers in association with the FRG. I replied that at the last Ministerial Meeting we had readily agreed to consider an FRG proposal. Since that time the German draft had been discussed, and in some instances modified, in the Ambassadorial Group. Other differences in view were still under discussion. We understood the German preference for a plan which the three powers could sponsor in association with the FRG. The question of whether the three powers should make the proposal to the Soviets or whether the FRG should put it forward alone depended principally on whether a quadripartitely agreed proposal could be achieved. It was not a question of whether we all support reunification. I recounted efforts to this end made by the Kennedy administration shortly after it first came into office when a crisis arose over Berlin. The main problem about the FRG proposal as it now stood and as it might be modified, was not whether it was negotiable with the Soviets but whether it constituted a credible Western position. It would be counter-productive if a position were put forward which represented a retrogression from previous positions or was so patently unrealistic as to have the appearance of a purely propaganda exercise. We were earnestly seeking a reasonable proposal in the Ambassadorial Group. If such a proposal could be formulated, I was sure we would be willing to associate ourselves with it. I would, however, convey the Chancellor’s concern to the President immediately so that it could be taken into account by Secretary Rusk in his discussions with FonMin Schroeder and his British and French colleagues in The Hague. Comment: The fact that the Chancellor has raised this question as a matter of urgency, with the suggestion that his comments be passed directly to the President, indicates the importance he attaches to it. He has apparently come under increasing pressure from the Adenauer-Krone-Strauss-Guttenberg group on this issue. It may well be that the French, who we understand are really more lukewarm on the FRG proposal than we, are hinting to this group that it is the US which is blocking the FRG plan. I am not sure that Erhard, or even Schroeder, fully appreciate the repercussions their proposal might have. They do, however, feel strongly that the present situation calls for some new Western initiative on reunification for which they would like, because of internal political considerations, to obtain credit. The Germans have clearly gained the impression from the Ambassadorial meetings and from other information which has reached them that the Americans are not enthusiastic about a new initiative. They seem to feel that our approach is overly influenced by the possible effect which such an initiative might have on our relations with the Soviets, including our ability to negotiate additional bilateral agreements. The Chancellor emphasized twice that what he proposed would not, in his judgment, exacerbate our relations with Moscow. This is not a critical issue from the standpoint of the Chancellor’s overall position, which, following the Baden-Wuerttemberg election, is now stronger than ever. It could, however, determine whether Schroeder can in the future merely survive as Foreign Minister—and possibly only until the 1965 elections—or whether he can play an important role, commensurate with his ability, in the making of German foreign policy. I recommend strongly that this matter be discussed by the Secretary and the President prior to the Secretary’s departure and that insofar as possible we take a positive position in discussions on this question at The Hague. As the Dept is aware, the Embassy in Embtel 3953 submitted a suggestion for an alternative approach in the event agreement along the lines proposed by the FRG is not feasible. This would have the effect of deflecting the FRG proposal into the creation of a four-power standing committee on the German problem. I am submitting by separate telegram a summary of views expressed recently by Kuhlmann-Stumm and Majonica, foreign policy leaders in the FDP and CDU respectively, which would indicate the acceptability of such an approach in FRG political circles (see Embtel 4099). I believe there is a temporary malaise in our relationship with the FRG, some of the aspects of which are being dealt with in a subsequent telegram. While I do not believe this is serious, I feel it justifies a little greater effort now than we might otherwise make along the lines proposed by the Chancellor in order to provide convincing evidence that we have not lost sight of the German reunification objective in our efforts to achieve more limited agreements with the USSR. McGhee 36. Letter From Chancellor Erhard to President Johnson Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. No classification marking. The source text is marked “Unofficial Translation.” A notation on the source text reads: “Rec'd 5/9/64.” Bonn, undated. My dear Mr. President: I would like to thank you sincerely for your letter which Ambassador McGhee transmitted to me on the 6th of March. Document 15. Your thoughts have been very interesting to me and I would like to assure you that it is my sincere desire to remain in permanent close contact with you. I noted with particular satisfaction the large extent to which our opinions coincide with regard to the relations between a united Europe and the United States of America. The points of view of the United States and the EEC concerning some important aspects of the Kennedy Round have already been harmonised. I am glad about that and believe that the difficulties still to be expected, particularly in the field of agriculture, can be overcome in the course of negotiations concerning specific proposals and objectives. The solution of the Cyprus question appears to me to be extremely important for the unity of NATO. As the original peace plan could not be put into the effect we have contributed financially to the peace-keeping action of the United Nations. It appears also to me that the re-establishment of peace on the island is an essential precondition for a political solution which is to be prepared for the United Nations by the Finnish mediator. We are, however, aware of the difficult task of the mediator. My government follows with great concern in particular the efforts of the Soviet government to exploit the discord among our NATO Allies over the Cyprus question and to draw Cyprus into their sphere of influence. I think it is necessary to keep in mind this threatening aspect in any political settlement and to bring it to the attention of our NATO Allies directly concerned. I fully share your view that in the present situation South Vietnam cannot be abandoned by the West. Neither do I see in a plan for neutralization an appropriate solution to the problem, for nobody can ignore the danger that such a neutralization could open the way towards a future seizure of power by the Communists. In that case Thailand and Malaysia would be threatened directly and thus forced to politically reorientate themselves. A severe undermining of the Western position in the whole of East Asia would result. Therefore, we shall support within our given possibilities the United States in their efforts to maintain South Vietnam as a bulwark of the Free World in South East Asia. We shall continue our assistance for South Vietnam in the political, economic and cultural fields. As you well know, the Federal Government is prepared to support strongly the efforts of the United States which aim at lessening the Cuban-Communist threat to Latin America. Neither among the Cuban population nor in the other parts of Latin America should under any circumstances as a result of action by the Western countries the impression be created that Castroism is profitable. Within the scope of our legal possibilities we shall continue therefore in our endeavors to keep trade with Cuba on the lowest level. In particular, we shall continue to refuse government guarantees for exports to Cuba. The support of the developing countries is also in my view necessary for the creation of stable conditions in these countries; this is in the best interest of the Free World. The aid to developing countries will therefore be a very important task for a long time to come. Our future budget plans will significantly reflect our efforts in this field. Intensified efforts in the field of public relations endeavor with increasing success to win over the German people for this attitude. I am, however, certain that I can count on your understanding that our respective annual efforts will have to be in proportion to our economic growth and in particular to our other obligations as, for instance, our defense needs and our obligations in the field of social payments. Equally I follow the disarmament conference in Geneva with interest and hope; I regret that, in spite of your constructive proposalsFor text of the U.S. proposals of January 21 and February 13, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 1012–1028. no substantial progress has been achieved since January. I am glad, however, that it was possible to find among the Allies a common basis with regard to the project of the ground observation posts, and thus to provide a constructive contribution to the Geneva talks. This was brought about thanks to the close consultations with our friends and their preparedness to examine and take into consideration our proposals and our concerns. Regarding the freezing of strategic nuclear carrier weapons—which for the time being is probably the most important and far reaching armaments control proposal—consultations are taking place at present, which in my view should be as extensive as possible to thoroughly explore all aspects of the problem, as e.g., the difficult question of inspection. I share your hope that a slowing down of the arms race rather than an escalating arms race will contribute towards overcoming the partition of the German people. I have appreciated it very much that the American representatives in the Washington Ambassadorial Group endeavor to support and to further quadripartite deliberations concerning a Western initiative for the reunification of Germany. I think that the preparation of such a document is particularly important since it is imperative that we are prepared at all times to take steps vis a vis the Soviet Union in the question of Germany. Such a policy is also of importance because it could counteract the still existing assumption of Moscow that on the Western side a generally passive basic trend prevails with regard to the German question. This false assessment could anew cause Soviet misinterpretations and it could again lead towards an aggressive policy of the Soviet bloc in the question of Germany and Berlin. Furthermore, it should not be overlooked that the German public expects the West to take steps in the question of Germany. This the more so as almost five years have gone by since the West has last undertaken an initiative namely with the last Western peace plan of 1959. I am in agreement with you that the stationing of American Armed Forces in Germany in unreduced strength continues to be imperative for the common defense of the alliance. The question of the balance of payments, resulting from the military expenditures of your country in the Federal Republic of Germany is also of greatest importance for my government. The agreements concerning the years 1961 and 1962 having been fulfilled to their full extent I have no doubt that satisfying arrangements can be reached in the discussion between Mr. McNamara and Herrn von Hassel. You may be assured, Mr. President, that I shall support all endeavors to achieve constructive results. A few days ago Mr. Shriver called on me and gave me your kind letter of the 22nd of April.A copy of the President’s message suggesting coordination between the German Development Aid Service and the Peace Corps is in Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, Germany. I deeply appreciate this renewed expression of your friendship and I have asked Mr. Shriver, with whom I had a very pleasant and interesting conversation, to convey to you my heartfelt thanks and my best personal regards. I also like to think back to my visit to your ranch, to our open talks in the spirit of friendship, and to all the considerateness which Mrs. Johnson and you showed me. My wife and I sincerely return your kind wishes and send Mrs. Johnson and you our warmest regards. I am very much looking forward to seeing you again in June. With sincere appreciation, I remain, with warmest greetings, Ludwig Erhard Printed from a copy that indicates Erhard signed the original. 37. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2397. Secret. Drafted by Ausland on May 13 and approved in S on May 24. The meeting was held at the British Ambassador’s residence. The Hague, May 11, 1964, 8 p.m. US/MC/11 UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE THIRTY-THIRDMINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL The Hague, Netherlands, May 12–14, 1964 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Ambassador Thompson Mr. Tyler Mr. Ausland France Foreign Minister Couve de Murville Mr. Lucet Mr. Beaumarchais Mr. De la Grandville United Kingdom Foreign Minister Butler Sir Peter Garran, Ambassador to the Netherlands Lord Hood Mr. Barnes Federal Republic of Germany Foreign Minister Schroeder Mr. Carstens Mr. Krapf Mr. Lilienfeld Mr. Oncken SUBJECT Initiative on Germany Following the dinner, Mr. Butler said that he considered this meeting a follow-up to the one held in Paris last DecemberSee Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XV, Document 245. and the work done by the Ambassadorial Group in Washington. He said he would like to hear first from Schroeder, particularly whether Schroeder thought the initiative should be a declaration or designed to bring about negotiations. After expressing gratitude for the work of the Ambassadorial Group, Schroeder said he would like to see the three Western powers take a step vis-à-vis the Soviet Union. This should contain the basis for negotiations. For the Federal Republic to take a step at this time would be too theoretical. Schroeder emphasized that he did not have in mind propaganda or merely quieting certain quarters back home. The Germans felt that the struggle with the Soviet Union would continue and that ground would be lost if the position on Germany were not made clear. He did not agree with those who said that a step at this time would lead to deterioration in relations with the Soviets. Although he was not optimistic about a positive Soviet response, he thought that the idea of a Four Power group might interest the Soviets. In any event, the step would not cause a negative Soviet reaction. He proposed, therefore, that the work of the Ambassadorial Group be condensed in form and content and presented to the Soviets by the three Western powers either jointly or in a parallel manner. Butler asked Schroeder if when he spoke of the Four Power council he thought that it would take up the question of German unification at the outset. Schroeder noted that the German paper was rather comprehensive regarding the tasks assigned to the council. The Secretary remarked that the Four Power council would only meet if the Soviets accepted the over-all proposal. Butler asked Schroeder what he thought were the chances for negotiations on the basis of the German plan. Schroeder replied that he thought there probably would be no full acceptance, but at least the unity of the West would have been demonstrated. Mr. Butler asked Schroeder if he thought a tripartite initiative would have any effect on the effort of the Federal Republic to improve its relations with the satellites. Schroeder replied that he thought the two policies were quite compatible. Butler then raised the question of European security. Schroeder emphasized that it would be a mistake to make any concessions now in view of the uncertainty regarding whether the Soviets would engage in negotiations. Couve de Murville remarked that he understood that Schroeder wanted to keep the reunification question alive. He noted that the German proposal had been discussed in Washington at length. General agreement had been reached on the German paper. The question of how the German paper would be endorsed, however, was not really discussed. Now Mr. Schroeder had new thoughts. He wanted the three powers to take an initiative. He asked Mr. Schroeder to give his thoughts on this change in procedure. Schroeder replied that Couve’s statement proceeded from a wrong assumption. There had not been a change in the German views. The German Government had always been flexible on procedure. What it mainly wanted was an agreement on ideas. Finally, after considering the various alternatives, the German Government had decided on a tripartite initiative. He did not preclude some changes in the German paper, provided they did not touch the substance. Couve remarked that Schroeder then wanted the Three to propose negotiations on Germany. The Secretary then asked Schroeder why the Germans felt that unification had moved into the background. Schroeder replied that there is a feeling in Germany that as the West reaches agreements with the Soviets it may come to the conclusion that only the Germans block further agreement. This was the line taken by Gromyko last year in New York. The West, therefore, should put its position on Germany forward. He felt that if it didn't, there would be serious consequences. The Secretary said that we would like to meet the German needs. He felt there was no problem on substance. He noted, however, that there was no common basis at present for negotiations with the Soviets. The Secretary reminded the others that he had spent a great deal of time in the past few years trying to find a basis for negotiations with the Soviets on Berlin and Germany, but without success. Now he thought the Soviet position may have worsened, partly because of the Federal Republic’s policy toward Eastern Europe and its success in isolating East Germany. He noted that Ulbricht was complaining about liberalization in Prague and the trade treaty between the Federal Republic and the Eastern European countries. The Secretary added that he understood that Malinovsky during his recent visit to East Germany, had told Ulbricht that he should forego for now a separate peace treaty. The Secretary said that he had no difficulty with the idea of a declaration which made the position clear on Germany. He noted that he and other American officials had regularly made the attitude of the U.S. on German unification clear in speeches. The Secretary emphasized that we are under no illusions about any so-called détente with the Soviet Union. He asked Schroeder if the Germans felt that we should not talk on any subject with the Soviets unless it were linked to German unification. The Secretary also noted that if we made a proposal for negotiations or a lengthy declaration we will be asked questions about security and such problems as territorial boundaries on which at present we do not have agreed answers. He concluded by saying that he thought the present German paper contained too much to be a declaration and too little to be a basis for negotiations. Schroeder noted that many formal offers have been made to the Soviet Union on Germany, beginning in 1954.For texts of Soviet proposals for a German peace treaty, February 1, 1954, for the neutralization of Germany and for a treaty of collective security for Europe, both February 10, 1954, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 411–416. He did not think that the Germans wanted to link all problems to unification. The Germans had not objected to American wheat sales to the Soviet UnionFor text of the announcement of the U.S.-Soviet agreement, October 9, 1963, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 525–526. but thought they should have been linked to political concessions. (The Secretary remarked that Europe had traded ten times as much as the United States with the Soviet Union without asking any concessions.) Schroeder added that the trade agreements with Eastern European countries were not linked with unification because this must come from the Soviets. Schroeder emphasized that there should be no concrete proposals on security before negotiations took place. The question of territories, on the other hand, could be discussed in the Four Power council. We should make it clear, however, that these discussions should be based on the right of self-determination. Schroeder concluded by asking: if the others were prepared to accept the German paper as a basis for a declaration why were they not prepared to submit it to the Soviets as a basis for negotiations? The Secretary remarked that if we join in a proposal and get a “no,” he thought the American people would look upon this as a defeat at the hands of the Soviets. Schroeder said he didn't want to question the Secretary’s estimate of the American reaction, but that he doubted that many Americans would consider a “no” a defeat, in view of the large number of “no’s” the Soviet Union had already given the United States. Butler said that the British Government liked the idea of a Four Power council. He would like to see consideration given to making a proposal for a Four Power council privately to the Soviets. He would also like to have separate study given at the same time to a briefer declaration. Couve said that his only worry regarding the German paper concerned security, on which the German paper is vague. He thought this should be discussed a little further. He said that he would make no secret of the French attitude on this question. If Germany were reunified, something would be needed regarding European security, and this should not be linked to the neutralization of Germany. Couve said he understood Schroeder’s situation. Couve emphasized that he wanted by all means to avoid any impression that there was disagreement following this meeting. The Secretary then proposed that Ambassador Thompson, Lord Hood, Mr. Carstens and M. Lucet meet the following day and continue the discussion. Schroeder said he thought this was a good idea and perhaps these four could submit some proposals to the Foreign Ministers. Schroeder said he would also like to say something tonight as well as something in the NATO communiqué.For text of the communiqué, released on May 15, see Department of Stare Bulletin, June 1, 1964, p. 852. After some discussion, agreement was reached on the following guidance regarding the meeting for press officers: “On 11th May 1964 the Foreign Ministers of Germany, France, the United Kingdom and the United States met at The Hague. “They discussed the question of Germany and reaffirmed their conviction that a just and peaceful solution to the problem of Germany will have to be found on the basis of the right of self-determination. “They agreed that each opportunity should be seized to bring the German people’s wish for reunification in freedom nearer to realization. “The Ministers wish to give further thought to the different possibilities and to consult their governments. Discussion will be resumed in the Ambassadorial Group.” Ambassador Thompson, Lord Hood, M. Lucet and Mr. Carstens agreed to meet at the American Embassy at 3:15 on May 12.A memorandum of conversation is in Department of State, Central Files, NATO 3 NETH (TH). Ambassador McGhee reported on German reactions to this meeting in telegram 4191 from Bonn, May 14. (Ibid.) 38. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Limdis. Passed to the White House. Bonn, May 16, 1964, 7 p.m. 4223. I do not wish to raise any question with respect to the wisdom of the Dept’s policy, up to this point, of not supporting the German reunification proposals made to the Ambassadorial Group. I fully understand that broader considerations are involved including our current relations with the Soviets. The fact is, however, that before the recent NATO Ministerial Meeting at The Hague ForMin Schroeder made a strong appeal to us (Embtel 3824)Telegram 3824 from Bonn, April 22, reported Schroeder’s comments on German reunification proposals. (Ibid.) for support, and the Chancellor a similar strong and direct appeal to the President (Embtel 4100). Document 35. I will see the Chancellor on May 22 to convey to him orally the message accompanying Ambassador Thompson’s letter to me of May 4,Not found. just received yesterday. It would be very helpful if I could present to him at that time, also orally, a message from the President giving the rationale behind our negative reaction to the German proposals, and, if possible, advising what our attitude will be during the reconsideration of these proposals in the Ambassadorial Group, as agreed upon by the four Foreign Ministers at The Hague. I believe that we must keep in mind that we have hit the Germans very hard in recent weeks, at the highest levels, for a number of relatively important things we want them to do, i.e. the offset implementing agreement, and assistance to South Vietnam, to which they responded favorably, as well as the subject raised here May 6 by Komer and Sloan,No documentation on this meeting was found. to which they may not. There has, as a result, been a perceptible reaction here in the last few days, both on the part of officials and the press, to our recent requests. I would hope, therefore, that the Presidential message would, in addition, express appreciation for the offset agreement and the strong German support to our policy in South Vietnam contained in the McNamara-von Hassel communiqué, McNamara visited Germany May 9–11. For text of the communiqué released at the conclusion of the talks, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 531–532. as well as for the subsequent German efforts to respond to McNamara’s request for a medical unit. I believe we should, moreover, delay for the time being any further new requests of the Germans involving any substantial contributions or sacrifices on their part. It is for this reason that I do not believe a visit by AID Director Bell to press for additional development aid, although normally quite a desirable thing, would be so at this time. This is particularly true in view of the fact that next year’s budget is now so frozen that we could not realistically expect it to be changed. McGhee 39. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Brandt Visit, 1964. Confidential. Washington, May 16, 1964. SUBJECT Your meeting with Mayor Willy Brandt, Monday, May 18, 12:00 noonNo record of the May 18 meeting was found, but see Document 41. The German election campaign for 1965 is already under way and Mayor Brandt’s visit here on Monday, just as Erhard’s in June, is an important element in that campaign. Brandt is bright, easy, and affable, but is very leaky. You can count on the substance of your private conversations with him reaching the German press in relatively short order. And since he is running hard against Erhard for the Chancellorship, he is not above using the substance of his talks with you for firing broadsides against Erhard. Therefore what we say to him must be the things that will not bounce back on us while he leaks them. The two principal controversial issues between Brandt and Erhard now are (1) the question of passes which would permit West Berliners to visit East Berlin (at the present time, West Germans can visit East Germany but West Berliners cannot enter East Berlin), and (2) tactics in the German struggle for reunification. In connection with the passes, Erhard has admitted frankly he is bothered by Brandt’s exploitation of the issue and has made it clear he will not permit the Mayor to continue to exploit it for the benefit of the Socialists. In dealing with this problem you might remind the Mayor of your statement on the 15th anniversary of NATO in which you said, “We did not make the Iron Curtain. We did not build the Wall. Gaps in the Curtain are welcome, and so are holes in the Wall, whenever they are not hedged by traps.”For text of the April 3 speech, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1964, Book I, pp. 433–436. The point that Brandt should take away with him is that although we feel every effort should be made to “humanize” the Wall, the means for accomplishing this should be worked out jointly by Bonn and Berlin, in consultation with the Western Allies, who continue to bear responsibility for the security of Berlin. There is essentially the same kind of problem in dealing with reunification. The Erhard government is now wrestling with an unsatisfactory plan for which allied endorsement is being sought, while the Socialists are looking on in amused silence. Your own position on reunification was made quite clear both during your meetings with Erhard at the Ranch and in your NATO anniversary speech in which you said, “We continue to believe that the peace of all Europe requires the reunification of the German people in freedom.” The point that should be made with Brandt here is that the United States is prepared to support any sensible proposal which truly advances and does not undermine the cause of reunification, and will work closely with its British, French and German allies to this end. This will probably be used by Brandt to show that we are for realism on these matters—but so we are, and it doesn't hurt to have it known. Brandt’s advance agent, his press secretary Egon Bahr, has indicated that the Mayor also intends to ask you specifically what the Germans should do to meet the Soviets part way to allay legitimate concerns about Germany and facilitate the achievement of a détente. To encourage him without giving him, too, ammunition with which to bludgeon the Bonn Government, you might cite as an example of what the U.S. Government has in mind the recent German effort to establish useful and constructive working relationships with Eastern Europe (trade missions in Poland, Hungary, Rumania and Czechoslovakia). This is a helpful move in the right direction. It is our hope that the Germans will continue to take every reasonable step to reassure the Eastern Europeans of Germany’s peaceful intentions and carefully consider all reasonable proposals to this end which do not threaten the freedom and security of West Germany and West Berlin. Further points which may arise in the meeting with the Mayor are covered in the attached briefing paper prepared by the Department of State (Tab A).Not printed. McG. B. 40. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Drafted by Ausland on May 20 and approved in S on June 3. Washington, May 18, 1964. SUBJECT Mayor Brandt’s Call on Secretary Rusk PARTICIPANTS U.S. The Secretary GER—Mr. Creel BTF—Mr. Ausland FRG Mayor Brandt Ambassador Knappstein Minister Von Lilienfeld Senator Schuetz Mr. Egon Bahr The Secretary opened the discussion by noting that it was important, as we deal with Berlin and German questions in the next few years, not to allow them to become a partisan issue either in the U.S. or in Germany. If they become partisan issues in Germany there will be an attempt to draw the U.S. in. The result would only help the Soviets. The Secretary asked Mayor Brandt what the prospects on this were in Germany. Mayor Brandt replied that he was not sure how the situation would develop. At present the coalition in Bonn on foreign policy is different than that on domestic questions. He pointed out that he had no influence on developments within the CDU or the CSU. There were some difficulties there, but he didn't know how far they would go. The Secretary recalled that at a dinner several years ago in Bonn he had referred to bipartisanship. This had produced amused reactions on the part of some of the Germans present and he was not quite sure what this meant. Mayor Brandt said he thought it was important to link the question of German unification to decisions on other long-run problems. It would be undesirable if the impression were created that they were not linked. He noted that the Test Ban Treaty had not yet been approved by the Bundestag. Mayor Brandt added that he had spoken to Schroeder just before he went to The Hague. He thought they had an understanding that there must be a common front. The Secretary said he was very interested in the change taking place in relations between the Federal Republic and Eastern Europe. The effect was to isolate Ulbricht. He heard from time to time talk from Germany that any move toward a détente would be bad unless it were linked with the German problem. He wondered if there were an effort to apply a double standard. For example, some Germans had objected to the U.S. selling wheat to the Soviet Union when the U.S. trade with the Soviets is only a fraction of European trade. Mayor Brandt said he thought those who follow such things closely understand that the German question cannot be inserted at every point. In his travels around Germany he had found considerable support, particularly among young people, for Atlantic unity, peace between Germany and its neighbors to the East, and partial solutions along the lines of the Christmas pass agreement. The Secretary said he would like to say directly to Mayor Brandt that the U.S. is not negotiating with the Soviets on European problems behind the back of the Germans. His last talk with the Soviets on Germany had been in Moscow at the time of the signature of the Test Ban Agreement.See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XV, Document 204. He had emphasized the importance of allowing the Germans the right of self-determination. However, he got nowhere. Khrushchev seemed preoccupied with other problems and maintained that no one in the West was really interested in German reunification. Mayor Brandt commented that if we should move from peripheral questions we should consult the German Government. The Secretary said he got the impression that the Soviets were preoccupied with the Chinese and internal problems and were not interested at the present time in serious discussions with the West. This does not mean we may not want to take some initiative because we can never tell when this might be desirable. Khrushchev was blaming the British and American elections for our inability to get ahead but this may be an excuse. Ambassador Knappstein said he would like to comment on the question of linkage between unification and relaxation of tensions. The Federal Republic was not opposed to measures which were world-wide in nature, such as the Test Ban Agreement, or bilateral agreements between the U.S. and the Soviet Union. It did, however, feel that it had a direct interest in such measures as the Rapacki and Gomulka plans.For the portions of Rapacki’s October 2, 1957, address calling for creating a denuclearized zone in Central Europe, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 512–513. For text of his March 28, 1962, proposals on a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Europe, see Documents on Disarmament, 1962, vol. I, pp. 201–205. For text of Gomulka’s 1964 proposals, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 1086–1087. The Secretary said he was sure the Soviets would be happy if we pursued their idea of agreement by mutual example. For example, if we were to withdraw troops from Germany, Khrushchev would probably follow suit. We can't do this, however, until the German problem is settled. The Secretary added that he didn't believe relaxation of tension harmed the prospects for unification. After all, tension had not moved us toward German unity. (At this point both Schutz and Bahr murmured agreement.) On the other hand, the Secretary added, we can't assume that relaxation will lead to German reunification. Mayor Brandt said he thought it might be desirable to concentrate on steps within Germany. He referred in this regard to statements in the Adenauer policy statement of 1963Apparently a reference to Adenauer’s April 25, 1963, statement to the Bundestag. For text, see Adenauer, Bundestag Reden (Bonn, 1967), pp. 336–340. and the Erhard policy statement regarding the desirability of improving the situation in East Germany.June 11. For text, see Europa Archiv, 1964, vol. 2, pp. 318–323. The Secretary commented that this was an interesting line of thought. Adenauer had mentioned to him the desirability of the situation in the Soviet Zone being improved. The Secretary said he thought it would be desirable to do things which remind the Germans that they belong together. The Federal Republic should also assure the Eastern European countries that they have nothing to fear from Germany. Mayor Brandt then turned to the problem of the border with Poland. He noted that the Poles were in the incongruous situation of wanting to recognize two German states, but asking the one with which they did not have a common border to guarantee the border with the other state. It might, however, be desirable to think in terms of some kind of qualified nonaggression arrangement which gave the Poles some assurance that the Federal Republic was not thinking in terms of a violent solution. The Secretary commented that this was an interesting idea. He was not sure of the Soviet reaction, since it presumes a common frontier between the Federal Republic and Poland. He then asked Mayor Brandt what he thought would happen after Ulbricht disappeared from the scene. Mayor Brandt replied that he didn't know. There were more differences within the leading group in the GDR than there were a year ago. The Secretary commented that Khrushchev has serious problems. He was not sympathizing with Khrushchev’s problems but merely noting them. From the Communist point of view Peking was probably right in saying militancy is necessary to maintain Communism. The East Germans may appear to the Soviets like the boy with his hand in the Dutch dike. If the Soviets pull their divisions out of East Germany they may lose all of Eastern Europe. The Secretary added that he thought, however, that the more isolated Ulbricht is, the better. Mayor Brandt agreed. The Secretary asked if Mayor Brandt had any idea why the East Europeans are not jamming our radio as much. Brandt replied he thought this was because they needed the equipment to use against the Chinese. The Secretary expressed surprise at this and asked Mr. Creel to get him a report on this.No report was found. Ambassador Knappstein said he thought it would be good if we could convince Khrushchev that the disappearance of the GDR would not destroy their position in Eastern Europe. The Secretary asked if the Ambassador could say this with conviction. Ambassador Knappstein said he thought there was a difference since the other Eastern European countries were national states, whereas the GDR was not. The Secretary said that in view of Khrushchev’s remark to the Danish Prime Minister about responding to an American move against Cuba in Berlin, he thought he should say frankly to Mayor Brandt that the situation in Cuba was very explosive at present. We are continuing our overflights. The Soviets are training the Cubans to handle surface-to-air missiles and turning them over to the Cubans. The Cubans may be more nervous than the Soviets. This could lead to an explosive situation. He did not think it was an immediate matter but it could take a turn for the worse sometime in the future. We may be able to replace our overflights with other methods in time, but for now we must be sure there are no missiles in Cuba. The Secretary added that the situation in South Viet Nam is also very dangerous. Ambassador Knappstein asked if it would be possible to replace U–2s with satellites. The Secretary replied, not for several months. There was the problem of orbiting and satellites were much more expensive than U-2s. Ambassador Knappstein asked if it were possible for U-2s to fly off the mainland. The Secretary replied that in this case they could only make adequate photographs 5–6 miles inland. There may be alternative means available some months ahead. The Secretary noted that Mayor Brandt in his speech to the Foreign Policy AssociationFor a summary, see The New York Times, May 14, 1964. spoke of joint projects with the East. Mayor Brandt said that he did think it would be useful for us to make proposals to the East, such as to build highways across Europe. The Secretary said he was interested in this because we have discussed within the U.S. Government the possibility of technical cooperation with the Soviets. We might locate, for example, some technical institute on the autobahn. He added that moving the UN to Berlin would be difficult, but that the location of some UN agency there would be acceptable to us. 41. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 7 GER W. Confidential. Also sent to Berlin and repeated to Paris, Moscow, and London. Washington, May 20, 1964, 4:17 p.m. 3283. Washington visit of Mayor Brandt May 18–19 went off smoothly and effectively in cordial atmosphere throughout, and on departure yesterday evening Brandt expressed himself as extremely well satisfied with visit. High point was 45-minute private talk May 18 with President, followed by luncheon for 50 guests (including Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, Generals Taylor and Clay, Dean Acheson and John McCloy) hosted by President. Following schedule which left him virtually no free time, Brandt had separate talks with Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, Mrs. John Kennedy, Attorney General, Senator Fulbright, McGeorge Bundy, Rostow, Ambassador Thompson, President’s Scientific Advisor and officers of EUR, GER and BTF. Program also included luncheon speech to Overseas Writers Club, two receptions and various background briefings for correspondents. Senator Schuetz and Bahr accompanied Brandt to most appointments. Substantive discussions covered wide range of subjects. Among highlights were following: 1. Emphasis placed by Brandt at every opportunity, as expected, on his advocacy of step-by-step approach to alleviate division of Berlin and Germany and introduce some new movement into German situation. He said he supported FonMin Schroeder’s policy of “knocking at the kitchen window” (i.e., at Ulbricht’s flanks and rear in Eastern Europe) but felt that at same time efforts should be made to “knock at the front door” (i.e., in Berlin). While expressing hope in rather wistful way that Allies could be “somewhat less neutral” on complex of problems centering around Passierschein issue, he expressed confidence Germans in Berlin and Bonn could work out common position for new pass arrangement, to which he hoped Allies would be able lend their full support. (See septel)Not found. 2. Brandt’s indication to Rostow that he was now prepared give his full support to MLF. 3. Brandt’s low-key suggestion to Secretary of possibility some sort of non-aggression agreement between FedRep and Poland. 4. Strong plea by Brandt that RIAS be left untouched in event any curtailment USIS operations in Europe owing budgetary stringencies. 5. Repeated mention by Brandt and Schuetz of political need for further strengthening of ties between FedRep and West Berlin, with particular reference to Globelgesetz. 6. President’s luncheon toastFor text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1964, Book I, pp. 694–695. stressing constancy of US purpose to bring about a united Berlin within a united Germany on basis self-determination and in peace and freedom, and fact that “until this objective is achieved there can be no real and lasting peace in Europe or, indeed, in the rest of the world.” 7. Conversation with Secretary McNamara highlighted need for better public understanding in FRG of danger posed by communist aggression in Viet Nam, political and military value of MLF as means of bolstering NATO solidarity, US determination to maintain six divisions in FRG as long as needed and as long as US able finance foreign exchange costs, and fact that FRG military forces once built up to NATO force levels will be minimum necessary in order meet communist threat to NATO. Detailed memcons follow.A memorandum of conversation between Brandt and Secretary Rusk is Document 40. A memorandum of Brandt’s conversation with Bundy, May 18, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Brandt Visit 1964. A memorandum of conversation between Brandt and McNamara, May 19, is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 GER W. Memoranda of his May 19 talks with Walt Rostow are ibid., POL GER W–US, and ibid., DEF (MLF). Rusk 42. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by McIntyre; cleared by EUR, GER, AID, BTF, Thompson, and Klein for the White House; and approved by Rusk. Washington, May 21, 1964, 10:17 p.m. 3307. Bonn’s 4223. Document 38. At your meeting with Erhard May 22, in addition to letter of May 4, you may convey orally following message from President: 1. Express to Chancellor President’s appreciation for Chancellor’s letter of May 8 Document 36. and President’s pleasure that he and Chancellor are in close agreement on important problems discussed in their exchange of correspondence. 2. FYI. Agree it would be desirable to convey to Chancellor message from President regarding reunification. With respect to your suggestion, however, that we advise Chancellor of what our attitude will be in Ambassadorial Group, we shall need to know more what British, and Germans as well, have in mind regarding a possible Four Power Council and what its relation to German paper might be before we decide what position we will take. End FYI. You should tell Chancellor President has followed personally discussions of German initiative on reunification particularly those which have taken place most recently at The Hague.See Document 37. He feels that frank discussions which our representatives have had have helped us to understand more fully each other’s point of view and preoccupations at present time. These discussions have made clear complexities of any initiative and importance for us to have most careful consideration and groundwork laid. President wants to assure Chancellor of his personal interest in goal of reunification through self-determination and his view that we should continue to consider jointly with our Allies what we may realistically do to make progress in this area. 3. Tell Chancellor we most appreciative of his cooperative attitude during Secretary McNamara’s visitSee footnote 6, Document 38. regarding both continuation of military offset and expression of FRG support for our policy in South Viet Nam. We believe these are matters of great importance to both of us. We hope that FRG will be able take early action to provide medical unit or other concrete demonstration of support for Viet Nam. 4. Chancellor’s letter of May 8 demonstrates how close is our common view of importance of aid to developing countries. Germany and US are donors of aid in more countries than any other contributor. Special reasons exist, therefore, for our governments to work closely together on development assistance. Accordingly, President will wish to discuss problems and prospects of our respective aid programs during Chancellor’s forthcoming visit to Washington. In meantime consortia on India, Pakistan and Turkey will be meeting and it is our hope that the FRG will do its best to improve amounts and terms of its pledges to these three countries which are showing way in mounting major self-help efforts. 5. President’s message on Israeli tanks follows in separate telegram.Telegram 3308 to Bonn, May 21. (Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER) Rusk 43. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. Top Secret; Exdis. Bonn, May 23, 1964, 9 p.m. 4318. In my meeting with Chancellor Erhard today, at which other subjects were discussed which are being reported separately,Telegram 4310 from Bonn, May 10, reported the Chancellor’s views regarding German foreign aid levels. (Ibid., Central Files, POL GER W–US) I gave him orally the message from the President concerning his exchanges with Chairman Khrushchev, Document 34. which was contained in Ambassador Thompson’s letter of May 4, received May 15.Not found. I had discussed the delivery date with Ambassador Thompson who agreed that it was best to wait until the Chancellor’s return from his Tegernsee vacation. After the Chancellor had heard the message, he said that he welcomed the fact that the President had such a clear attitude toward the security of the German people. It was, moreover, not just a question of Germany. There was also involved the security of all the NATO countries, as well as the countries of Central Europe. It was easy to recognize what was behind the Soviet proposition. Any withdrawal of their forces would be only for a short distance, say two hundred kilometers, and would have no effect on the military balance. A withdrawal of US forces would be for a distance of 6000 kilometers. Under such circumstances, it would be a delusion to believe this would not upset the military balance. Reduction of forces in Central Europe would be possible only in connection with general disarmament measures resulting, under controlled conditions, in a decrease in the military forces of all countries, not just those of the two great powers. He would welcome further discussion of this subject when he meets the President in Washington on June 12. Comments: The Chancellor was obviously pleased to be taken into the President’s confidence in such an important matter. Although he disclaimed any doubts whatsoever, the disclosure should serve to assure the Chancellor that the exchanges between the President and Chairman Khrushchev do not deal with subjects vital to Germany behind Germany’s back or at German expense. McGhee 44. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Ambassador at Large (Thompson)Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Copies were sent to Tyler, Davis, and Ausland. Washington, June 1, 1964. SUBJECT German Unity Proposal 1. We face an eventual need to put forward a proposal regarding German unity which will meet three tests: (a) It will not be wholly implausible in terms of negotiability with the Soviets and will not damage East-West relations. (b) It will meet German domestic political needs, so as to strengthen moderate German leadership against Strauss et al. (c) It will be a proposal that we could live with, if the Soviets accepted it. 2. I doubt we can, until after the German 1965 elections, get German agreement to a substantive proposal on unity which meets the first test, i.e., which is at least as good as the revised Western Peace Plan.For text of the Western Peace Plan, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 624–629. 3. Nor is a proposal for convening a Four Power Conference on Germany likely to get us very far. The Conference would almost certainly fail, as the Geneva 1959 Conference failed; this would not be helpful in terms of either East-West relations or of German domestic needs. 4. I suggest we propose, instead, creation of a standing Commission on Germany and Central Europe, which would serve as a form for discussion of these issues, year in and year out, until they were ripe for settlement. The analogy of the Austrian State Treaty discussions may be relevant. The Commission might be opened, like the Geneva Disarmament Conference, with Foreign Ministers (or Deputy Foreign Ministers) in attendance for the first week or two. Then it would descend, as the Disarmament Conference did, to the Ambassadorial level. Vienna might be the site. It is more a symbol of successful negotiation (Austrian State Treaty and IAEA) than Geneva, which has become a symbol of deadlock. Vienna might be attractive to the Soviets, and it would symbolize the Central European focus of the group’s work. The US, UK, France, and USSR would be members of the Commission. The USSR would probably want East (and West) Germany represented on the same terms as at Geneva in 1959. Perhaps this could be somewhat blunted by including Germany’s four neighbors—Poland, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, and Holland—in the same “observer” status. The terms of reference of the Commission should be broad enough and vague enough to satisfy the Germans that it was going to talk about German unity, without forcing the USSR to acknowledge the four occupying powers' responsibility for unification. 5. What would the Commission actually discuss? I suppose at first the West would run through the virtues of the Western Peace Plan, and the USSR would say that German unity was for East and West Germany to decide. But perhaps the Four Powers could then agree to talk about the security provisions that would be appropriate to a peace treaty with a united Germany—leaving aside the question of how unity came about. Through such discussions we could try gradually to get the Soviets to see that German unification could be hedged about with sufficient safeguards to assume [assure] their security. This might be helpful if and when the time came (e.g., against the background of a succession crisis) for the Soviets to consider seriously the possibility of German unification. The Commission could also talk about Berlin; safeguards against war by accident and miscalculation in Central Europe; and other topics related to stabilizing this area. 6. But the proposal’s merit is not tied to the view that any of the above would be on its agenda. It lies rather in the fact that: (a) The Commission’s existence would help to assure German opinion that the German question was still on the front burner. (b) It would offer the Soviets a forum for talking out some of their concerns about security in Central Europe. (c) Over time, its deliberations might be one more factor working for gradual constructive evolution in Soviet attitudes and East-West relations. 45. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 7 GER W. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Berlin. Bonn, June 1, 1964, 9 p.m. 4418. Subject: Preparations for Erhard visit; US–FRG relations. On the general state of US–FRG relations, I would not suggest that there is at present anything resembling a crisis in confidence. There is not. All essentials are in place. At the same time, a certain uneasiness has developed in recent weeks over the manner in which our alliance is operating. The Germans have gained the impression that they are becoming the object of mounting demands from us. The following is by no means a complete list of the things we have officially asked the Germans to do in recent months which require effort or sacrifice on their part: increase their aid to underdeveloped countries; speed up formation of their peace corps; send troops to Cyprus; send aid and a medical unit to South Vietnam; give aid to Zanzibar; give aid to Turkey; extend the offset agreement; increase their military budget; make concessions to Yugoslavia; support our position on observation posts and other disarmament matters; liberalize their restitution program; give arms aid to Israel; increase American imports. Since many of these requests have been made on the occasion of visits by high American officials, their acceptance has often appeared to be the result of pressure. This does not mean that these requests should not have been made, although with regard to timing and emphasis perhaps we should in the future pay a little closer attention to their cumulative effect. It is logical that Germany come under increasing pressure for requests of this type because: 1) increased prosperity in Germany makes it possible for her to do for the first time things she could not have done in the past, indeed creates an obligation on her part (as the second or third free world economic power) to do so; 2) Germany’s interests have been, up to this point, largely centered in Europe and she must be persuaded to play more of a world role; 3) despite the offset, we still pay budget-wise for the 7th Army here, which should provide us considerable leverage in asking favors of the Germans; 4) Germany has many problems, such as reunification, for which she needs assistance from us and other free world countries, hence she must be prepared to help us with our problems. It is moreover to be expected that it is we, as the residuary legatee of the free world’s problems, who, on most occasions, must ask the FRG for help. The Germans, during this period, have asked for little that is new (perhaps because we already do so much), but even in the few matters of minor importance which they have put up to us, e.g., Bavarian coal, they have had little success. We have, of course, shown consideration in certain instances, such as delaying the withdrawal of Roundout and Long Thrust forces, and retaining the extra strength of an augmented battalion in Berlin. In the one matter of capital interest to them, however, for which they have sought our backing at the highest level, i.e., their initiative on reunification, we are still hesitant. Sensitivity with regard to seeming pressure from the US is particularly great in the FedRep because of the still recent experience of occupation. The reaction often takes the form of criticism of the Federal Government for a lack of backbone and an independent policy. This creates internal pressure on the government to demonstrate its independence which, in turn, could lead to serious problems for the government and possibly to actions that are contrary to our, or even to their, interests. In addition, there is at present the special and important circumstance that Chancellor Erhard and Foreign Minister Schroeder have embarked on the difficult task of pursuing a more “flexible” foreign policy toward the Soviet Union—which is entirely in accord with US policy and in opposition to strong forces within their own party. If they are to retain public support and ward off attacks from their opponents, they must not appear to be acting under US pressure. The attraction of Schroeder’s efforts to achieve an improvement in the Federal Republic’s position in Central and Eastern Europe through trade agreements and missions and cultural exchanges is that it is considered to be a German initiative. If it should come to seem only a reflection of US policy, it would become far more vulnerable to attack by the group around Adenauer and Strauss. With this in the background, it seems to me important that we draw the following two conclusions from recent developments in our relations with the FRG: 1. Whenever it does not run contrary to our vital interests, we should welcome, and, when possible actively encourage FRG foreign policy initiatives. In this way we can assist the FRG to establish an independent identity for its policy and thereby (paradoxically) make it easier for the FRG to follow our lead on matters where US vital interests are concerned. This is one reason why I have long hoped that we could support the FRG initiative on reunification. With success on this score, the FRG would be in a stronger position to cooperate with us elsewhere. The current question of the FRG-ChiCom relations presents some of the same opportunities and hazards for us as the reunification initiative. Looking at the problem from Bonn, there could be advantages to an FRG trade agreement with the ChiComs if it includes a Berlin clause; it would, from current indications, not go much beyond the “private” trade agreement of September 1957Reference is to the agreement signed in Beijing, September 27, 1957, between the Eastern Trade Committee of the West German Federation of Industry and Commerce and Chinese for the Promotion of International Trade. and would not involve a politically more significant exchange of trade missions; yet it could effectively serve to isolate the Pankow regime further and make Ulbricht’s personal position more difficult. It would tend to improve the FRG position in those non-aligned countries where ChiCom influence is considerable; it could cause further dissension between Moscow and Peiping; and it might give the FRG an additional lever in future dealings with the USSR. There are obvious disadvantages from the US point of view, possibly of such a compelling nature as to force us to continue to dissuade the FRG from such a step. However, we may at least wish to consider the desirability of the FRG having somewhat more latitude in their China policy. 2. We should avoid placing the FRG in a position where it seems, publicly, to acting as a result of US pressure. I realize that in view of our position and responsibilities there are times when we must exert pressure. We should, however, do so sparingly and privately if possible, giving the FRG every opportunity to convey the impression of taking independent action and to receive whatever credit may be derived therefrom. We should avoid any appearance of “lecturing” to the FRG. The period when this could profitably be done has long since passed. I would cite our recent approach on South Vietnam as a case in point. From what we have heard, our handling of the matter at Bonn and The HagueConversations in Bonn were reported in telegram 4246, May 19, telegram 4341, May 26, telegram 4393, May 29, all from Bonn. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) No record of discussions at The Hague meeting of NATO Foreign Ministers was found. left the Germans with the impression that they were being pushed too openly. This occasioned some resentment in government circles, and a cool, often critical, press reaction. In view of the various items which we shall probably be pursuing with the Chancellor during his Washington visit, I would particularly urge that we avoid any appearance that new FRG concessions to US policy (such as grain price) result directly from the meetings. My suggestions for treating specific points which may arise during the conversations will follow in separate telegrams. McGhee 46. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 1 GER W. Confidential. Drafted by Charles K. Johnson, cleared in EUR, and approved by Creel. Repeated to Munich. Washington, June 10, 1964, 9:03 p.m. 3547. Subject: Strauss Visit. CSU Chairman Strauss concluded five-day visit in Washington yesterday and departed for Chicago where he will receive honorary degree (De Paul University). Strauss commented before departing that his Washington visit, which he said had been for “informational” purposes and not the main objective of his trip to US, had been most satisfactory. His Washington schedule included appointments with Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Rostow, Tyler, Gerard Smith, Schaetzel, Creel and GER/BTF officers. On Capitol Hill he met with Senators McCarthy and Fulbright, who escorted him to Senate floor during civil rights bill debate. Understand Strauss also had conversations with Dean Acheson and Walter Lippmann. In general Strauss' approach was one of friendly reasonableness. On several occasions he expressed himself in basic agreement with US policy on Germany and East-West relations as outlined to him. On another he commented that the last thing in the world he wanted was to be considered in any way as anti-American. Highlights of substantive discussions, during which he came down heavily and repeatedly on theme of no real détente without solution of German problem, included following: 1. “Détente”—We stressed that range of US-Soviet agreements thus far very small; all big questions, such as German problem, still remained unresolved. We were concerned that any feeling of détente might cause Europe to relax prematurely. Strauss asserted that détente policy should be looked upon as political weapon, not as “chance to go to sleep.” Furthermore he would be strongly opposed to any détente based on nothing more than series of concessions to Soviets. He stressed that there was no way to solve German question short of general change in political structure in Eastern Europe; thus no isolated solution of German problem possible. 2. Eastern Policy—Strauss said he favors active eastern policy if undertaken in realization there has been no change in basic principles of Communism and that we make use of changes taking place to strengthen centrifugal forces in Eastern Europe. Strauss also said he favors trade relations and exchange of FRG trade missions with Eastern Europe but only provided they are used to strengthen nationalist tendencies in Eastern Europe and to endeavor reconcile those countries to establishment of a united Germany. 3. Reunification—We told Strauss that while we do not think it helpful deliberately to maintain tensions over issues which can be settled with Soviet Union, we are convinced that a permanently divided Germany cannot be reconciled with our basic security and national interests. No one in Washington believes it possible to shove German problem under rug, but on other hand there is no indication that Soviets are prepared to agree to reunification on terms compatible with Western security. Strauss replied he had no doubts or basic reservations about US policy on reunification as outlined to him. 4. MLF—CSU will support MLF but may suggest two conditions: (1) MLF should not lead to nuclear disengagement from continental Europe; and (2) US should be prepared at some future point to turn MLF over to a European sovereignty if prerequisites therefore are met. 5. European Integration—Strauss sees no chance of progress in framework of Six and suggested consideration of European confederation as halfway step to federation, with only three or four member countries if necessary. 6. Southeast Asia—We stressed to Strauss world-wide nature of Communist threat and potential threat to Europe (including Germany) posed by any deterioration our position in Viet Nam. Strauss took line that Germans were inhibited from accepting greater commitments in world at large by unhappy memories of their past history as a world power. Detailed memcons follow.Memoranda of Strauss' conversations with Secretary Rusk and Assistant Secretary Tyler, both June 9, are ibid., POL 1 EUR, and ibid.,POL 32–4 GER, respectively. Memoranda of his conversations with Rostow and Creel are ibid., POL 21 EUR E–EUR W and POL 32–4 GER. A memorandum of the Strauss-Schaetzel talk is ibid., POL GER W–US. No records of conversations with McNamara or Smith were found. Rusk 47. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Confidential. Drafted by Lejins and Kent and approved in S on June 19. The meeting was held in Rusk’s office. Schroeder accompanied Chancellor Erhard on his June 11–13 visit to the United States. McGhee commented on these meetings in At the Creation of a New Germany, p. 148. Washington, June 11, 1964, 4 p.m. SUBJECT The German Question PARTICIPANTS Germans Foreign Minister Gerhard Schroeder Baron Herbert A. von Stackelberg, Minister, Embassy of Federal Republic of Germany Mr. Weber, Interpreter US The Secretary Ambassador George C. McGhee Mrs. Lejins, Interpreter (At the beginning of the meeting, the Secretary and Mr. Schroeder met alone for approximately 30 to 40 minutes.) The Secretary reiterated certain points discussed by him with Mr. Schroeder pertinent to the German question. He said that the US was willing to explore whether the Poles, Rumanians and Hungarians might possibly be interested in a permanent German settlement. There was no doubt that Khrushchev was under pressure from the other East European countries. There was growing anxiety in Moscow for a number of reasons. The President’s talk,Reference is to President Johnson’s May 23 speech at Lexington, Virginia. For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1964, Book I, pp. 708–710. for instance, had been well received in the other East Bloc countries although it had an unfavorable reaction in Moscow. Perhaps it would be possible to build in Eastern Europe an interest in a permanent German settlement, which was not necessarily in the interest of Moscow. Mr. Rusk said that we had received an intelligence report to the effect that the Soviets might announce the withdrawal of 15,000 men from somewhere in Eastern Europe. It was uncertain whether this might be from Hungary or Eastern Germany. It could well be that the Soviets would then say this is what we have done; let this be an example and do likewise. The US has said repeatedly, however, that this type of procedure is no basis for us to use. The Foreign Minister said he felt that the possibility that the German trade commissions and their contacts in various Eastern European countries would lead to desirable political consequences was very remote and limited. In any event, developments would be slow and take a long time. The first persons sent to these countries by Germany were eating bitter rice. However, eventually something might come of it, and these trade contacts were useful. There was no objection on the part of Germany to the efforts of the United States in this direction. When the situation was right, the Germans would follow through. After all, the Minister said, that was the whole purpose of establishing trade relations. It was not Germany’s primary objective to make the Eastern European countries happy economically. The Secretary then suggested that talks with the small Eastern European countries be undertaken only after the possibility of talks with Russia had been made public. If talks with the other countries were undertaken without such preparatory moves, there might be a severe reaction in Moscow. But if such talks were preceded by a public announcement, as indicated above, pressure might well be applied on Moscow by the other countries. Foreign Minister Schroeder then reverted to a point previously discussed with the Secretary, concerning possibilities of action with reference to the question of German reunification. He briefly set forth four points: (1) A proposal might be made by Germany, which would then have the support of the three Western Powers. (2) A four-power commission could be established with a mandate; the exact nature of such a mandate to be the subject of discussions. (3) A plan might be submitted to Moscow by the three Western Powers. This, however, would be the most difficult line of action. (4) A point could be chosen at which the three Western Powers would reconfirm vis-à-vis Germany their intention and responsibility for the reunification of Germany. A very opportune occasion might perhaps be the signing of the pending Friendship Treaty. In any event, opportunities must constantly be sought for the three Western Powers to show their responsibility for reunification and to express their will to carry it out. This must be kept a live issue, and the Foreign Minister has urged Chancellor Erhard to discuss this with the President tomorrow. The Foreign Minister continued that it was perfectly clear that unless this was done the Germans would get the impression that the question of German reunification had been placed into a psychological icebox, and that those who carry on the discussions with the other side were no longer interested in this issue and might even fear to state their stand on the German problem vis-à-vis the Soviets. This impression had very undesirable implications among the German people. The Secretary strongly emphasized that, while he was aware of this German reaction, he did not know how he could do more than he had actually been doing in this respect. It was a fact that in all his talks with the Soviets he had spent at least two-thirds of his time speaking about Germany and the German problem. The Foreign Minister quickly pointed out that he did not wish to be misunderstood and that what he had said should not be construed as a complaint. He felt, however, that everyone had to look ahead and had to gauge possible reactions to whatever would be undertaken, in order to avoid bad reactions both on the international and the national scene. The Secretary then said he felt that it might be possible to put together several different things into one package; for instance, a declaration might be forthcoming from the Federal Republic of Germany, made publicly to all four powers. This might be followed by a thoughtfully prepared Three Power declaration in the nature of a Western response, aimed at the Soviet Union. All this should be done publicly. Then it would be up to the Soviets to pick this up and do something with it or not. That might be the occasion that might point toward the opening of discussions. The Secretary stated that it was his impression that the Soviets do not speak about reunification in the sense in which we see it. They constantly come back to it as a problem to be settled by the two Germanies. The Secretary raised the possibility of turning this to advantage, though he indicated he realized that Ulbricht was not the man to try this on. Did the Foreign Minister think that the established trade contacts might possibly lead to some opportunities in this respect? The Foreign Minister indicated that he viewed the political results of the trade relations in Eastern Europe skeptically. These countries of Eastern Europe were interested in improving their economies; they were not interested in the German question. They were interested in throwing off Soviet exploitation and in improving their economic ties with the West. The question of German unity did not enter into this, as far as they were concerned. They were interested solely in the economic aspects and it gave them a feeling of independence. The Foreign Minister felt, however, that they could not and would not be allowed to go very far in either respect. The Soviet Union was the controlling and dominating power, which would not permit any developments in the long run that were not in the Soviet interest. The small Eastern European countries were well aware of that. 48. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2413. Secret. Drafted by Johnson and approved in S on June 19. The meeting was held in the Under Secretary’s Conference Room. The source text is marked “Part I of IV.” Washington, June 12, 1964, 10:30 a.m. SUBJECT East-West Relations PARTICIPANTS Germans Chancellor Erhard Foreign Minister Schroeder Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein State Secretary Ludger Westrick, Office of the Chancellor State Secretary Karl Carstens, Foreign Office State Secretary Karl-Guenther von Hase, Federal Press Office Assistant Secretary Franz Krapf, Foreign Office Horst Osterheld, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of the Chancellor Karl Hohmann, Assistant Secretary, Office of the Chancellor Berndt von Staden, Counselor, German Embassy Americans The Secretary Governor Harriman Ambassador George C. McGhee William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary of State Robert J. Manning, Assistant Secretary of State Robert C. Creel, Director, Office of German Affairs Charles K. Johnson, Office of German Affairs The Secretary began by welcoming Chancellor Erhard to Washington and assuring him that the United States wants to do all it can to make his visit useful. Chancellor Erhard expressed his pleasure at being in Washington and said that these talks were taking place at an appropriate time, particularly in view of the treaty between the USSR and the “GDR.”For text of the Soviet-East German treaty of friendship, mutual assistance, and cooperation, signed at Moscow on June 12, 1964, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 867–872. Erhard continued that although this treaty would give rise to a feeling of insecurity among some people, it would certainly not upset the West German government. US/FRG relations are unshakeable and through a strong NATO, peace and security will be guaranteed. Erhard then remarked that inevitably some people in Germany will ask whether the treaty is not the fruit of a policy of détente. As far as Erhard is concerned, Khrushchev is making a treaty with himself which may serve the purpose of giving some compensation to Ulbricht. Nevertheless even though no spectacular consequences can be anticipated from the treaty, the German Government must take into consideration that there will be a certain increase in uneasiness. Thus the Chancellor felt that his meetings in Washington were most opportune. He felt that the statement at The Hague on German reunification was a very good one, but still there will be questions raised in Germany asking when there will be action on the German problem. There will be questions as to why in an atmosphere of relaxation one cannot do something or take an initiative on the German problem. Chancellor Erhard said that he would be happy if these questions could be answered. He said that he had in mind a statement that could be issued today. Secretary Rusk replied that we do not regard this treaty as a helpful step and that it will undoubtedly raise anxieties within the West. He said our commitment on German reunification is clear. As far as a détente is concerned, we do not feel it has gone very far. We see two immediate dangers at this moment. One relates to Cuba where the Soviets are turning over to the Cubans surface-to-air missile sites. If the Cubans shoot down our overflights, we will have to shoot back hard. There is clearly a very explosive situation involved in having Cuban fingers on the missiles. The other explosive situation exists in Southeast Asia where there are gross violations of the 1954 and 1962 accords by Hanoi and Peiping. The United States is not going to get out of Southeast Asia. The situation there does not smell of détente but of great danger. The Secretary said that we are interested in Erhard’s impressions of important moves now going on which are affecting the status quo. How do they relate to the German question and what long-range trend can result from improved relations between the FRG and Eastern Europe? What is the significance of Ulbricht’s nervousness stemming from his isolation in Eastern Europe? Concerning reunification, there is no problem for US policy in view of our commitment to the objective of self-determination for the German people. We are prepared to take a hard look at this matter to see what we can do to meet the Chancellor’s needs. Our main concern is that whatever we do, we do together; that we not start something on which we are going to separate once we get started. We are prepared to work hard on German reunification. The Chancellor said he did not think that the USSR-“GDR” treaty will affect Berlin since that would contradict Khrushchev’s policy of reducing tension. What has gone on so far is no real détente. Our policies must move toward the core of the problem. At the same time, the FRG did not want to pursue a single-minded interest in the German problem to the exclusion of other critical problems in the world such as the Cuban situation. The Chancellor then said that the policy of neutralization in Indo-China initiated by de Gaulle was not possible.Reference is to de Gaulle’s June 24 speech welcoming Prince Sihanouk of Cambodia to France. For text, see Charles de Gaulle, Discours et Messages, vol. 4, pp. 217–218. He questioned whether the Chinese could be won over and whether they would be prepared to withdraw from Southeast Asia if they were admitted to the UN. With regard to Eastern Europe Erhard said he was convinced that Khrushchev was concerned about the movement toward greater independence by the Eastern European countries. He then referred to the Seebohm speechApparent reference to a May 13 speech at Nuremburg in which the Minister of Transportation attacked Czechoslovakia over its treatment of Sudeten Germans and implied the validity of the 1938 Munich agreement. as a “somewhat unpleasant episode.” He said he had done his best to make his government’s position clear: Hitler had torn up the Munich Agreement and the FRG has no territorial claims against Czechoslovakia. Nevertheless the speech had been a “great blow” to the FRG since it had raised new doubts in the Eastern European countries about the FRG. He asked for understanding for the German position on this matter. On the German reunification initiative, the Chancellor said he would welcome it if the Ambassadorial Group could work out something which could be implemented at an appropriate time. He acknowledged that this effort must be coordinated and that each side had its own problems to consider. The important thing is to act together. He said it was regrettable that elections in both our countries would give rise to certain unfortunate statements. Nevertheless he felt there would be great continuity in both countries. He said he would be happy to see all the elections over. Secretary Rusk said that Khrushchev seems to have the impression that nothing can happen until our elections are over even though we have tried to make him understand that we are still in business. 49. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Johnson and Chancellor Erhard Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Erhard Visit, June 1964. Secret. No drafting information is on the source text, which was prepared on June 15. The President and Chancellor met privately in the Oval Office until 12:40 p.m. when they joined the two delegations (see footnote 6 below). Washington, June 12, 1964, 11:30 a.m. OTHERS PRESENT Mr. Weber Mrs. Lejins After the President presented the Chancellor with a number of gifts, Mr. Erhard expressed his pleasure at being in the United States again. He said despite a few discordant notes heard from time to time German-American friendship was firm and lasting. He considered the cooperation of the United States and Germany in NATO the guarantee for the maintenance of peace and freedom in the world. U.S.-German friendship went beyond bilateral considerations. It was a major element bringing North America and Europe together. He expressed concern about the great inflationary trend presently at work which could break up Europe. But it was Germany’s task—for political, economic and social reasons—to guarantee the stability of Europe. The Chancellor felt his trip was very timely. Although he did not want to sound dramatic about the latest arrangements between the Soviet Union and East Germany, this most recent development could cause considerable concern and unrest. Therefore, the present visit and discussions could do much to allay fears in Germany. Chancellor Erhard was sure the President was aware that the German press (although this did not, of course, affect German official policy) was asking when, in all the efforts being made to achieve a détente, the time would come to deal with the most important question which lay at the heart of everything—the German problem. Such discussions in Germany and their effect should not be underrated. Nine months after the U.S. elections, Germany also would be facing elections. At that time, the Chancellor would have to answer some of these questions. He certainly would not want to be disloyal to himself or his friends. But he would have to discuss these matters. Therefore, it would be most advantageous if something could come out of the present talks which could put German fears at rest and suppress certain nationalistic voices making themselves heard. He added he could not hide the fact that Goldwater’s statements had been a real shock to much of Europe and had awakened voices which had to be muted. But he wanted to make it clear that it was not the aim of his visit to bring about or set off any specific set of actions. Germany had been satisfied with the results of the NATO meetings at The Hague. All he wished at this time was that discussions continue so German concerns could be met. There were other problems, too. Chief among these was the future course of certain NATO developments, and particularly the MLF. The German attitude on this had not changed. Germany considers the MLF desirable and necessary. Since taking office, the Chancellor had visited almost all the capitals of Western Europe and discussed the MLF. While he did not find widespread enthusiasm for the MLF, all seemed to realize that in the final analysis it was necessary to accept the MLF and to make whatever contributions were necessary. Unless this was done, de Gaulle might try to use the force de frappe, not as a military weapon, but as a political instrument to pursue his own independent European policy. Then there was, too, the question of Israel and the Arab world which the Chancellor described as “a very hot one.” This represented a very delicate problem for Germany. Germany had done very much for Israel. There were the reparations and military assistance. But by the same token, Germany had to proceed very carefully because of possible adverse Arab reaction. The coming conference of the non-aligned nations in Cairo could take a very strong negative position (possibly recognize East Germany) which in turn could complicate the prospects for a German solution. Germany’s relations with the Arab world were very good. Germany was not burdened with a colonial past and there were no present disputes with the Arab states. Germany had a good name and great prestige in the Arab world. Consequently, Germany could not do too much too fast as far as aid for Israel was concerned. The Chancellor therefore felt that Germany had found a good way of solving the problem of supplying Israel with tanks. Germany was going to ship the tanks to Italy where they would remain for a while and be equipped with weapons and ammunition. Later, they would be sent on from Italy to Israel—the connection would not be immediately or readily visible, although the end result would be the same. The Chancellor wanted the President to understand that Germany was not only thinking of her own problems. Other nations had theirs, too, and Germany shared these problems and was interested in them. He understood two of the President’s major problems—Cuba and South Vietnam. In the case of Cuba, Germany followed U.S. desires and broke off her trade with Cuba and would continue to do so. In South Vietnam, Germany stood ready to do all that could be done economically, politically and financially. Germany was also considering what humanitarian contribution it could make, such as perhaps sending a hospital ship to the area. These were questions, however, that should be discussed at another level. With regard to Red China, the Chancellor did not envisage diplomatic recognition on the part of Germany. Matters of this sort would be carefully coordinated with the United States. Trade relations with Red China were very limited. No expansion would be undertaken without advance consultation with the United States, both as to time and substance. Moreover, Germany did not anticipate the establishment of any trade commissions. These were all the items the Chancellor wanted to take up with the President. The President thanked the Chancellor for his visit. He expressed the high esteem in which the Chancellor is held in this country. As the Chancellor had said, Germany’s problems were our problems, too. The United States did not intend to act in any of these important questions, including matters pertaining to the Communists, without carefully reviewing them with the Chancellor, if at all possible. The President was happy to hear what the Chancellor had said concerning the recognition of and trade relations with Red China. Talk of more trade with Red China would create very serious alarm among the American people. The President had not yet recovered from the shock he had suffered as a result of the British bus sales to Cuba. (Note: Part of this discussion submitted separately.)See Document 50.. The President stated that it was important that the Chancellor recognize the problem in the Middle East. He wanted to congratulate him and encourage him with respect to what he had said about the tank deal via Italy. The United States will give all possible aid in these matters. But the next 90 days will be critical ones for the United States and therefore Germany’s help in working with Italy is most helpful and gives the United States great satisfaction. The President felt sure that it would be a long time before the true nature of the deal was recognized. In the meantime, it would be possible to extend a certain degree of aid to both Israel and the Arabs. This was the only intelligent way to handle the problem. Of course, the President indicated, this was only a drop in the bucket compared to the $300 million, in terms of which Khrushchev had spoken to Nasser. One matter of great concern to the American people was whether the German defense budget and planned foreign assistance would be adequate. Rumors had it that there might not be enough money to permit carrying out the McNamara-Von Hassel agreementSee footnote 6, Document 38. and certain matters discussed and agreed upon in the context of offset purchases which had been discussed at the Ranch in December and which were needed to help us maintain our six division presence to which we were committed. The President expressed the hope that these matters would not present a problem, because they would create very grave difficulties for us. Consequently, he hoped that these rumors were false. The President indicated that no one could understand better than he matters of psychological pressure. Everyone was down on him at the present time because of the 15,000 men stationed in Vietnam. He would not yield, however. Instead of bringing them home, as he was asked to do, he would increase their number. He could understand the problem created for the German people by the new treaty. Justified or not, he realized there would be a psychological reaction. This would not, however, weaken American determination to help solve the German problem and U.S. friendship and loyalty toward the German people. He had already instructed his people to work closely with the Chancellor’s people on how to help the German psychological situation. The President reverted to one matter about which the Chancellor had spoken earlier—the MLF. The President appreciated what the Chancellor had said on this score and hoped it would proceed satisfactorily. The President then indicated that it might be better to join the others in the Cabinet room. He had expected to speak with the Chancellor only for about 15 minutes, but his desire to have frank and useful talk with the Chancellor had prompted him to lengthen this into more than an hour. The President expressed the hope that the Chancellor would have the opportunity during the further course of his visit to discuss matters of trade with Governor Herter,See Document 55. matters pertaining to the treaty with Secretary Rusk (with whom the President had already discussed this problem), and matters pertaining to offset problems and tanks with Mr. McNamara.See Documents 53 and 54. The President himself would be glad to discuss anything else of interest to the Chancellor. The Chancellor then indicated that the offset agreements previously discussed should create no problem whatsoever. The Germans were ready to go through with what had been agreed upon and assume all responsibilities growing out of the U.S. presence in Germany. However, Germany did not want to discuss these matters too loudly. Germany feared that others, notably the British, would then approach Germany on the same score and it would be difficult to refuse them. The German trade balance was so excellent at the present time and there was such a surplus of orders that the Chancellor had already given the word that purchases should be carried out in the United States as agreed upon. Consequently, there was no cause for concern. The President then, half-jokingly, raised the question of meat and indicated that he might have to ship some Texas steer to Germany if Australia and New Zealand continued their dumping tactics in the United States. The meeting was then adjourned to the Cabinet room.According to a memorandum of conversation, the President and the Chancellor joined Rusk and Schroeder at 12:40 p.m. The President outlined the discussions with the Chancellor. Secretary Rusk and Erhard then discussed the public handling of the announcement of the Soviet-East German treaty before the Chancellor departed for a lunch meeting with Congressional members. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 GER W–US) 50. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File: Germany, Erhard Visit, June 1964. No classification marking. No drafting information is on source text. The discussion took place during the Erhard-Johnson meeting that began at 11:30 a.m. (see Document 49). Washington, June 12, 1964. CONFIDENTIAL PART OF DISCUSSION BETWEEN THE PRESIDENT AND CHANCELLOR ERHARD on June 12, in the presence of Mr. Weber and Mrs. Lejins The President indicated that the U.S. found itself presently in a very critical period. The first six months of Mr. Johnson’s administration had been extremely difficult ones. Leading Republicans, such as President Eisenhower, Nixon, Scranton, Romney and Senator Goldwater all were criticizing the part the United States plays in world affairs. They were apt to assume a martyr complex, complaining that no one loves us. The President assumed that this was only natural after 20 years of post-war efforts. Last year President Kennedy had asked Congress for $5 billion in foreign aid and there had been a terrible fight and a great deal of criticism. This year the President was asking for much more. The struggle in Southeast Asia had been going on for ten years by now. In the last few months, alone, there had been three governments in South Vietnam. Although it was perfectly obvious that the Communists were striving to swallow up Southeast Asia and that this was of concern to the entire world, the United States were the only ones who were really attempting to do something about it. It was our men who were being killed and our planes that were being shot down. We had been forced to greatly increase our national debt limit. Over $100 billion of all this money had gone into rebuilding other countries since the war. At the same time, France was causing great problems in Southeast Asia which also affected our own Cuban problem. The recognition by France of Red China was creating problems not only for the U.S. Government but was creating problems between the President and the American people. Americans, to a degree at least, understand the British. England is sort of a mother country of us. Nevertheless, it is hard to swallow England’s shipping materials to the Communists, selling busses and railroads to Cuba. The President said he had a greater understanding now for Mr. Erhard’s poultry problems. Australia and New Zealand are flooding the country with meat, with a resultant drop from 30 cents to 15 cents per pound and from $300 per head of cattle to $150 per head. Consequently, all cattle breeders are mad at the President, complain of Australian etc. dumping and consider us stupid. They act as though this were the only problem the country is faced with and consider themselves a particularly abused and special class of martyrs; and the Republicans, of course, exploit this to the hilt. In all, the President felt he could tell Mr. Erhard the American people were ready to see someone else come to the rescue on the world scene and offer to carry some of the burden the United States had been carrying for these many years. This attitude would, of course, be reflected in the votes on certain issues in Congress, such as foreign aid. It also would be reflected in the coming elections. The President indicated that he had recently met with Republican leaders and told them his problems.Not further identified. He had indicated that he would need more money to carry out U.S. policies in Southeast Asia. They had answered by asking him what other nations would help carry the burden. Therefore the President felt encouraged by what Mr. Erhard had said in this respect and his indication that Germany was willing to help in Southeast Asia. This would be advantageous not only for Southeast Asia, but also for U.S. morale. The President indicated that he would remain, of course, resolute and firm is his convictions and actions. But he could not deny the fact that Mr. Goldwater was the one who would gain from any and all dissatisfaction arising in the United States. Anyone who had a complaint of any kind would join up with Goldwater. The President then indicated that he felt very close to Mr. Erhard and that he had never told a similar thing to another statesman. He felt that both of them were fairly new at their jobs, having assumed their responsibilities at about the same time. These responsibilities were very heavy ones. Mr. Johnson presently saw his chief problem in an attempt to unite the American people, and he was not at all sure whether he was the person to do it. Very confidentially, he indicated that many decisions would have to be made within the next 60 days which would greatly affect the confidence of the people of the world. He would try to keep in touch with the Chancellor whenever it was possible on many of these questions. However, much of what needed to be discussed was as yet very unclear and very indefinite, and the President hoped that Mr. Erhard would consider any discussions of this situation as extremely confidential. He would then discuss further with him some of the problems of the United States. The Chancellor thanked the President for his show of confidence and friendship and indicated that he very much shared the President’s feeling. He did not feel as close to any other statesman, either. Perhaps part of the explanation was that both of them, before very long, faced elections and both of them stood a pretty good chance of being re-elected. This, the Chancellor felt, was a factor greatly contributing to the stabilization of the world and of the further course of NATO developments in particular. The Chancellor indicated that he could well understand the feeling of bitterness which the President felt in view of the fact that the United States had done so much to re-establish and maintain order in the world and to assist the reconstruction of many countries—both morally and materially—without getting much thanks of any kind. But that is life, the Chancellor felt, and creditors are never very popular. Once those who have been given help get back on their own feet they like to forget those who helped them. However, the Chancellor stated, he wanted it to be understood most emphatically that Germany would never forget what the United States has done on her behalf. This memory would never be wiped out. It formed the basis of Germany’s loyal friendship for the United States, a few occasional false voices notwithstanding, who would make it appear as though there existed in Germany a de Gaullist party and a North Atlantic party in opposition to one another. This was not true. Germany was convinced of the fact that Europe itself had to build the strength of Europe and the German Bundestag was convinced of the fact that the alliance with the United States was a matter of life and death without which the German problem can never be solved. At the same time, Germany realized that this was the only way of achieving a solution and that it was a matter of slow process. The Chancellor then stated that he wished to express surprise at the fact that the President did not view the matter of the coming elections with more confidence in his power to win. The Chancellor stated that all over the world, certainly in Europe, there existed the expectation that Mr. Johnson would win and such victory was unquestioned. The Chancellor had found out, of course, that it was not an easy job the President had. In addition to being the head of a Government—like the Chancellor himself—the President was also the head of the state. Although it was none of his business, the Chancellor was of the opinion that Mr. Johnson had greatly strengthened his position since he assumed office; that his leadership was undisputed and that the results of the elections were for all practical purposes assured. The Chancellor had spoken with Mr. Rockefeller yesterday,Governor Rockefeller called on Erhard at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel after the Chancellor’s arrival in New York. whom he has known for many years. Mr. Rockefeller had expressed horror about the state of Republican affairs, and had indicated that in his opinion a Goldwater nomination would assure Johnson’s victory and guarantee a split in the Republican party. The Chancellor felt obliged to say that recent Republican events had revived certain feelings in Europe that should long since have become a thing of the past. In any event, the impression created in Europe as the result of recent Republican developments was not a good one. The President fully agreed and indicated that he had been much saddened by the course of recent events. He disagreed, however, about the Chancellor’s evaluation of election prospects. He felt that it was too early even to tell who would be in the running, much less what the results would be. Only today Governor Scranton had announced his candidacy. Mr. Johnson had not yet made any announcement. Even if one assumed (and this was no foregone conclusion by any means) that Senator Goldwater and President Johnson would be the candidates, it would be extremely difficult to predict the outcome. The Chancellor stated that it was not possible to win elections with such a negative approach. Only a positive approach could achieve results. Both of them were experienced when it came to elections and the Chancellor had 16 years of experience in this area. He admitted that frequently things do not look too good in advance, but as an election comes closer people begin to change their minds and to get sense and vote as they should. The President stated that he hoped the Chancellor understood his uncertainties with reference to the U.S. elections and even the matter of candidates. He urged the Chancellor to keep this discussion completely confidential since he had not even mentioned some of these misgivings to his own Cabinet members. The Chancellor assured him that he would. (END OF SPECIAL CONFIDENTIAL SECTION) 51. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Erhard Visit, June 1964. Confidential. Drafted by Creel and approved in S on June 19. The meeting was held at the White House. The source text is marked “Part 1 of 4.” Memoranda of conversation dealing with the French attitude toward NATO and internal German politics are ibid. A memorandum of conversation dealing with the Soviet-GDR treaty is Document 52. Washington, June 12, 1964, noon. SUBJECT Trade Relations Between the Federal Republic and Communist China PARTICIPANTS Germans Foreign Minister Gerhard Schroeder Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein, German Embassy State Secretary Ludger Westrick, Office of the Chancellor State Secretary Karl Carstens, Foreign Office State Secretary Karl-Guenther von Hase, Chief, Federal Press Office Assistant Secretary Franz Krapf, Foreign Office Assistant Secretary Karl Hohmann, Office of the Chancellor Deputy Assistant Secretary Horst Osterheld, Office of the Chancellor Deputy Assistant Secretary Dankmar Seibt, Aide of the Chancellor Mr. Hermann Kusterer, Counselor, Foreign Office (Interpreter) Americans The Secretary Mr. McGeorge Bundy, Special Assistant to the President Ambassador George C. McGhee Assistant Secretary William R. Tyler,EUR Mr. George Reedy, Press Secretary, White House Mr. Robert C. Creel, Director, GER While the President was in a private meeting with Chancellor Erhard,See Documents 49 and 50. the Secretary suggested to Foreign Minister Schroeder that they make use of the time to continue their discussions of June 11. The Secretary said he had gathered from his conversation with Schroeder yesterdayApparently during the private conversation that preceded their 4 p.m. discussion; see Document 47., that the West Germans were considering entering into some sort of trade agreement with Peiping at the governmental level. He had received the further impression that the Germans were thinking of doing this fairly soon. He would like to explore further Schroeder’s ideas on timing. For our part we were concerned over any action which might be construed by Peiping as a go-ahead signal for continuing their present line of conduct. Schroeder replied that, as he had indicated yesterday, this idea of increasing trade between the Federal Republic and Communist China and formalizing this trade in some way was not a new one. It was of course true that the Germans had less freedom in their actions now because of de Gaulle’s recognition of Peiping. What particularly appealed to the Germans was the possibility of being able to secure a Berlin clause in any such agreement along the lines of those already included in trade agreements with countries of Eastern Europe. The Germans had no exact ideas on the matter of timing. All contacts thus far with the Red Chinese on the matter had been at the second level; there had been no real contact thus far at the government level. If developments indicated a definite interest on the part of the Red Chinese, then maybe something could be done “in the not too distant future”. There was no particular time pressure, but in the interest of maintaining momentum the Germans were thinking of trying to settle the matter “in the course of this year”. Trade agreements with a Berlin clause had already been signed with the countries of Eastern Europe except for Czechoslovakia. In this latter case conclusion of an agreement had already been unduly delayed, owing primarily to adverse reaction from Sudeten German groups. Schroeder said the Germans did not want to do anything which would create a difficulty for the United States. However, they hoped that over the next two or three months there might be some easing of our problems in Southeast Asia. In any case the Germans would like “to settle things if possible this year”, because otherwise momentum would be lost and they would “lag behind the optimum”. The Secretary expressed the hope that we could keep in close touch on this matter. It had a direct bearing on the current serious crisis in Southeast Asia. At the time France recognized Peiping, it had asserted that it had not been able to take this action earlier because of the unhelpful attitude of Peiping during French difficulties in Indo-China and Algeria. At the time the French did take action to recognize Peiping, we were ourselves suffering serious casualties in Southeast Asia. He wished to stress that any action which would encourage the Chinese Communists to believe they were on the right course would make things more dangerous. Schroeder replied that the Germans were aware of this point. He said they were not particularly keen over increased trade in itself but they were keen over having a Berlin clause, particularly in the light of the Soviet-GDR treaty signed in Moscow today. He felt that such a development would strengthen our common position against Ulbricht. 52. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson library, National Security File, Country File: Germany, Erhard Visit, June 1964. Confidential. Drafted by Creel and approved in S on June 19. The meeting was held at the White House. The source text is marked “Part 2 of 4.” Memoranda of conversation dealing with the French attitude toward NATO and internal German politics are ibid. A memorandum of conversation covering the discussion of German-Chinese relations is Document 51. Washington, June 12, 1964, noon. SUBJECT Soviet-GDR Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Assistance PARTICIPANTS [Here follows the same list of participants as Document 51.] At Foreign Minister Schroeder’s request, the interpreter read a report on the speech made by Ulbricht in Moscow today at the signing of the Soviet-GDR Treaty of Friendship, Mutual Assistance and Cooperation.Not found with the source text. Extracts of the joint communiqué are printed in Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 872–875. Schroeder said he wished to draw particular attention to the passage in which Ulbricht had stated that German unification was possible only through negotiations between the two German states, but that in such a case the treaty could be revised. Schroeder wondered whether this was part of the treaty itself or merely an interpretation of it by Ulbricht. If it were the former, then maybe it could be regarded as a sort of alibi on the part of Khrushchev for not taking any action on German reunification. The Secretary said we had just received a report from Ambassador Kohler in Moscow on the delivery of the oral démarches to the Soviets about the USSR-GDR treaty that had been agreed on in Washington yesterday.Telegram 3740 from Moscow, June 12. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 21 GER E–USSR) For text of the U.S. statement on the Soviet-East German agreement, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, p. 536. The US, British and French démarches were being delivered separately in Moscow today. The three démarches did not include the sentence which had been suggested by the Secretary rejecting Soviet charges of German revanchism. The British in Moscow had objected to this sentence on the ground it was superfluous. The Secretary said that even so we could get this sentence back in the picture in our oral statements on the matter. The Secretary continued that, with regard to Ulbricht’s statement about “the only path to reunification”, he wondered to what extent this mention of reunification had been considered necessary by Ulbricht from the standpoint of East German public opinion. Schroeder said that in the past East Zone leaders had for many years claimed to be the champions of German unity. It was true the theme had been neglected for some time but they now seemed to be reactivating it. Possibly this was being done for the benefit of the young people in East Germany. The Secretary said we should be prepared for any follow-up on this assertion of “GDR sovereignty”. We should have the Ambassadorial Group review the situation and check our intelligence as to whether the agreement contemplates making any new difficulties on the Autobahn, for example in connection with the scheduled July 1 meeting in Berlin of the Bundesversammlung. Schroeder said he felt that what was needed at this moment was a demonstration of a common position by the Three Powers. He pointed out that the démarches in Moscow had been delivered separatelyFor text of the démarche, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 869–872. and that the Three could not agree on the admirable sentence suggested by the Secretary. It was important that there be some sort of joint declaration by the Three that no impairment of Berlin access could be accepted. It might be desirable to move quickly since Pankow might wish to test Western resolution. The Three Powers would have to make quite clear that no changes in the Berlin situation could be accepted. The Secretary said that after we had a chance to study the text of the treaty, there should be consultation among all four of us very quickly to consider the issuance of a joint statement. Such a statement might also be helpful in meeting the German problem about support for reunification. Schroeder said he felt such a statement should be made on June 15 or 16. The Secretary agreed, but pointed out the difficulty of transacting business over weekends.For text of the three-power statement, released on June 26, see Department of State Bulletin, July 13, 1964, pp. 44–45. State Secretary Westrick referred to the passage in the Ulbricht speech describing West Berlin “as an independent political unit”. It would be a good idea for any joint statement to take issue with that statement, which was always coming up from the Communist side in the pass negotiations and other ways. The Secretary said we might have some problems with our Allies on this. Westrick said he could not imagine any real problem with the Allies, who had never said that West Berlin was an independent unit. Schroeder said he thought that we had already had formulas on this point that we could refer to. He agreed with Westrick that we should take a position on it. It would also be helpful for there to be a joint Allied statement about reunification. There had not been such a statement for some time. The Secretary inquired if Schroeder attached any significance to the distinction between this treaty and a peace treaty. Schroeder replied in the affirmative. He said that a peace treaty would involve important arrangements in the field of European security, and these could not be undertaken as long as Germany was divided. The present treaty seemed to be a substitute, at least for the time being, for a peace treaty. Westrick inquired whether Dobrynin had stated to the Secretary that the present treaty was not a peace treaty. The Secretary said that Dobrynin had only read an oral démarche and had added no comment.A memorandum of their June 8 conversation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XIV. He had not said that this was not a peace treaty or not to take it seriously. Westrick said he had been referring to the report in this morning’s New York Times. Schroeder said this was probably just speculation. The Secretary said that maybe the Soviets had intimated something of the sort to the press in Moscow, but Dobrynin had intimated nothing at all to him beyond the oral démarche. 53. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files, Lot 66 D 110, CF 2413. Secret. Drafted by Gilman and approved in ISA on June 24. The meeting was held in Secretary McNamara’s office. McGhee discussed the offset negotiations in At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 143–145. Washington, June 12, 1964, 3:40–4:15 p.m. SUBJECT Secretary McNamara’s Meeting with FRG Chancellor Erhard 12 June 1964 PARTICIPANTS German Side Chancellor Ludwig Erhard Minister for Foreign Affairs Gerhard Schroeder Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein State Secretary Ludger Westrick and others United States Side Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara Deputy Secretary of Defense Cyrus R. Vance Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) John T. McNaughton Robbins P. Gilman, Department of State 1. Offset Agreement Chancellor Erhard opened the discussion by referring to the offset agreements on military sales. He requested that the US not insist upon strict accounting and a balance sheet type of agreement signed by both parties. Such a rigid formula might become public and would cause others, for example the UK, to claim similar treatment. The Federal Government was perfectly willing to assist the US in its dollar balance difficulties. The Chancellor stated two reasons for this. First, the FRG balance of trade this year was favorable so that no difficulty was encountered on that score. Secondly, in light of the booming economic conditions in West Germany there were positive anti-inflation benefits to be gained by placing orders in the US. The Chancellor stressed the offset agreements were in the interest of both countries. Secretary McNamara agreed that the offset arrangement should not be made public, nor should they become a cause for FRG embarrassment vis-à-vis the UK or other countries. He questioned, however, the remarks of the Chancellor as they affected actual performance. While the US Government was grateful for past purchases of the FRG, he was afraid that the size of the current FRG defense budget would not permit the purchase of a sufficiently large quantity of defense material to meet the need fully. The Chancellor replied that some purchases overlapped from one year to the next. Some years the amount might be more and some years less. It could be managed somehow so that the agreed amount of purchases were made. Secretary McNamara said, “You have said you will do it and that is all we want. We don't have to have a written agreement.” 2. Viet-Nam Secretary McNamara expressed his appreciation for the German support for US policy in Viet-Nam. Chancellor Erhard said he had been impressed by the seriousness with which President Johnson had spoken to him on the questions of Southeast Asia and Cuba. Mr. McNamara said that these questions were not only important for the US but also for Germany and Western Europe. The danger lay in the loss of this area to the Communists. The reliability of the United States to carry out its treaty obligations and the danger to adjacent countries in that part of the world was also at stake. Chancellor Erhard agreed that this was a bastion of the free world and that it would not be a good alliance if each partner were only concerned with those matters affecting its immediate geographic area. If freedom were threatened anywhere, the Chancellor said, it must be the concern of all members of the alliance. He was aware that freedom could easily be lost in Indonesia and elsewhere in Southeast Asia. Secretary McNamara said that he appreciated the medical unit which the Federal Government had said it would provide. The Chancellor noted, however, that this matter was still under consideration. The Secretary emphasized that the next few weeks would be very important in Laos and Viet-Nam. Our planes had orders to fire if fired upon, and since we expected group fire, some exchange was inevitable. The Chancellor asked about the morale in Viet-Nam. The Secretary replied that while the bulk of the populace was still under the control of the Government, they have suffered heavy casualties in the past nine years, they were fatigued and concerned about the future. The Viet Cong had made substantial progress since October. Taking everything into account Vietnamese morale was quite good. The Secretary said that more substantial action by the United States might be necessary in the months ahead. The Chancellor asked whether Secretary McNamara felt anything could be gained from negotiations. The Secretary said, “No,” and the Chancellor quickly agreed. Secretary McNamara felt all was not black, however, since the Chinese Communists and the Viet Cong had problems of their own. Secretary McNamara noted that Hanoi has been silent with respect to the recent aircraft incidents, Peiping has not threatened force and delicate pressure should prevent further aggression. In closing, the Secretary said that while the US would not expect military assistance from the Federal Republic, we would like to feel that we had support of the Germans for our policy in Southeast Asia. To this the Chancellor assented. 54. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Erhard Visit, June 1964. Confidential. Drafted by C.K. Johnson. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room at the White House. Washington, June 12, 1964, 4:30 p.m. SUBJECT USSR-“GDR” Treaty; Cyprus PARTICIPANTS Germans Chancellor Erhard Foreign Minister Schroeder Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein State Secretary Ludger Westrick, Office of the Chancellor State Secretary Karl Carstens, Foreign Office State Secretary Karl-Guenther von Hase, Federal Press Office Assistant Secretary Franz Krapf, Foreign Office Karl Hohmann, Assistant Secretary, Office of the Chancellor Horst Osterheld, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of the Chancellor Herman Kusterer, Counselor, Foreign Office (Interpreter) Americans The President The Secretary Mr. McGeorge Bundy, Special Assistant to the President Governor Herter Ambassador McGhee Mr. William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary of State, EUR Mr. George Reedy, Press Secretary, White House Mr. Angier Biddle Duke, Chief of Protocol, Department of State Mr. Charles K. Johnson, Office of German Affairs Mrs. Nora M. Lejins, Interpreter The first portion of the meeting was devoted to a discussion of the communiqué to be issued at the conclusion of the talks.For text, see Public Papers of the President of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1964, Book I, pp. 771–773. After agreement had been achieved on the final text, Chancellor Erhard remarked that we had now received the full text of the USSR-“GDR” treaty and asked what our reactions were. Secretary Rusk replied that after a first reading of the text, the treaty appeared to be what we expected—an attempt by Khrushchev to give something to Ulbricht without getting into the complexities of a peace treaty. He remarked that he was happy to see the language contained in Article 9 of the treaty.It reads: “The present treaty does not affect the rights and commitments of the sides under the bilateral and other international agreements which are in force, including the Potsdam agreement.” On the other hand, the Secretary said, we need to watch the situation carefully to see that no steps are taken on the basis of the treaty which might tend to reduce Allied rights. Secretary Rusk then stated he would like to express our concern about the situation in Cyprus.Reference is to the mobilization of Turkish forces following the outbreak of intercommunal fighting. As Foreign Minister Schroeder would recall, at the recent NATO meeting in The Hague it was agreed by all parties that war between Greece and Turkey was an unthinkable eventuality. The situation has now become more dangerous; the Turkish Cypriots seem to be in a more critical position. The Greek Government appears to fear employing its maximum pressure on Archbishop Makarios out of concern that Makarios will turn to the Soviet Union. The United States has been making representations to both sides. Our clear position is that there must be no war between the Greeks and the Turks, and that both sides must exert every possible influence to maintain law and order and find an agreed solution promptly. We had had a very tight situation recently when the Turks were at the point of intervening militarily. Under Secretary Ball’s mission had been undertaken in order to insist in both capitals on moves to stabilize the situation. In view of this situation, we believe it is important for all NATO members to make clear in both capitals the nature of their concern. Secretary Rusk said that we will keep in touch with the FRG on this situation. We hope that the FRG will insist firmly in Athens and Ankara on the idea that peace must be maintained. Chancellor Erhard expressed his agreement with what Secretary Rusk had said and asserted that the FRG will make further efforts to make reason prevail. 55. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Posts in European Economic Community Capitals Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS–EEC. Limited Official Use. Drafted and approved by Greenwald. Pouched to posts in EFTA capitals. Washington, June 13, 1964, 5:36 p.m. 2339. Following is resume of points made by Herter in discussion with Erhard June 13 in response to question: “Does the United States consider that a unified grains price decision in the EEC now is indispensable to the success of the Kennedy Round?”: 1. A unified grains price decision now is not indispensable as far as the United States is concerned. We believe that negotiations on industrial products, agricultural products other than grains, and even on grains, could be carried right up to the concluding stage in Geneva without a unified grains price decision, if the EEC negotiator were in a position to negotiate on these matters. 2. In the view of the United States, the problem seems to lie therefore not in Geneva but in Brussels. It seems to have become an indispensable element in the internal bargaining situation with the EEC that the unified grains price decision be made now and that in the absence of such a decision the EEC representatives will be unable to enter into negotiations on virtually any matter in Geneva. 3. Unless the capabilities of the EEC to negotiate on industrial products and on agricultural products including grains is restored in one way or another, the timetable and even the final results of the Kennedy Round could be put in serious jeopardy. The preparations for the tabling of exceptions lists (which in the view of the United States must be done simultaneously for industry and agriculture) must be resumed at the latest by the end of the summer holidays if we are to meet the target date of November 16. In view of the already serious delays in the past, such further delays in the progress of the Kennedy Round would seriously endanger the negotiations. That would create a situation where the negotiations might well fail or at best be seriously impaired. 4. As far as the United States is concerned, the question of a unified grains price can in any case not be seen in isolation. While the United States wishes to see the lowest possible grains price in the Community, it is clear that any such price now being considered is so high as to require assurances for the maintenance of grain imports. Full report of conversation follows.A memorandum of the Erhard-Herter conversation was transmitted in airgram CA–13427, June 22. (Ibid.) Rusk 56. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 7 GER W. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted and approved by Creel and cleared by P and EUR. Repeated to Berlin. Washington, June 15, 1964, 12:15 p.m. 3590. Prior Chancellor Erhard’s departure from Washington June 13, Secretary handed him following message from President: “Dear Mr. Chancellor: As you leave Washington, I want to tell you how much I have appreciated even this brief opportunity to renew our friendship. Our talks on the problems which confront us have been as always most helpful to me, and I am convinced that they have further strengthened the firm bonds of friendship and understanding between our two countries. I am mindful of the fact that a few days from now, on June seventeenth, you will be commemorating in the Federal Republic the Day of German Unity. As I told you here, it is a fundamental objective of American foreign policy to help bring an end to the unjust division of the German people, because otherwise there can be no real and durable stability in Europe. The Day of German Unity—June seventeenth—has therefore come to assume a special significance as we look forward to the day when German unity will become a reality. I take pleasure in sending you special greetings on this occasion. Sincerely, Lyndon B. Johnson.” Federal Press Chief Von Hase was told there would be no objection to publication of letter, with timing to be left to Germans. Request Embassy check with Von Hase to ascertain when Germans plan publish letter in order similar release may be made here. Rusk 57. Memorandum for the FilesSource: Department of State, Central Files, PPV 7 GER W–US. Confidential. Drafted by Tyler. Copies were sent to the White House and to GER. Washington, June 16, 1964. SUBJECT Article by Bonn Correspondent of the Washington Post dated June 15, 1964Entitled “Bonn Balks at New U.S. Germany Policy.” Following a call from Mr. Klein at the White House, I told the Secretary of State that President Johnson was greatly disturbed by this article and by the fact that, according to information from our Embassy in Bonn (Bonn’s telegram 4666)Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, PPV 7 GER W–US) it was based on a briefing by the Federal Press Office. The President wanted someone to call Ambassador McGhee and ask him to go to see the Chancellor right away, expressing the President’s concern at the origin and effect of this article, and asking if the German Government could set the record straight right away. The Secretary then read the article and agreed that I should call Ambassador McGhee along the foregoing lines. I reached Ambassador McGhee at about 10:15, apprised him of the situation and dictated to his secretary the most important and obnoxious passages of the article in question. The Ambassador, who had not seen the text of the article, expressed his dismay and concern that such an article could have been published at all, let alone the fact that it purported to reflect official German views. He said he would ask to see the Chancellor immediately. I also asked the Ambassador to tell the Chancellor that we would like to publish the President’s letter to him of June 13 and the Chancellor’s own message to the President of the following day.See Document 56. Erhard’s reply is in Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. The exchange of letters was not published. WRT 58. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Berlin, vol. 1. Secret; Limdis. Moscow, June 17, 1964, 8 p.m. 3801. Department telegrams 3650 and 3651.Telegram 3650 to Moscow, April 9, reported on discussions with British and German officials regarding the Kennedy Round. (Department of State, Central Files, FT 13–2 US) Telegram 3651 was not found. Emb had hoped that public knowledge of tripartite démarche in Moscow in advance of announcement of Soviet-GDR treaty as well as President’s letter to Erhard endorsing reunificationFor text of the démarche, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 869–872. For President Johnson’s letter, see Document 56. as major Western policy objective would have satisfied FedRep need. Obviously latest FedRep initiative in Ambassadorial Group indicates Bonn believes further action required to cope with internal FedRep political pressures. We would hope that in deciding form and content of response due consideration would be given to elements in Moscow picture which account in large measure for Soviet handling of Ulbricht visit, including particularly unorthodox private “reassurances” to Western Three as to significance of Sov-GDR treaty. At risk of seeming to plead Moscow’s case, we would point out that Sov behavior could be rationalized as calculated effort to reconcile internal pressures within own camp with desire to maintain impetus for improving relations with West, including FRG. Specifically, Moscow may have regarded treaty of friendship as relatively safe maneuver which would in part satisfy East German pressure for cashing in on Khrushchev’s 1958 ultimatumReference is to Khrushchev’s November 10, 1958, address. For extracts, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 542–546. (confirming GDR frontiers, restating refusal countenance FRG proprietary interests in West Berlin) and at same time, by its confirmation Quadripartite responsibilities, avoid triggering Allied reaction resulting in crisis situation which Moscow obviously wished avoid. Moscow would undoubtedly find it difficult to maintain this posture of “restraint” if further Allied moves effected in such way as to compel vigorous rejoinder. In context struggle with Peiping, Sovs cannot afford to appear soft toward West and FRG and weak in defense of a socialist ally. ChiComs apparently have already started flogging Moscow on issue and Soviet concern is reflected by Izvestiya June 16 attempted rebuttal of ChiCom charge that treaty did not change “one iota situation of GDR.” We not in position judge East German reaction to visit but entirely possible that ChiCom attack based on evidence unhappiness of Ulbricht and others with results of visit. In circumstances if action required to reassure West German public, we would share British preference (Deptel 3663)Not found. for some form public declaration, which reaffirms our understanding of situation in unprovocative terms requiring minimum response from this government. Time for protest, it seems to us, will come if Soviets choose draw some legal consequences from paragraph in treaty about West Berlin being separate entity. Stoessel 59. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs (Kitchen) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow)Source: Department of State, German Desk Files: Lot 76 D 170, Pol 32–4 Ger. Secret. Copies were sent to Ball, Harriman, Johnson, Thompson, Tyler, Hughes, Creel, and Klein at the White House. Washington, June 19, 1964. SUBJECT The US and German Unity: A Policy of Movement The discussion at the Secretary’s Policy Planning MeetingSecretary Rusk’s appointment books indicate he met with the Policy Planning Council at 9:17 a.m. (Johnson Library) of the S/P paperThe paper, entitled “The United States and German Unity: A Policy of Movement,” April 2, is not printed. It was initially presented to an April 9 meeting of the Policy Planning Council. (Department of State, German Desk Files: Lot 76 D 170, Pol 32–4 Ger), causes us to offer the following comments and suggestions for consideration in any revision of the paper. The Secretary asked why we could not take advantage of frequent Soviet statements (the most recent of which appeared in the USSR-GDR Treaty of Friendship of June 12) that reunification is an internal German problem and let the East and West Germans sit down and work things out for themselves. This points to one specific area in which the paper might probe more deeply; the options available to US policy. As the Secretary pointed out, we must attempt to find some way for the West Germans to talk with the East Germans without allowing the vexing recognition issue to arise as an immediate impediment. We know the East Germans would immediately seek to use negotiations as a vehicle for obtaining recognition. In this connection the question of whether the Federal Republic will deal with the Ulbricht regime or with a more appealing leadership that might emerge from an internal liberalization process is not really relevant. At least for the immediate future, no East German government can abandon or relegate to secondary position, the objective of obtaining co-equal status with the Federal Republic in any bilateral talks. A way to break out of this vicious circle, and to give more substance to the policy of movement in a manner acceptable to the West Germans, would be to establish a Four Power aegis under which East and West Germans could meet. As you know, the Ambassadorial Group has for some time been considering a West German Initiative on Reunification. One aspect of the German proposal is the creation of a Permanent Council of the Four Powers, the principal task of which would be to work out a plan for phased reunification accompanied by corresponding measures in the field of European security. The Council is also to prepare in cooperation with “German agencies” an electoral law and to deal with “further measures” regarding the German question. We suggest considering the desirability of proposing to the Germans—and the British and French—modifications to the plan whereby the subjects to be discussed by “German agencies” under the aegis of the Four Power Council would be expanded to include an agreed “list of issues” such as you suggested at the Planning Meeting. I believe a mandate from the Four Powers would largely remove the sting of the recognition issue from such East-West German discussions and would, therefore, be more palatable to the West Germans than the direct talks we are urging upon them. It would also serve to reaffirm the basic responsibilities of the Four Powers for reunification. At least two elements add to the urgency with which this should be considered. As we read the USSR-GDR Friendship Treaty, one of its purposes is to reinforce the division of Germany and enhance the prestige of the East German government preparatory to possible new GDR initiatives vis-à-vis the Federal Republic. It would therefore be desirable to launch an initiative soon (the form in which this is done, i.e. as a tripartite document, is far less important than the substance of the move) and to pre-empt anything Ulbricht may have up his sleeve. The fact that this is an election year in West Germany increases the odds that he will want to add fuel to a political campaign in which the reunification issue will inevitably come to the fore. The second element making for urgency is that quadripartite action on the German initiative has been slow. Ambassador McGhee has pointed out it is possible that the French and British may go along with the German initiative and that we may be saddled with the onus of obstructing it. We have, of course, no assurance the Soviets will agree to form such a Four Power Council. However, since they have been urging us to agree to joint East-West German discussions on reunification, they might find acceptable a proposal to bring about such discussions under Four-Power auspices. If they reject it, we have lost nothing. In addition to being responsive to the Secretary’s desire to take them up on their past statements, we would (a) have buttressed our position vis-à-vis the West German Government by going along with its wish for action in the reunification field; (b) be in a favorable position to put the Soviets on the defensive on the German issue; (c) have placed the Federal Republic in a better position to reject GDR overtures that may come soon. If the Soviets accept, we will have brought East and West Germans together in a manner acceptable to the Bonn Regime and one that would not embarrass it in the eyes of the electorate. While this proposal would give substance to the policy of movement vis-à-vis East Germany and fit in with our “détente” policy in a manner consistent with German objectives, we should also explore the possibilities of a West German policy of movement vis-à-vis the Eastern European satellites other than the GDR. It is important to distinguish between these two policies, though we do not consider them to be mutually exclusive. Rather, we regard them as complementary. The purpose of a policy of movement vis-à-vis the EE satellites would be to stimulate polycentrist tendencies within the Bloc and to alienate the GDR from the satellites. This is essentially Schroeder’s policy and we should examine the desirability of pushing the Federal Republic further along this road. Already there has been some success in the economic agreements concluded between Bonn and some of the satellites. To the extent these contain “Berlin clauses” they directly contravene the political claims of the GDR in the Berlin question. Any revision of the S/P paper might also examine the question whether a modification of the Hallstein Doctrine toward greater flexibility vis-à-vis EE satellites (other than the GDR) would not be in our and the Federal Republic’s long range interests. Similarly, a non-aggression pact between Bonn and Warsaw might go some way toward reducing Polish fears of West German revanchism and further isolate the GDR. The West Germans might thereby succeed not only in driving a wedge into the Warsaw Pact; the more isolated the GDR feels, the more telling West German pressures might become in the afore-mentioned East-West German dialogue. In sum, we think the question is not whether a policy of movement is more desirable than the other two alternatives posited in the paper (Stabilization or Force Majeure), but what our options are within the policy of movement and where they would lead us. 60. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 4. Secret; Nodis. A notation on the source text reads: “Bundy. No other distribution.” Bonn, July 6, 1964, 11 p.m. 47. For the President, Secretary and Under Secretary only. I called on the Chancellor today at his request. I had been told that he wished to inform the President of the results of his meeting, held on July 3 and 4, with General de Gaulle.They met July 3–4 at Bonn to discuss European defense and cooperation. The Chancellor prefaced his remarks by stating that what he had to tell me was of such a confidential nature that he would appreciate it if I could by some arrangement see that the message I would send the President was destroyed after it had been read. If any of his confidential revelations of what had taken place in his talks with General de Gaulle became public, it would be extremely embarrassing to him. Although I did not commit precisely to such a procedure, I assured him that special precautions would be taken. The Chancellor continued that the talks had been “tough” ones. He had made it clear that he could not agree to de Gaulle’s concepts. He had told de Gaulle that the decisive point for him was his relationship with America. He had said to de Gaulle that he (de Gaulle) seemed “to have the impression that we Germans are vassals to America. This is not true.” de Gaulle had attempted to persuade him that the American policy of détente would lead to the abandonment by the U.S. of efforts toward German reunification. Erhard had attempted to persuade him otherwise. In a situation of tension there is less possibility that offers toward reunification would be successful. Without close ties with America, Europe has no protection. Germany would never renounce its ties with the United States. de Gaulle proposed that Germany and France should together develop a European policy. The Chancellor replied that this is fine, but why should there be any insurmountable differences between such a policy and American policy? For that matter, the whole free world should have similar policies. de Gaulle had pointed out some of the existing differences in policy—making particular reference to China. Erhard had explained the current American attitude toward China, pointing out that the situation in South-East Asia, in which China was deeply involved, was a matter of “life and death” for America. Under such circumstances he felt that Germany must be loyal to its ally. de Gaulle had taken the line that the U.S. would inevitably become so involved in its contest with China, that we would seek an accommodation with the Soviets at the expense of the German problem. Germany must look to Europe for a solution to its problems. Erhard had repeated that Europe could not get along without the United States. In the event the U.S. withdrew, the Soviets would be tempted to make some adventure in Europe. de Gaulle had not understood the U.S. and German objectives in seeking a détente. The Chancellor then proceeded to describe General de Gaulle’s real views as to how he felt European unity could be achieved, which was basically through the development of a much closer relationship (almost a union) between Germany and France with, he added as his own interpretation, “Germany as a vassal.” Germany and France would take the decisions, presumably with little consultation with others, who would then be “forced to their knees.” Erhard had asked de Gaulle how he could expect the smaller nations to accept such dictation. He pointed out that they would be in the same relationship to France and Germany that de Gaulle says Europe is to the U.S. The Chancellor reported that his private discussion with General de Gaulle was often “dramatic.” de Gaulle had said, “We can unite Europe if you will only take a decision favorable to France. This is not possible because of your ties with the U.S.” Erhard had replied, “Germany must have an alliance with the United States. However, this is not directed against France.” He pointed out to de Gaulle that de Gaulle himself had, in their previous meetings, stressed that the Franco-German treaty was not directed against the U.S. and that he, de Gaulle, had wanted an alliance with the U.S. Erhard said he had told de Gaulle that before Europe could act, as such, it must first unite. Germany and France could not act more closely in concert until they could reach a larger area of agreement on fundamental issues—such as NATO. France appears to favor a NATO composed of national armies, whereas Germany prefers an integrated force. He asked General de Gaulle how Europe could be defended without a NATO including the U.S.? The Chancellor, in order to bring out de Gaulle’s views, said that he had told de Gaulle that he assumed, after the U.S. election, de Gaulle would wish to meet with President Johnson. At this time he would have to discuss the NATO problem. What would he tell President Johnson? He characterized de Gaulle’s reply to this question as the first clear expression he had ever heard of de Gaulle’s real views. de Gaulle had replied that his concept involved the United States on the one hand, and a united Europe on the other strong enough to be an equal partner with the United States. An alliance would then be negotiated between the two providing for their mutual protection. Erhard had replied that he was anxious to help in developing such a plan, but what, for example, were de Gaulle’s concepts of the plan in its strategic, financial and other specific aspects? Would it mean, for example, that France and Germany will in the future supply arms to Greece and Turkey that are now being supplied by the U.S.? Does he imply that there will be equal nuclear strength in Europe and the United States? Present U.S. nuclear strength is much greater than that of the force de frappe. If Europe insists on making its decisions independently, it is not realistic to expect America to continue to defend Europe. What would be the position of Europe in the meantime? What would constitute its nuclear defense? Would the force de frappe be a European force, available for the defense of all of Europe, or a French force? de Gaulle had replied bluntly that it would be a French force. The Chancellor had responded that he would rather be dependent on the U.S. than France for Germany’s nuclear protection. Sensing that his reply had been too absolute, General de Gaulle had then sought to soften it, saying that perhaps the U.K. would also make its nuclear force available to Europe. Perhaps there would be a European government which would control its own nuclear force. The Chancellor had replied that de Gaulle’s nationalistic approach precluded the creation of a European government. de Gaulle did not disagree with him. At this juncture Minister Westrick intervened to comment that I should know that a Die Welt article, written from Paris just before de Gaulle’s visit, was known to have been inspired by de Gaulle. This article had said in effect that all of de Gaulle’s efforts up to this point to unite Europe had failed. Presumably this was Germany’s fault. The purpose of the article had, according to Westrick, been to prove that the only remaining alternative lay in what de Gaulle had now proposed—a Europe based on closer German-French cooperation. The Chancellor, in response to my question, said that he and de Gaulle had not discussed the Common Market nor the grain price question. This had been left for the Ministers concerned. The position of the U.K. had not come up either. If Wilson comes in, he anticipated that Britain would probably not apply for membership in the Common Market. Although it was not said, he assumed de Gaulle would oppose U.K. entry in any event. de Gaulle’s ideas for the political unity of Europe seem to go beyond the Common Market. He seemed to feel that the group he was seeking could exclude some of the Six—and might include others outside the Six. Erhard confided that he himself had sometimes wondered whether it would be necessary to include all of the Six in a European political union. The Chancellor admitted that the results of the discussions were meager. de Gaulle was not willing to take steps toward European political union along the lines Germany envisaged. de Gaulle was not thinking even in terms of a revived Fouchet Plan,Reference is to a plan for a draft treaty of a “Union of European States” developed in 1961 by an EEC Committee headed by Daniel Fouchet. but a French-German (with Germany as a vassal) hegemony over Europe. Erhard was, however, not yet willing to give up, and had agreed with de Gaulle that their FonMins would study the unity question further between them and produce a draft which could be reviewed at a later date. When de Gaulle had mentioned to him the desirability of their coordinating their foreign policies, he had said, “You say you want to work out common foreign policies, however, I hear of your policies only in the paper,” mentioning de Gaulle’s policy toward China, Israel and the Arab states, and Greece and Turkey. “You are asking me to sign blank checks.” The Chancellor then asked me rather abruptly whether we had any suggestions as to how we could improve our own relations with de Gaulle. He had been thinking that, after being rebuffed by him (Erhard), de Gaulle might as a tactic turn to the United States. I replied that we would welcome an improvement in our relations with de Gaulle. President Kennedy had been disappointed not to have been able to meet with him following his visit to Germany. I felt sure that President Johnson would, after his election, be glad to meet with de Gaulle if it appeared that anything constructive could be achieved. Our impression, however, was that de Gaulle was so inflexible on so many points of policy diametrically opposed to ours, that it would be impossible to reach agreement with him short of abandoning our policies. I assured him, however, that we would never reach an understanding with de Gaulle at the expense of the Germans or agree to let de Gaulle speak for Germany or Europe. The Chancellor speculated that de Gaulle’s thinking might turn to a French-German-US–UK grouping, whose leadership he thought the other European countries would accept. There was no reason why this could not be accomplished within NATO. The Chancellor did not, however, appear to be proposing this himself. Comment: Although some reports about the impasse reached in the discussions between Erhard and de Gaulle are circulating around Bonn, not even Foreign Office officials appear as yet to have a detailed version of what took place. One report, probably accurate, is that de Gaulle’s relatively restrained attitude on Saturday morning was the result of his conversation with Adenauer, during which the latter asked that the French President take a less rigid and extreme position since adherence to the latter could only weaken that wing of the CDU/CSU which favored even closer Franco-German cooperation. The President and Department may wish to consider a response to the Chancellor from the President, including as a minimum an expression of appreciation for his confidence. Such a response might, however, be utilized to convey substantive comment on some of the issues raised by the Chancellor from an overall U.S. viewpoint. McGhee 61. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 4. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted in the White House and approved by Read. Washington, July 8, 1964, 6:37 p.m. 67. For Ambassador from McGeorge Bundy. 1. The President asks you to call on Chancellor promptly to express President’s deep appreciation for highly confidential message conveyed in your 47 Document 60. and to convey following message in reply. 2. President is most grateful for the Chancellor’s confidence and will insure that there is no disclosure of the contents of his message, or indeed of its existence. 3. On substance, the President finds himself in full agreement with views expressed by Chancellor, and in particular re-emphasizes his conviction that it can never be useful for Germany to be forced to a choice between France and the United States. We are all members of the same alliance. The US continues to believe that interdependence of Europe and America is inescapable reality upon which policy of all must be based. President believes that de Gaulle’s proposals to the Chancellor fly in the face of this reality, and that it is of highest importance that de Gaulle should learn to recognize the firmness and rightness of the position the Chancellor put forward. Thus although President regrets any argument among allies, he cannot but send his thanks to Chancellor for the position he stoutly and clearly set forth to de Gaulle. 4. You can reassure Chancellor once more that US would welcome an improvement of relations with de Gaulle and will always be ready for serious discussion with France. Moreover, US will not squabble publicly with de Gaulle. At the same time Chancellor can be quite sure, as you have already said, that the US will never make any private agreement with de Gaulle or anyone else at expense of Germans. Nor can US regard the General as spokesman for Europe. 5. President hopes that as time passes it may be possible to make new beginnings toward stronger partnership, always with room for France and never with any thought of exclusiveness. This is immediate value of MLF, and the President repeats his belief that it will be important to move ahead promptly with this major undertaking in the last months of 1964. 6. If there should be any fresh prospect of wider agreement among Germany, France, US,UK and Italy, President would gladly lead new and strong effort by all to move forward. Please note inclusion of Italy, whose solidity in Alliance needs constant attention. 7. The President values your prompt and comprehensive report of Chancellor’s extraordinarily revealing conversation and sends thanks. Ball 62. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 4. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Bonn, July 11, 1964, 3 p.m. 120. White House for the President and McGeorge Bundy; Dept for the Secretary and Under Secretary. The timely, clear and forceful message from the President, through McGeorge Bundy, contained in Deptel 67 (Nodis), Document 61. has been most helpful. Although I have not yet been able to convey it personally to the Chancellor, whom I will see Monday afternoon,July 14. McGhee reported on his talks with Erhard in telegram 139 from Bonn, July 14. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 4) McGhee reiterated President Johnson’s message, the two men discussed internal German political developments, and the Ambassador provided his analysis. McGhee commented on the Erhard-de Gaulle talks in At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 149–150. I did convey its content yesterday to Minister Westrick and in a meeting this morning with Westrick at which time we had a link with the Chancellor. The Chancellor’s immediate reaction was to thank the President for his prompt response and to say that he was satisfied with it and felt more secure as a result of it. The message from the President will be of particular help to the Chancellor today as he prepares his critical speech for the CSU meeting in Bavaria tomorrow, and in his meeting with Barzel and other CDU party leaders Monday. The Chancellor expressed interest in the President’s suggestion for increased emphasis on Atlantic partnership and prospects for an initiative by the President on a wider agreement among Germany, France, the U.S., U.K. and Italy. His immediate reaction was favorable, however, he would give thought to the matter and discuss it further with me on Monday. Other information provided by Westrick may be of interest in putting together the fast-moving picture here. Westrick said that the Chancellor, who was in Denmark at the time, was greatly disturbed by the meeting between Strauss and Adenauer on Monday, despite the fact, as we know, that Adenauer really tried to calm Strauss down. The public did not know this, and the press subsequently built up the concept of an attack against Erhard by an Adenauer-Strauss-Dufhues grouping. This is why the Chancellor struck back even while still in Denmark, and why he saw Adenauer immediately upon his return Wednesday morning. He had found Adenauer in quite a conciliatory mood. Together they had, at Westrick’s suggestion, called Strauss, with Adenauer telling Strauss not to “beat the drum.” Strauss had replied indignantly that he had no intention of “beating the drum” and his speech in Munich (Munich’s 24 to Dept)Dated July 10. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 EUR) indicates that whatever his intentions had been he did not in fact do so. Westrick said that the foremost point of irritation on the part of the French, particularly Couve de Murville, during the talks, seemed to be German support of U.S. policy in South Vietnam. Couve characterized German policy as a “satellite policy.” The Germans had, however, remained firm on the basis of their loyalty to the U.S. Westrick said that the Chancellor had, since his return, been provided ample evidence of the overwhelming national backing that he had in pursuing his present policy line. Yesterday the leaders of German industry, including Fritz Berg, head of the Federation of German Industries, and Dr. Schneider, head of the German Chamber of Commerce, called on the Chancellor to assure him of the support of the business community. According to Westrick, the group in opposition is now really negligible—and without Adenauer has no force. Comment: Our comment and appraisal of the overall situation resulting from the de Gaulle visit will be contained in a separate telegram following the meetings on Monday. It is clear, however, that Erhard has won an important victory within his own party, which may have far-reaching effects, and that he has been reinforced in his determination to pursue European political unity on a broad basis—firmly within the ambit of Atlantic partnership with the U.S. The strong support of the President, as conveyed in his message, has helped Erhard greatly during this critical period. McGhee 63. Letter From the Ambassador to Germany (McGhee) to Secretary of State Rusk Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 1 GER W–US. Secret. Bonn, July 21, 1964. Dear Mr. Secretary: When the Attorney General was here recently,The Embassy reported on Robert Kennedy’s June 25 visit to Bonn in telegram 4867, June 26. (Ibid., POL 32–4 GER) both Erhard and Schroeder made a point of speaking to him about their interest in improving relations with Poland, and their hope that he might be able to put in a word for the Federal Republic while in Warsaw. They admitted that their difficulty with regard to the Poles lay in their inability to give assurances with respect to the Oder-Neisse frontier. The Chancellor said that the Germans could not hand over to the Poles the Oder-Neisse territory on a golden tray, since according to the Potsdam Agreement the 1937 frontiers were valid until the peace treaty was signed. The Chancellor added that it was implicit, however, that the new frontiers would not be the old frontiers. As can be gathered from the press accounts (which is all that we have received), the Attorney General has done yeoman’s work in Poland Kennedy visited Poland June 27–July 1. by his public references to the urgency of overcoming the division in Europe following from the division in Germany, and by intimating that in his opinion a way could be found to settle the frontier question satisfactorily. The Germans have been very grateful for this. It has been commented upon by the press, by officials to me personally, and by a number of high ecclesiastics who were at the Papal Nuncio’s reception recently. It has set me thinking—indeed crystallized a feeling that I have had for some time—that conceivably we might, through Foy Kohler, be able in Moscow to do something toward the same end. The question of whether we could do something—by quiet private talks, more or less directed towards planting a seed—is easier to answer than the question of what precisely we would put up to the Soviets. I have no illusions about the political and psychological difficulties which have brought about the impasse during the past 19 years. In essence the problem is whether there is anything which can be done which would lead Moscow to take a more friendly attitude toward Bonn. I am well aware, for example, of the obstacles here to any significant actions by the Germans on their frontier problem, such as a relinquishment of the hypothetical legal claim to the Oder-Neisse territories which is still stubbornly maintained by all elements in Germany. I can easily imagine the questions about this and other issues that would confront Foy during his discussions in Moscow. All the same, the more I reflect about it, the more I am convinced that these people are still victims of a false perspective, a perspective which may have had some validity a dozen years ago, but with each passing year becomes more unrealistic—and that they will in time see this. The Soviet leadership will undoubtedly continue to evaluate its relationships with “capitalist” countries in terms of Communist ideological and tactical considerations. This would presumably apply to the Federal Republic as well as to us. However, there have been indications in recent years that Khrushchev is willing to adopt a somewhat more flexible approach in his relations with certain key countries, without regard to whether these relations may seem entirely consistent with the long-run goal of establishing the Communist system throughout the world. As you know, the Germans, despite their stress on the continuing Communist menace and the argument made by many that the Soviet Union rather than Communist China remains the primary menace to the free world, are quite willing to consider ways and means of improving their relations with the Russians. Erhard, for example, continues to toy with the notion that German economic resources can somehow be brought to bear in a favorable way to move towards the solution of the reunification problem. I know that the Department does not consider this feasible, but perhaps there is some hope in a step-to-step approach which might at least lead to a bettering of relations between the Federal Republic and the Soviet Union and the end of mutual name-calling. What I have in mind is that by a process of very careful exploration, by Foy in Moscow and by me in Bonn, we might plant the useful idea that the Federal Republic is interested in improving its relations with the Soviet Union, is even prepared to pay a certain price for this and that consequently, at least in part, the admittedly sincere Soviet fears of the Federal Republic might bear reexamining. We might, first of all, attempt to persuade the Soviets that present-day Germany is not militaristic—nor in any way controlled by militarists. It might, for example, be suggested that the present agitation in the Federal Republic over its armed forces, precipitated by the Heye Report,Reference is to statements in the annual report of the Federal Parliament’s Defense Commissioner, retired Admiral Heye, criticizing “excessive elite consciousness” in the military. is a healthy sign of both popular and governmental concern. Propaganda aside, the new German army is not simply a latter-day model of the old imperial or Nazi army. It places special emphasis on the role of the individual in a “citizen” army. They have a special institute and training in this concept. All German forces are fully integrated into NATO, and their role is conceived of as purely defensive. We are in a position to vouch for the fact that the Federal Republic has no aggressive intentions and that there is neither governmental nor popular support for any adventuristic policy. It might also be pointed out that the Federal Republic continues to grow rapidly in economic prosperity and has become one of the foremost trading nations of the world. It is prepared to expand its trade relations, on a basis of mutual interest, with the countries of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. It might be noted that there are obvious limits to what can be done here, but that the German attitude appears reasonable and does provide a basis for improved relations (we would not at this point, of course, want to get into the subject of long-term credits). Another point which might be made is that the Federal Republic has renounced the use of force to effect any changes in national frontiers or demarcation lines. This, in our view, is a solid and lasting commitment, and propaganda implying that the Federal Republic is in the hands of militarists who are ready to spring at any moment is both unrealistic and self-defeating. Such propaganda cannot really be taken seriously as an estimate either of German capabilities or of German public opinion and the intentions of its leaders. It might be stressed that a very convincing proof of the real attitude of the Federal Government to Germany’s Nazi past is the fact that the Government has, in a spirit of contrition and reparation, sponsored programs involving the expenditure of many billions of marks in an effort to make restitution to victims of Nazi persecution. These programs continue up to the present and have recently been supplemented by new legislation. I will, of course, be willing to do anything in Bonn which might be useful to supplement what Foy does in Moscow. I should welcome receiving any thoughts or advice you may have on the feasibility of this approach. I have taken the liberty of sending a copy of this to Foy, with the suggestion that he comment directly to us both. With best regards, George C. McGhee 64. Telegram From the Mission in Berlin to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential. The telegram is summarized in McGhee, At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 150–152. Berlin, August 7, 1964, 3 p.m. 166. Eyes only for: the Secretary, Under Secretary, Assistant Secretary Tyler. From Ambassador McGhee. In my meeting yesterday with FonMin Schroeder at his vacation residence on the Island of Sylt, he asked that I convey to the Secretary his regret, not only because of the problems for the US but also for the added burdens for the Secretary personally, that have been created by the North Vietnamese attack on our naval vessels.Reference is to the Gulf of Tonkin incidents, August 2–4. He wanted to assure the Secretary of his strong personal support, as well as that of the German Government. In a long talk with the FonMin over much of the afternoon, he gave me some insight into his personal situation which might be of interest. Schroeder, who has since the de Gaulle visit of July 3–4 been under constant attack from the Gaullist wing of the CDU and CSU, advised that he had last week met with Chancellor Adenauer for two hours and had, he believed, made peace with him. Indeed, he feels that he is now in better graces with Adenauer than is Erhard, whom Adenauer has never ceased to disparage and undercut. Schroeder did not consider that any issue of importance remained between himself and Adenauer arising out of the latter’s views toward de Gaulle and France. He had assured Adenauer that he would, in his quest for European unity pursuant to the undertaking made during the de Gaulle visit, propose no development of supranational institutions—since he knows de Gaulle would never approve. When I queried him as to what he would propose he was not clear, but indicated some embellished form of the Fouchet Plan. Although he has not mentioned it to the Chancellor he is considering visiting the various capitals of the Six in order to determine what area of agreement for political unity exists before submitting his final proposals. Schroeder feels that although basically orientated towards de Gaulle and France, Adenauer by no means follows slavishly all of de Gaulle’s policies. Adenauer is, for example, still for the MLF. In Schroeder’s view it is, however, most unfortunate that Adenauer was chosen as head of the CDU party, which greatly complicated his and Erhard’s problems. Schroeder feels that the French will step up their campaign against the MLF, seeking to persuade the Germans that they can rely on the force de frappe. He asked me, in this connection, to provide him convincing answers to the impressive arguments the Gaullist elements in Germany are presently using in favor of the force de frappe. I will take this matter up separately with Jerry Smith. Schroeder expressed no particular concern over his relations with Erhard, although it is obvious that there is not very close coordination—perhaps not even much rapport—between the two. He had, for example, not been advised that the Chancellor had responded to the President’s letter.President Johnson and Chancellor Erhard exchanged communications over the Gulf of Tonkin incidents, August 4 and 6, respectively. Texts are in Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, Germany. This is but one of many examples that we find that the Chancellery, run by Minister Westrick who has a tendency to handle matters himself, operates to a very large extent in isolation from the FonOff. Calhoun 65. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Ambassador to Germany (McGhee)Source: Department of Stare, Central Files, POL 7 GER W–US. Secret. A copy was sent to Kohler. A memorandum attached to the source text states that the letter was drafted by Creel. Washington, August 13, 1964. Dear George: We have read with interest your letter of July 21 Document 63. setting forth certain suggestions as to what might be done to try to help improve relations between the Federal Republic and the Soviet Union. We have also noted your supplementary comment in Bonn’s 370 of July 29, and Foy Kohler’s observations on the subject in Moscow’s 364 of August 3.Neither printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–USSR) We definitely agree, of course, that an improvement in relations between the Federal Republic and the Soviet Union is a very desirable goal and something which, within the limits of our resources, we should continue discreetly to work for. An important part of the problem, as you suggest, is to try to correct some of the misconceptions and misimpressions which appear to exist in the minds of the Soviets about the true state of affairs in the Federal Republic. The Adzhubei visit may well have, as you indicate, served a useful purpose in this regard, and the same might be true of a Khrushchev visit to the Federal Republic should this materialize. As for what we can do ourselves in this area, I think there are certain limitations on our capabilities. I am impressed by the point made by Foy that in the final analysis the Soviets are not so much interested in what we might ourselves say or think about the Germans as they are in what the Germans say and do themselves. Furthermore, the extent of the Soviet commitment to Ulbricht & Co. will probably make it difficult for Moscow to move very far in the direction of conciliation with Bonn, even with Erhard rather than Adenauer as Chancellor. Nevertheless, I agree fully with you that this is a subject of great importance and that we should continue, in our contacts with the Soviets and Germans, to do what we can to help improve at least the atmospherics in FRG/Soviet relations. I feel sure, for example, that there will be opportunities for improvement in East/West relations to which the Federal Republic could contribute, through collaboration with us and by initiative of its own. I am happy to note that you and Foy will be getting together in the near future to talk, among other things, about the ideas set out in your July 21 letter. I shall await with interest the further views of you both. Thanks also for your letter of July 25Not printed. (Ibid.,POL 7 GER W–USSR) forwarding Von Hassel’s Tutzing speech. Sincerely, Dean 66. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–3 GER-POL. Confidential. Repeated to Prague, Moscow, Warsaw, Berlin, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Munich, Stuttgart, Dusseldorf, and Bremen. Bonn, August 14, 1964, 6 p.m. 590. Subj: The Oder-Neisse Line. Ref: Embtel 2432, Deptel 2026.Telegram 2432 from Bonn, January 11, summarized German positions on the Polish and Czech border issues. (Ibid.) In telegram 2026 to Bonn, January 20, the Department of State commented on the German positions. (Ibid.) The following represents our current thinking on the general question of Germany’s eastern boundary. We have benefited from a discussion on this subject during the past few days with Ambassador Kohler. The Dept’s study (Research Project No. 677 of April 1964)See footnote 6, Document 28. on the US position on the Oder-Neisse line is also most useful. We have read it closely and think it will be of continuing value. As a matter of historical interest, it might also be noted that President Kennedy, in his press conference of April 12, 1961,For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 258–264. reaffirmed the view that fixing of the German eastern border would have to await a peace treaty. In reviewing German developments on this matter since Embtel 2432 and Deptel 2026 in January, I think that events have supported the main conclusions of those messages, i.e. that Schroeder is trying to underplay the issue, that the German Govt will adhere to its position of not making unilateral concessions prior to a peace treaty (although there is no realistic expectation of Germany being able to negotiate more than marginal border adjustments and concessions), and that our best policy is to avoid public statements about the subject. At the same time, some political movements have occurred in this field, not all of it unfavorable. The past six months have in fact brought about two distinct but connected developments. The favorable development has been the increased recognition and public discussion, primarily in intellectual and student circles, of the probability that Germany will not regain her former eastern territories. We should not, however, overestimate the impact of this trend in terms of a change in the German position. In the absence of reunification, a real change might well take close to a generation to evolve. In addition, the govt has clarified (as much as it is apt to) its position on the 1938 Munich agreement by acknowledging its abrogation by Hitler, and by disclaiming any territorial designs on Czechoslovakia. The foregoing has not been an unmixed improvement, as it has set off a counteraction of expellee backlash. The extent of the latter is hard to judge, but its expression is harsh and loud. Minister Seebohm’s statements in Nuernberg were a good example. The Embassy has also reported such recent moves as the proposal for a Sudeten “march on Bonn,” warnings that the league of expellees is turning “soft,” and disgruntlement with de Gaulle’s position on the eastern frontier (Embassy’s A–292).Airgram A–292 from Bonn, August 6, reported on resentment against Erhard on the part of Sudeten Germans. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 13 GER W) Despite this reaction, however, the current attention to the eastern border problem is not in my judgment, a major or growing factor in German national life. With a close election in the offing, however, it could become, at least temporarily, a field of political rivalry which could adversely affect the growing German potential to influence the future course of events in Eastern Europe. Unfortunately, the problem posed by expellee unrest is most difficult for those German moderates who are our natural allies in trying to “defuse” it. Much of the animus of the current upswing, for instance, is directed against FonMin Schroeder, who has been suspect in expellee circles ever since June 28, 1963, when he delimited restoration of the right of self-determination “to our countrymen in the Soviet Zone.” Expellee activity cuts across all three parties; the expellee leaders (Rehs and Jaksch) of the SPD are as impervious to party discipline on this score as are intransigents (Neuwir) in the CSU. As for American policy, we can of course, hardly change our formal position on the Oder-Neisse line. It is now too deeply embedded, although the original ethnic and economic (foods and jobs) justification for our 1945 reserveDocumentation regarding the U.S. reserve is in Foreign Relations, 1945, The Conference at Potsdam, vol. I, pp. 744–745, and vol. II, pp. 208–215, 1491–1492. See also President Truman’s August 9 statement in Department of State Bulletin, August 12, 1945, pp. 210–211. about the line itself no longer obtains, there is in any event, little need for such a change, since our position is only procedural and does not bind us as to specific lines on a map. Although we might review the situation after the 1965 elections, there appears to be no room at the present for maneuver in this area. We can however, as we have since Secretary Marshall, give no new public impression that we envisage any specific territorial adjustments (nor should we deny this possibility). What I would propose to undertake, with suitable caution, is to spread the idea in responsive govt and party circles that a moratorium on discussion of this issue would be desirable in the 12-month period before the elections. Although expellee agitation could not be totally silenced, it would still be worthwhile to stimulate govt spokesmen and major party leaders to soft pedal, or so far as possible to bury it, the issue during the forthcoming campaign. The election atmosphere could easily exacerbate the issue. Although it is a matter of primarily minority interest, this minority could potentially supply the 5–10 percent vote shift that the SPD or CDU are competing for. Our line in achieving this might be as follows: 1) In explicit US statements, we would discuss reunification only in the context of the Zone. We would avoid any reference to or acceptance of the concepts of East and middle Germany. 2) We would avoid volunteering any public restatements of our formal position on the Oder-Neisse line. When queried we would express adherence to the Potsdam Agreement but in minimum terms and low key. 3) In private discussions: (A) We would note that the formal US position on the line is procedural (i.e. negotiating it finally in a peace settlement) rather than substantive, and that in fact we are committed to support some “accession (to Poland) of territory in the north and west.” (B) Try to create a general atmosphere of discouragement that the Germans can realistically gain territory. We would emphasize the improbability of any substantial German recouping in the area beyond present borders, since force is ruled out and it is unlikely to be achieved through a voluntary Polish surrender. Emphasize that neither we nor anyone else would ever be willing to fight for return of this territory. 4) In private conversations, we should urge on the Germans a moratorium on domestic discussion of the issue. 5) Finally, we should emphasize privately that continued agitation on this question is a drag on German reunification policy. In view of the continued close Soviet/GDR connections, the best possibilities now are in the direction of expanding German influence in East Europe, and isolating Ulbricht in his own camp. Implications that Germany aims at crippling Poland or Czechoslovakia can only tighten Soviet ties with these two nations, which together with Pankow bond, would thus continue to provide an extensive framework for continued Soviet predominance over East Europe. It is, however the retirement of frustration of this hegemony by gradual and natural processes, which can provide the only conceivable basis for eventual reunification. In advancing the foregoing, I would naturally be highly selective in conversation partners. There would be no suggestion of an official campaign, any press leaks of which could seriously backfire. In general we should try to be casual and conversational, and to the greatest degree possible endeavor to implant the idea in the other person in such way as to suggest that it accords with, or originated in, his own thinking. In spite of the sensitivity of the problem, it should be noted that there already exists a rudimentary awareness of the desirability of keeping the issue out of domestic politics, as evidenced by Brandt’s proposal, which was accepted by the other two parties, that a three-party position should be taken with this aim on the Munich Agreement. There are thus good chances that some responsible political figures would be receptive, and I recommend that we try the approach since any gains in this sense would be positive in terms of our overall German and European objectives. During his visit Ambassador Kohler inquired whether the Germans might be persuaded to offer the pledge that if they obtained reunification any future all-German govt would acquiesce in the present Eastern border in peace settlement. He pointed out such a move would permit a new relationship with Poland, and would focus energies and attention on reunification rather than the frontier question. I certainly agree that this would be the best interim solution, and it is furthermore likely, if any future German policy change occurs, that it would take just this form. There is, however no present party or governmental enthusiasm for the idea (which was first broached prominently in 1963) and it is too early to estimate the possibilities for such a step in 1966. Here again it becomes a question of quid-pro-quo. The Germans are reluctant to yield any bar-gaining power no matter how fractional, which conceivably could be of cumulative significance at a peace conference. McGhee 67. Letter From the Deputy Chief of Mission in Berlin (Calhoun) to Secretary of State Rusk Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL EUR E–EUR W. Confidential; Official-Informal. A copy was sent to McGhee. Berlin, September 4, 1964. Dear Mr. Secretary: You will recall that during your talk with Governing Mayor Willy Brandt in Washington last MaySee Document 40. he indicated that he would try to put on paper some of his thoughts regarding Western relations with the countries and peoples of Eastern Europe. Mayor Brandt mentioned this conversation to me shortly after his return from Washington and has subsequently said from time to time that he was working on the paper. Brandt has now forwarded this paper to me with a request that it be sent on to you and a copy retained by the Mission. I therefore enclose the original German textThe German text was not found. and the original and two copies of an English translation prepared by an officer in the Mission. The Governing Mayor said during our last conversation that he was not coming up with any new and startling ideas but that he hoped his thoughts might be useful to you. If there is any word that you would wish me to convey back to him, I shall of course be happy to do so. It was both pleasant and helpful for me to have a brief conversation with you in Washington during the day that I was there in early June.Apparently June 11–12 when Calhoun accompanied the Erhard party to Washington. I hope that there may be an occasion for a further meeting before too many months pass, although I realize that you are deeply immersed in many other more critical and urgent problems. Major General Franklin, the new US Commandant here, spoke with warmth and appreciation of his meeting with you and other high Department officials in Washington a few weeks ago.Not further identified. He has now taken over officially and seems to be getting his feet on the ground very rapidly. I am sure that our relations with him will be as friendly and mutually fruitful as they were with General Polk. With warm personal regards. Faithfully yours, Arch Calhoun Attachment No classification marking. The source text is marked “Translation.” Berlin, August 1964. RELATIONS WITH EASTERN EUROPEAN STATES AND PEOPLES I. In increasing measure, Western political thought proceeds from the premise that the Eastern European Communist states can no longer be regarded as mere satellites of the Soviet Union. The effect of the Soviet/Chinese controversies, and the process of economic and ideological differentiation (not directly related to the first) are being observed with great interest. Questions of communication with Eastern European states and peoples, of practical cooperation, and of appropriate political action, have begun to play a larger role. It may be assumed that the incipient union of free Europe, despite all difficulties and obstacles, has exercised a strong attraction, and that an all-European consciousness has survived or been revived in the peoples located between Germany and Russia. In his Lexington speech of May 23, 1964,For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1964, Book I, pp. 708–710. President Johnson spoke of an “all-European” perspective. President Kennedy told the Berlin students on June 26, 1963For text, see ibid.: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 526–529. that it was “not too early to think once again in all-European terms;” the “winds of change,” he said, are blowing across the Iron Curtain. The interests of French and British policy in this problem area are obvious. Thus, the French Foreign Minister observed on April 28, 1964 before the National Assembly that the countries of Eastern Europe had already made use of the Soviet/Chinese conflict in order to accelerate their already marked tendency towards emancipation. In his 1964 New Year’s broadcast,For text, Charles de Gaulle, Discours et Messages, vol. 4, pp. 159–160. General de Gaulle said that without engaging in illusions, one must be prepared for the day when in the Eastern European capitals the totalitarian Communist regime might undergo a gradual process of change. “Then perspectives would open up for all of Europe which would be in keeping with its means and capabilities.” On June 26, 1963 Lord Home declared in the House of LordsFor text, see House of Lords Debs., 5th series, vol. 251, cols. 277–292. that there were numerous indications for the beginnings of a new mood: “Country upon country in Eastern Europe begins to question the right of the Soviet Government to dictate its forms of economic development … No one can foretell the future with certainty, but there is evident a possible development which will have to be observed with the greatest care.” In its Bonn declaration of June 1, 1964,For text, see Europa Archiv, 1964, vol. 2, pp. 339–347. the Action Committee for the United States of Europe (Monnet Committee) advocated that “the beginnings of communication with the nations of Eastern Europe should be strengthened through realistic endeavors.” This, therefore, is the theme: For the immediate future it appears desirable and not unpromising to engage the Eastern European states in the largest possible volume of communications. II. It is in the Western interest to support the autonomy of the Eastern European nations and not to curtail their maneuverability. However, it would be grotesque if certain centrifugal tendencies in the Communist world were to evoke an erosion of Western cooperation—in other words, if—to paraphrase a statement of Bismarck—a new “nightmare of bilateral or even multilateral constellations” should develop in Europe between decaying power and interest blocs. Obviously it cannot be in the Western interest to permit illusions concerning the nature of the Eastern European regimes. On the other hand, it would be foolish to set ideological conditions as a price for communication. Western policy will have to concentrate on measures in the economic and cultural realm. It will have to treat any Eastern European state as a full partner, but it will also have to take into account the military and ideological ties maintained by such states. Over and above concrete forms of economic and cultural cooperation (which of necessity will have to remain limited, for the time being), it is of decisive importance to work toward good-neighborly relations. In this fashion evolutionary forces can be encouraged and furthered. National consciousness in the Eastern European states, and their striving for greater autonomy find expression in growing self-interest. This tendency must be taken into account and should not be curbed by unnecessary generalizations or inappropriate over-all propositions. Differentiation in development makes it necessary to evolve a different policy for each of the Eastern European countries. This aggravates further the known difficulties which beset efforts to achieve a coordinated Western position. However, it remains most desirable that the Western countries should agree to certain joint principles in their position vis-à-vis Eastern Europe, and that they should strengthen and systematize their exchange of information and experience. This should be done as effectively as possible and in a not particularly spectacular manner within the framework of existing European and Atlantic institutions. The Common Market has had a liberalizing effect on economic thinking in all Eastern Europe. Modest but purposeful progress on the road to greater European unity and Atlantic partnership—as proposed by the Monnet Committee—would strengthen this tendency. The regulations governing relations with third countries create a particular problem for the countries of the Common Market. A clarification of the political intentions of the EEC member-states is a prerequisite for closer relations with the Eastern European countries. A formal relationship with the Common Market is dependent also on the capabilities of the Eastern European states and, not least, upon the “cohesion” of the Soviet-led bloc. The West must demonstrate that it is working towards a framework of commercial policy in which also the national economies of the Eastern European peoples will be able to find a place. There are important reasons for allowing the countries of Eastern Europe to share in the liberalization resulting from the Kennedy Round. Objectionable political influences from the East would, of course, have to be avoided. Economic facts of life in the Communist realm, and conditions in the West make it difficult at present materially to increase East-West trade. In order to achieve a substantial increase, the West will have to be prepared to grant far-reaching economic and financial supports, and the East will have to be ready to undertake far-reaching liberalization measures. The time is not ripe for either condition. It might be useful to refer to the studies undertaken by the ECE in Geneva concerning questions of expanding East-West trade. This applies also to considerations concerning the question of introducing a multilateral payments and accounting system among the members of the ECE. With respect to efforts to develop bilateral trade relations, however, it remains true, even under changed conditions, that the West is at a disadvantage vis-à-vis countries with a government monopoly on trade, when on the Western side there is unbridled competition among states and business firms. It must be made clear over and over that the West is prepared, through practical cooperation, to promote economic progress and raise the standard of living for its own and for other peoples. This does not contradict the fact that the West must undertake no move which might jeopardize its security, and that it cannot consider unacceptable conditions. At present it no longer appears possible to find a unified solution for the problem of longterm credits. However, this remains an important problem. Trade with the Eastern European states is not an end in itself. It must be evaluated and reviewed on a continuing basis within the over-all framework of Western policy. Wherever possible, economic agreements should be coupled with cultural agreements (“the more information, the more intellectual communication”) and—whenever it appears indicated—with humanitarian arrangements. IV.There is no section III. The study and development of joint, major technical projects is of great psychological importance and, in the long run, also of concrete significance. In this field the self-interest of the Eastern European countries will have to be the starting point. In the first instance, consideration should be given to endeavors within the framework of an all-European power-economy, as, for example, the merger of supply lines (oil, electric power). These endeavors might lead to a delivery union (Lieferungsverband vielfaeltiger Form) and promote an awareness of European unity and over-all responsibility in line with the principle of balanced, mutual advantage. As regards the trends to be observed in this process, preliminary studies in various fields by the ECE would be useful. The Geneva declaration of September 16, 1950Not found. concerning construction of international main highways, to which nearly all Eastern European states subscribed, might serve as an example in the field of transport. At issue here are convincing possibilities for joint planning, with a view to future all-European transport needs which the EEC commission also emphasized in a paper of April 10, 1961: “Particularly in the field of transport, it will not be possible to solve certain questions exclusively within the framework of the Six.” The European Conference of Transport Ministers, of which Yugoslavia is already a member, would probably be an appropriate body for long-range planning. This is true also for the planning, construction, and improvement of waterways (Rhine-Main-Danube canal, Elbe traffic, Danube-Oder canal, and other connecting links). In this context, the Federal Republic of Germany will have to study whether or how it might participate in the settlement of questions concerning Danube shipping. ECE investigations concerning European specific questions, such as gas problems and water supply, water and air pollution should be utilized. The establishment of new, and the improvement of existing, connections in the civil aviation network are of increasing importance. (“What is possible between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. should be possible also between Western and Eastern Europe.”) V. Cultural agreements should be based on the principle of reciprocity. Under the special conditions obtaining in Germany, participation by responsible non-governmental agencies should also be considered. Films, particularly television films, are of special importance. Artistically valuable films from Poland and Czechoslovakia already have proven to be an important contribution to better understanding, where Germany is concerned. In general, cultural agreements should include as many old as well as new media as possible. The area of scientific exchange and cooperation could open up a wide field of bilateral and multilateral endeavors. Here one might argue persuasively: “If the Americans and the Russians can work together, why not the Europeans also?” If full reciprocity cannot be achieved, it is in the interest of the West in some areas also to make use of limited liberalization. For instance, it is desirable that the Eastern European countries should open their borders to visitors from the West, even if these countries are not prepared to permit movement in the opposite direction. Here, however, it is important that the Western perspective become clear and is not blurred. This means: As much cultural exchange as possible in both directions. This means further: We should do whatever lies in our power to open our borders also to the youth of the Eastern European states. Over and above the useful activity of travel bureaus, consideration could be given to promoting low-cost tourism with the cooperation of the pertinent institutions and organizations, and with self-administration for the exchange groups. This should not apply, however, to government-controlled propaganda trips. Furthermore, the agencies responsible for public health might consider an agreement concerning the mutual use of their facilities in spas and resort towns. A “European youth organization,” as proposed by the German Social Democrats would have to include, in whatever form, a youth exchange with Eastern European countries. Reference is made further to the proposal of German youth organizations to prepare a general youth festival. Special agencies of the United Nations (UNESCO ?) might assume sponsorship or lend assistance. The present study is not designed to present detailed proposals for economic, technical, scientific, and cultural cooperation. That will have to be the task of experts. Their work will have to be based in part on carefully developed knowledge of the wishes and concepts of the various Eastern European states. VI. Within this framework the position and treatment of the Soviet Zone of Germany—the so-called GDR—constitutes a special problem. It is a problem, in part, because Western policy in the German question (self-determination, non-recognition, safeguarding of the peace) must not be affected and jeopardized in this context. Secondly, the problem arises because the Ulbricht regime reacts, or, rather, must react, to developments in the Communist world in a manner which is diametrically opposed to the behavior of the Eastern European governments: Not more autonomy in relation to the Soviet Union, but rather additional evidence of “reliability.” Nevertheless, a German policy designed to wrest from the Ulbricht regime alleviations for the human beings affected by the division, and for the population in the Zone, is in keeping with the interests of the West. The Interzonal Trade between the two parts of Germany, based on Allied orders, must be viewed also in this context, in addition to its significance for Berlin access. The possibilities for economic and cultural communication with the Soviet Zone are primarily a German problem, but the need for consultation and agreement with the three Powers is self-evident. All in all, it may be assumed that more intensive communication between the Western and Eastern European peoples cannot and will not bypass the Zone. Already in preparing for this objective, we should consider how, for example, Soviet Zone youth might be brought into general youth events. In multilateral economic endeavors it is not necessary to forego a priori the possibility of including the Zone, in third place, for instance. The equal status desired by the Zone regime could be avoided by the (West) German side by making the Federal German contribution through private business firms or business associations. VII. A flexible policy designed to achieve a high degree of communication with Eastern Europe requires appropriate preparation of the Western peoples. It must be made clear that such a policy is neither weak nor illusory, but that it proceeds from changing realities and is designed to bring about a better future—the objectives which President Kennedy sketched out in his speech of July 4, 1962. The conviction must be reaffirmed that the free society possesses greater vigor and vitality. Furthermore, there can be no doubting the fact that the free peoples cannot find salvation in bilateralism but, rather, in a meaningful, integrated and organized community. On the basis of the so-called Jaksch Report, the German Bundestag resolved unanimously on June 14, 1961 “to make use of every opportunity to achieve a normalization of relations between the Federal Republic and the Eastern European states, without sacrificing vital German interests.” In his Government Declaration of October 28, 1963,October 18. The portions dealing with foreign policy are in Meissner, Die deutsche Ostpolitik, pp. 63–66. Professor Erhard observed: “Within the limits of its ability, the Federal Government is prepared to expand the economic exchange with these countries. In the same manner it welcomes increased cultural contacts.” In his New York speech of May 15, 1964,See footnote 7, Document 40. Willy Brandt urged: “Our wish to work together must be made visible also to the Eastern European peoples. It is time to recognize more clearly that Europe does not end at the Iron Curtain.” In the same speech Brandt said: “We should propose joint projects to the peoples of Eastern Europe and make them understand that we do not fear but that, on the contrary, we desire a rise in their living standard to a level comparable to ours. This accords also with the original idea of the Marshall Plan.” The Americans in particular have made clear the connection between European developments and the German question. In Berlin, Kennedy spoke about “the course leading to the re-unification of Germany and the restoration of Europe,” which would not be an easy one. Johnson said in his Lexington speech: “It is our belief that the wise and skillful development of relations with the nations of Eastern Europe can bring closer the day on which Germany will be reunified.” It is in the joint interest of the West to guard against the stabilization of conditions which, by promoting the recognition of more than one state in Germany, would prejudice efforts to achieve an all-German peace treaty. This accounts in part also for the problems inherent in developing German trade missions in the Eastern European countries. In the present interim phase we must insist, above all, that the ties between Berlin and the Federal Republic are respected. The differences which have become manifest in this area (between the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, and in the intermediate positions taken by the Eastern European governments) are of significance. From the German point of view it is most important that agreements concerning economic and technical matters should be accompanied by an amelioration of human distress. It is obvious that on the German side, concern about the fate of German nationals and ethnic groups in Eastern Europe must play a special role. The question of family reunion also plays a significant role for emigrants and expellees of other nationalities. In conclusion, the main issues at present appear to be: 1. In awareness of existing differences of opinion, to bring about a consensus of Western views on these questions, in order to find a basis for joint policy; 2. To inform the governments and peoples of the Eastern European countries about the prerequisites and possibilities for fruitful cooperation; 3. To convince public opinion in our countries that even minor progress can help to influence in a positive sense structural change in an important field of world politics and to advance, in the long run, the restoration of Europe. 68. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Secret; Exdis. Bonn, September 4, 1964, 8 p.m. 870. Personal for the Secretary. Of all of the potential points of friction or armed conflict between ourselves and the Soviets in connection with Berlin, the one that has concerned me most in recent months has been that of our helicopter flights over East Berlin. I was, accordingly, particularly interested in the telegram which the Dept sent to General Lemnitzer on the subject on August 29 giving approval for continuation of such flights (rptd to Bonn as Deptel 609)Dated August 29. (Ibid., POL 38–9) Because I consider this matter one of great sensitivity, and particularly since I do not know the extent of your recent personal involvement in this problem, I am taking the liberty of raising it with you directly. You are aware of the general background of these flights. They were made only infrequently before erection of the Wall, but since then have been regularly programmed at four to six-week intervals. The Soviets have been objecting to the flights for some time, and they are now slowly escalating their threats. They have long referred to the helicopters as “air space violators.” On June 24, the Soviets implied that the flight might turn into something like “the incidents of January and March”.Reference is to the two aircraft shot down by Soviet fighters over East Germany; see Documents 8, 19, 20, and 21. On August 3, the Soviet BASC controller said that “alert fighters will take the necessary measures.” There is no evidence that fighters were in fact lofted on this occasion, but we now have certain indications (concerning which I am asking CIA to brief you),No record of the briefing was found. that actual countermeasures might be taken against the next flight, possibly up to an attempt to shoot the helicopter down. After looking into this matter very carefully, I have concluded that our justifications for continuing these flights, in order of priority, are (1) the old Berlin maxim that you never give up a right which you have successfully exercised; and (2) that through air photography from the helicopter, we are able to ascertain information about potential jamming devices which could threaten our utilization of our navigational aids. It is obviously important to maintain the right of unhindered flight within the Berlin Control Zone under 10,000 feet. We have interpreted the right to include helicopter flights over East Berlin, and having established this interpretation through practice, I would agree with the Dept that we should continue the flights. I believe, however, that we should not equate the principle of maintaining unhindered utilization of the Berlin Control Zone with the maintenance of a particular frequency or pattern of helicopter flights. I have been briefed on the intelligence justification for the helicopter flights, but am not fully convinced that the information could not be obtained by more conventional methods, i.e. by photography from normal aircraft. At any rate, due to the relatively static situation re Soviet installations, I do not think that the helicopter flights are required for this purpose as frequently as they now occur. The interval, in my judgment, could be increased to several months. General Polk, the Commandant in Berlin who has just been relieved, is strongly in favor of a continuation of these flights at their present schedule, as are presumably other high military officials here who would be concerned, i.e. General Freeman, USAREUR, and General Disosway, USAFE. They can be expected to oppose any change in the present schedule. Indeed, the message to which I referred (Deptel 609) indicates that the Dept itself, after a recent interchange on this subject, has decided against any change. Although I am not often more cautious in Berlin matters than the Dept, I question whether the advantage to be achieved, during the period intervening before the American elections on November 3, is worth the risk of being openly challenged by the Soviets with the possibility of their shooting down our helicopter. The shooting down of a US helicopter would inevitably result in a most serious confrontation between ourselves and the Soviets, with the possibility of further escalation. Since this would result from quite a different situation from that which occurred when our T–39 and RB–66 aircraft were off course and technically in the wrong we would be committed by prestige and principle to react strongly. The Commandant in Berlin is expected to recommend a regular flight within the next few days. According to my instructions, he must first submit his plan to me for approval as to suitability of the timing in terms of the broader German and world situation. Any decision for an extended delay, however, in light of the DOD and Departmental interest should, I believe, be made in Washington. In the circumstances, I recommend that the next flight be deferred until mid-winter. This will not give up the right, nor for that matter will it dispose of the problem, since the Soviets could shoot the aircraft down as easily then as now. Postponement would, however, preclude disturbance during a delicate period in our country, and could presumably be done without any serious derogation of our intelligence interests. I believe this matter is of sufficient importance that you may wish to discuss it with Secretary McNamara, and possibly even the President. Until hearing from you, I will in any event delay approval of any further flights. McGhee 69. Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Berlin, vol. 3. Secret. Washington, September 23, 1964. McGB— SUBJECT Berlin Pass AgreementOn September 23, the West German Cabinet approved an agreement between the Government of the City of West Berlin and East German authorities that permitted West Berliners to visit relatives in East Berlin. You and the President should know that tomorrow in Berlin the long negotiated pass agreement will be signed. In addition to the signing ceremonies, there will be a series of public statements—by the West Berlin Senat, the Government of the Federal Republic, the Allied Commandants, as well as an Erhard-Brandt exchange announcing support for the agreement, and defining the political implications of the action to limit distorted Communist claims of political significance. The agreement will make it possible for West Berliners to visit relatives in East Germany four times a year—the last part of October, between Christmas and New Year, at Easter time, and at Whitsuntide. In reaching agreement, the Socialist dominated West Berlin government had to haggle, not only with the Communist East Germans, but also with the Christian Democratic government of the Federal Republic. At times the dialogue with the Federal Government was more difficult than with the Communists. In fact, the Federal Government only yielded at the very end to avoid bearing the onus for collapsed negotiations. This morning, after much soul-searching, the Federal Cabinet found enough in the agreement to justify endorsing it. With that step, the way was open for signing ceremonies tomorrow and first visits in mid-October. On balance, the West will gain more from this agreement than the Communists. The Communists will get themselves a safety valve to lessen tensions in East Germany; the West will be able to reestablish relations with the isolated East German population and build bridges to it. DK 70. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Confidential. Repeated to Berlin, London, Paris, Moscow, CINCEUR, USAREUR, USELMLO, USNMR, and SHAPE. Bonn, October 6, 1964, 3 p.m. 1340. Subj: Berlin’s relationship to the FRG. Although we have dealt with the German proposal to hold a Cabinet meeting in Berlin on an essentially ad hoc basis,In telegram 1197 from Bonn, September 26, McGhee reported that Carstens had informed him of the decision of the Erhard Cabinet to hold a meeting in Berlin on September 30. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 5) the British, French, and we agree that this action is likely to be only the first in a series of attempts to modify certain aspects of the existing relationship between the FedRep and Berlin. FonOff representatives have on occasion frankly stated that during the present period when significant progress toward reunification is not possible, the best that can be done is to strengthen further the ties between Berlin and Bonn. This one way, in German eyes, to prevent solidification of the status quo and to counter Soviet and East German contentions that West Berlin is a third German political entity alongside the FRG and the GDR. In an electoral year, steps toward a closer integration of Berlin in the FRG will be good politics for the govt. It will help to steal some of the thunder which opposition leader Willy Brandt can still command as Governing Mayor of Berlin, and at the same time move in a direction consistent with the German theory that Berlin is legally a part of the FedRep, subject only to certain reservations imposed by the Western Occupying Powers. It was perhaps inevitable, once Soviet pressures on Berlin had relaxed, that the Germans would attempt to resume the process of creeping amalgamation of the Western sectors with the FedRep which had characterized the years between 1950 and 1958. During this period, the US generally advocated a permissive policy on the part of the Occupying Powers and was prepared to accept virtual de facto absorption of Berlin within the Bonn system. We have learned since, through our experience during the crisis years 1958–63, that the consistently formalistic and restrictive French approach, while extreme, had certain advantages. Apart from preserving the purity of our legal position vis-à-vis the Soviets, it tended to maintain a system of Western occupation control which could provide the operative basis for the kind of modus vivendi on Berlin which seems to have emerged after nearly five years of intense diplomatic crisis and struggle over the future of the city. The Dept will recall that our differences with the FedRep over the status of Berlin last came to a head in the autumn of 1961, during Ambassadorial Group discussions following the submission of a German memorandum on the subject (reproduced as BQD 53).Not found. It became clear at the time that the opposing views could not be reconciled on the level of logical argument and that both sides could agree to disagree. It was felt better to let the issue remain dormant, since the FedRep was not then pressing for any specific actions which challenged the Allied view. It has proved feasible to operate quite successfully on the basis of this tacit agreement to disagree. We doubt if the FRG would wish at this point to push so far as to destroy this modus vivendi. The German objective is to achieve the maximum show of unity with Berlin without destroying the position of the Allies in Berlin—particularly of the US—on which they know the security of the city depends. The Allied requirements, on the other hand, would seem to depend on legal substance and power rather than show. Our primary interest is to prevent jeopardy to our de jure position or doubts as to our intention to remain in, and defend, Berlin. It is within the context of these differing but not necessarily incompatible German and Allied objectives that we believe the three Occupying Powers should examine with some care the various courses of action open to the FedGovt and prepare considered responses so that they will not be caught by surprise when specific proposals are made. There are broadly two categories of action which the FedRep could propose: 1. Further demonstrative gestures such as Cabinet meetings, which have no basic effect on the legal position of Berlin but which highlight the activities of the FedGovt in the city. A proposal for the resumption of Bundestag meetings in Berlin would fall in this category. 2. Changes which could be interpreted as affecting the legal structure of relationships between the FedRep and Berlin. In this category would fall proposals for the direct election of Bundestag members from Berlin, giving free voting rights to Berlin members of the Bundestag, or the substitution of a Globalgesetz procedure for the existing Mantelgesetz procedure for the adoption of Federal legislation in Berlin. At this point, we are inclined to think that we could swallow occasional Bundestag meetings in Berlin. We would have greater difficulty in accepting proposals requiring formal changes in the existing structure of law. In the latter category, we could perhaps most easily permit direct election of Bundestag members from Berlin who would continue without voting rights in the Bundestag. In any event we believe we should think our way carefully to a final position, and would as a start appreciate receiving Berlin’s comments.Not found. McGhee 71. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–1 GER. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Moscow, Paris, London, and Berlin. Bonn, October 15, 1964, 3 p.m. 1481. Ref: Moscow’s 980 to Dept.Dated October 5. (Ibid., POL 38–6) 1. In Moscow’s 980 to the Dept Amb Kohler has raised important questions concerning relations between Moscow, Bonn and Washington as they revolve around Berlin and the German question. In Embtel 1340, Document 70. which pouched to Moscow unfortunately crossed Moscow’s reftel, we also alluded to the FRG’s policy with regard to Berlin. Although we raise virtually the same issue as Amb Kohler, our tentative conclusions are somewhat different. We will therefore, in the present message, comment further in order to respond to Amb Kohler and to cover the problem in fuller scope. 2. Neither the FRG nor any one of the three major political parties in West Germany regards acceptance or solidification of the present status quo in Central Europe as desirable. They do not, however, wish to bring about a change by force, indeed, they are so committed. We have, for example, seen in time of crisis in Berlin that they are prepared to move in the direction of accepting the status quo if under serious pressure from the Soviets. When, however, this pressure is no longer present or the Soviet threat less credible—a condition which they now consider to exist and estimate as likely to prevail for at least several years—the Germans revert to their underlying desire for progress on the German question. As noted in Embtel 1340, it is this desire which motivates the FRG in seeking a greater show of unity with Berlin through Cabinet meetings and the like. 3. It is significant that the steps which the FRG has taken or contemplates taking are not new. The recent Bundesversammlung meeting in Berlin should in fairness be accepted entirely as indicative of a trend, since it has never met anyplace except Berlin and its timing is determined by the Constitution. Certain other possible steps, moreover, e.g. Bundestag meetings, automatic application of Federal legislation, direct election of Bundestag representatives, were either in practice or had been sought before the Berlin crisis began in 1958. The Allies, under certain conditions, had actually approved the enactment of a “Globalgesetz” providing for the general application of Federal legislation. What we are now witnessing is, in our judgment, merely a resurfacing on the German side of a strong current temporarily forced underground by the prolonged Berlin crisis. 4. We believe that the desire for progress toward reunification will be a continuing and basic motivation of German foreign policy regardless of which party is in power. This is another way of saying that the FRG will not under foreseeable circumstances be prepared to cooperate in accepting or solidifying the status quo in Berlin or East Germany. Whether the United States or all three of the Western Occupying Powers are satisfied with the present state of affairs is therefore in the long run not likely to be the determining factor. We will, of course, continue to seek specifically U.S. objectives, and for various reasons we shall not always be able to support the Germans. But we must recognize that, given the overall position of the FRG in the Western Alliance, there are very definite practical limits to the possibility of our forcing or persuading the Germans to accept a policy which is repugnant to them. 5. A factor which we need always to keep in mind is the complexity and delicacy of the problem which the FRG faces in seeking to bring East and West Germans closer together in the interest of preserving the concept of their nationhood. There have been a whole series of examples recently: the pass agreement, the Hof Bridge settlement, rail path negotiations, etc. In each case the East German objective quite clearly has been to achieve either increased recognition or at least a public indication that the FRG is prepared to come to terms with the GDR as a lasting if unattractive reality. The West Germans must in each case decide to what extent they should accept East German terms in pursuing precisely the contrary objective of bringing German reunification closer. While recognizing that the FRG has frequently been inept in dealing with the East Germans, we should nevertheless not forget the difficulty of the problem they face. No one at the present time can be absolutely sure whether the pass agreement, for example, is a step more toward reunification or toward recognition of the GDR. Given this situation, it would hardly be surprising if the FRG should seek some extra insurance on at least part of its position by forward steps in its relations with West Berlin, where it is dealing with friends rather than foes. 6. The Germans are looking for such insurance elsewhere as well. The Berlin clause is a major attraction of the trade agreements with Eastern European countries and which the GDR may eventually seek with Communist China. The Chancellor will certainly seek some recognition of the special ties between Berlin and the FRG during Khrushchev’s visit. This is the most they hope for, and I have found no real optimism among those who determine German policy on the prospects of achieving even this limited aim. State Secretary Carstens has told me that he does not expect a Soviet concession on the Berlin clause question. 7. Contrary to the impression conveyed by Ambassador Groepper in Moscow, Erhard has consistently cautioned in both public and private statements against any great expectations from the talks with Khrushchev. There is, it is true, among the business community and some politicians a tendency to think that it will be a salutary and revealing experience for Khrushchev to see at first hand the economic strength and political stability of the FedRep. To this extent there is perhaps wishful thinking in the FRG. But even among these circles we have seen no recent signs of a belief that reunification can be bought through economic concessions. I am convinced that those Germans who will be planning the Khrushchev visit—Schroeder, Westrick, Carstens, and Krapf—have no illusions about a changed Soviet attitude on the German question as a result of the Khrushchev visit. The FonOff is closely following statements emanating from Moscow such as the Pravda editorial cited in the reftel. The Chief of the FonOff Soviet section (Kutscher) quoted to us the Suslov GDR anniversary speech as an indication of how little could be expected from Khrushchev’s journey to Bonn. The Schwirkmann case has also hardly contributed to an optimistic atmosphere in the FRG. 8. With specific relation to Berlin, although I have not always found the FRG’s timing or method of presentation of proposed actions as adroit as it could be, I believe we would encounter serious problems if we failed to understand the strong current of German thinking which their Berlin policy represents. Equally serious problems would of course be encountered on the side of the Allies if the Germans should ever come to underestimate the importance of maintaining the Allied position in Berlin inviolable. I am optimistic that the present satisfactory understanding on this question can be maintained, however it may require some re-thinking—and some yielding on less important issues—on the part of the Allies. It was the objective of Embtel 1340 to analyze where it might be possible for the Allies to “give.” We may have to restrain the FRG at times, but we cannot on the other hand allow the Soviets or the East Germans the right of defining what is or is not provocative. It is often the East Germans or the Soviets themselves (as in their military parade in East Berlin on the 15th anniversary of the GDR) who commit the most flagrant provocations. 9. I would like particularly to emphasize that if we give the impression of pushing the Germans to accept the status quo in Germany—whether this be related to Berlin or to broader aspects of the question, we shall be in for trouble. The Germans do not have any real hope at the present of achieving a satisfactory solution of the German problem within the foreseeable future. They do, however, hope and expect that their Western Allies, particularly the United States, will stand with them in keeping the issue alive and probing for modest progress, even though the effort may be futile. In some respects, and this involves both the personal practice of FonMin Schroeder and the general posture of the Erhard govt, the appearance of effort may be more important than the substance of real progress. But the appearance of effort there must be, especially in an election year, if the govt is to preserve the allegiance of its supporters. For this reason, we could not expect that they could accept the Soviet-GDR Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Assistance of June 12, 1964 without a strong reaction. 10. I have not detected any significant “Rapallo” thinking in the Fed-Rep. This includes the Ruhr industrialists with whom I maintain fairly close contact. The alternative to the Atlantic partnership usually cited by those in Germany who are looking for an alternative is not an arrangement with Moscow but closer cooperation with France. Any suspicion that the US is not prepared to support German reunification encourages, illogical though it seems, Gaullist thinking in the FedRep. In the future this could transform itself into a nationalist approach conducive to Rapallo thinking. This is only likely to arise, however, if we fail to take fully into account the depth of German feeling against acceptance or solidification of the status quo. McGhee 72. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Exdis. McGhee commented on relations with Adenauer in At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 157–159. Bonn, November 17, 1964, 7 p.m. 1950. Secretary and Under Secretary. During the past week a number of reports of former Chancellor Adenauer’s current views have come to our attention, each confirming that he has moved towards virtually complete acceptance of the de Gaulle position, combined with an anti-American bias and a suspicion of US motives which lead him almost automatically to oppose what he conceives to be the position of the US. The report to this effect contained in Embtel 1924,Telegram 1924 from Bonn, November 17, reported on Henry Kissinger’s meeting with Adenauer. (Ibid., POL 3 EUR W) based on a conversation between Adenauer and Henry Kissinger, while stark, is probably reasonably accurate. In a conversation with FonMin Schroeder yesterday at luncheon, he commented on how difficult Adenauer was making life for him by his repeated attacks. There was now a complete lack of rapport between himself and Adenauer. He could no longer talk with Adenauer about serious subjects. It may be of interest that Schroeder confided that he had not intended to attack Adenauer recently, as it appeared in the article he had given to a Mainz journalist just prior to Adenauer’s visit to Paris. The journalist had not only released the article prematurely, before rather than after Adenauer’s visit, but attributed background comment on Adenauer directly to the FonMin, contrary to their understanding. The FonMin felt, however, that on balance he had gained more through acquiring the reputation of a fighter, than he had lost through the mishap. Former High Commissioner McCloy, who has been here as head of the American delegation to the fourth German-American conference, reports that, while he was in Berlin, Von Eckhardt (for many years the former Chancellor’s chief information officer and now Federal plenipotentiary to Berlin) stated that Adenauer was hopelessly anti-American. He had been this way since his first visit to the United States during the Kennedy administration. He had developed a distrust for President Kennedy and certain of his advisers. According to Von Eckhardt, Adenauer felt that he had not been treated with proper respect during his visit. It was shortly after his visit to the US, while he was still under the influence of his disenchantment with the United States, that he had made his famous visit to France Adenauer visited France December 9, 1961. See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XIV, pp. 659–660, for Adenauer’s report to Kennedy on the meeting. and had been taken in completely by President de Gaulle. Adenauer was further alienated by President Kennedy’s policy of seeking limited agreements with the Soviets, which he strongly opposed. In the meeting which he had with Adenauer later in Bonn, McCloy reports that Adenauer labeled Schroeder a dunce (Dummkopf) and then went on to apply the same epithet to all Germans. He told McCloy that Americans simply didn't understand de Gaulle or what was happening in Europe. The great danger, which the US did not comprehend, was that de Gaulle might be forced to go to the Soviets. He referred admiringly to de Gaulle’s library, giving the impression that his respect for de Gaulle derives from the fact that he represents the best in French culture and civilization, to which Americans presumably do not measure up. He expressed doubt that the US was capable of world leadership. Adenauer further felt, he stressed to McCloy, that the US would not defend Germany in a pinch. The recent NATO Fallex exercise had convinced him that we would not use nuclear weapons against the Soviets until it was too late. During a luncheon conversation yesterday with McCloy and the DCM, Minister for Special Tasks Krone expressed somewhat similar suspicions of US nuclear policy. (He had personally participated in the Fallex exercise, and is probably the source of Adenauer’s information on this subject.) Krone protested the suggestion that the Chancellor and those who agreed with him were anti-American or that their pro-French policies were the main threat to the preservation of valuable postwar institutions. Krone did say that, if he were forced to make a choice, and he hoped it would never come to that, he would have to choose the US in preference to France. Comment: Our policy here has been to keep in contact with Adenauer. I have had him to lunch privately at the Residence every three or four months, on which occasions he is relatively congenial and responsive. He attended our last Fourth of July reception. However, we are somewhat at a loss to know how to go about changing his attitude toward the US. He has apparently reconstructed in his own mind the entire course of postwar history to justify his own policies and those of President de Gaulle as against those of the United States. He still professes his basic friendship for the US, as he did to a group of US participants in the German-American conference yesterday. He probably thinks he is being sincere in this, although in practice his friendship amounts to little more than an empty formula. On any given point of conflict he will always end up defending the French position. At this stage of his life Adenauer seems to be most affected by his strong positive or negative reactions to personalities, as well as by the quality of flattery he receives and by the cultural level of the environment which is provided him. We obviously cannot seem to reward him on this point, especially just after he has received the French honors of the Academy. One possibility which I should like to think about and comment on further is that he be invited to give a series of lectures at a leading American university, perhaps Harvard, from which he received an honorary degree. This might provide the kind of environment that would favorably impress him—and an opportunity for organized flattery and blandishments. Without wishing to exaggerate Adenauer’s influence, he is nevertheless a serious problem for us. When the controversies he stirs up are brought out into the open, either in the Fraktion or before the public, he often has to backtrack. All the same, he can still get a group of some 60 or so Deputies in the CDU to follow him on most issues. He is fortified by public opinion polls which show him as “the best Chancellor Germany has had,” and will continue to have a disruptive effect on the efforts of the Erhard government to move ahead on policies which we favor.In telegram 1964 from Bonn, November 18, McGhee suggested again that Adenauer be invited to lecture at Harvard University as a means of dealing with his anti-American bias, adding, “The effort may be basically hopeless … but it might still be worth a try. His capacity to do damage to our interests here is still considerable.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 GER W) McGhee 73. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Finn and approved in S, U, and G on December 1. The meeting was held in the Under Secretary’s Conference Room. The source text is marked “Part 2 of 3.” Washington, November 23, 1964, 2:30 p.m. SUBJECT Initiative to Soviets on German Question PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary The Under Secretary Mr. William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary,EUR Ambassador George C. McGhee Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson Mr. James L. Greenfield, Assistant Secretary, P Mr. Alfred Puhan, Director, GER Mr. Richard B. Finn, Deputy Director,GER Germany Foreign Minister Schroeder Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein Dr. Hans Ruete, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Mr. Georg von Lilienfeld, Minister, German Embassy Dr. Ulrich Scheske, NATO Desk Officer Dr. Klaus Simon, Personal Aide Dr. Jeorg Kastl, Press Secretary of the Foreign Ministry Mr. Wolfgang Behrends, First Secretary After a discussion of East-West relations,A memorandum of this part of the conversation is ibid., Central Files, POL 15 USSR. the Secretary said that he had talked to UK Foreign Secretary Gordon Walker about a quadripartite meeting in Paris before the NATO meeting.See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 43. The Secretary said that he had suggested that such a meeting would be useful in order to exchange views about the Soviet Union. A meeting of the four Foreign Ministers might be preceded by a meeting of the experts. Foreign Minister Schroeder said he thought this a very good idea. A preliminary meeting on December 12 would be very useful. However, in the view of the Federal Republic, an effective presentation of the need for German reunification depends on the United States. The US is the only power which can really accomplish anything with the Soviet Union. It is of the greatest significance, therefore, that the position of the US on the German unification question be kept constantly before the people. The Foreign Minister said that it would be most useful if the President could mention this subject in his State of the Union speech. He noted that President Kennedy had discussed the need for German reunification in one of his first speeches and this had been useful. The Foreign Minister observed that he had no doubt about US policy but felt it important to restate it. Mr. Schroeder commented that there are recurring rumors in Europe about negotiations between the US and the Soviet Union. One rumor has it that 140 letters have been exchanged. It is important to counter these rumors. The Foreign Minister said that he would comment on this subject in his talk to the National Press Club on November 24. He would make the point that US talks with the Soviet Union are an essential prerequisite for peace in central Europe. The Foreign Minister reiterated that the Soviets also have an interest in a solution of the German question, and therefore the Federal Republic is happy to see this subject taken up in official statements. It is important to prevent poisonous mistrust of US intentions from arising in Germany. Secretary Rusk said that the matter of an initiative will doubtless come up at the quadripartite meeting. The Secretary said that he would like to make a distinction between substance and procedure. He commented that our problem was really more on procedure than substance. The Secretary said that the US would be reluctant to take the initiative, then look around and ask where is everybody. He commented that it had taken three years to reduce the Berlin crisis and that this had been done without any French participation. Foreign Minister Schroeder said that this matter had not been recently discussed with the French but that the French have always argued that the time has not yet come to approach the Soviets. The French say that it is up to the Soviets to reduce tension. Foreign Minister Schroeder agreed that it is important to have Four-Power unanimity and that this would impress the Soviets even if no agreement is worked out with them. The Foreign Minister referred to the proposal made some months ago in Moscow by then UK Foreign Secretary Butler. Butler visited the Soviet Union July 27–August 1. This proposal (for establishment of a Four-Power council) had met with a complete Soviet rejection. The Foreign Minister wondered, however, whether this proposal should not be pursued further. He commented that the Berlin situation is calm now but that the problems remain—the Four-Power responsibilities, access, etc. Perhaps some procedural progress could be made. The Foreign Minister reiterated that the new Soviet regime has not been sounded out on this matter and that the Soviets have an interest in a solution. The Foreign Minister said that he thought it would be useful to renew the Butler proposal and that in any case this should be discussed in Paris. The Foreign Minister commented that a US clarification of its position on the German question has an important influence on the uncommitted powers, as well as on France and the UK. Secretary Rusk said that he was not so much concerned that the Soviets would say no to an Allied proposal, but rather that they might say maybe and then ask questions where there were no agreed answers. The Foreign Minister said that if a Four-Power approach should be made to the Soviets, there should be previous preparation, perhaps in the Ambassadorial Group. He thought that questions like this should be discussed at the forthcoming talks in Paris. The Foreign Minister stressed the desirability of sounding out the reaction of the new Soviet leaders on the German question and commented that it should not be necessary to have a complete program at the very start. Secretary Rusk suggested that other initiatives for separate stages of action might be considered. For example humanitarian commissions under Four-Power auspices might be considered. The Foreign Minister said that the FRG is prepared to return to these ideas. He commented that such ideas were well worth exploration. Secretary Rusk asked about Ulbricht’s position in the GDR. Mr. Schroeder replied that there was a lot of talk about changes in the GDR. He commented, however, that Ulbricht is a “superprefect” who can adjust to every change that comes along. The Foreign Minister commented that Willi Stoph is a different type: he is a German Communist rather than an emigre Communist like Ulbricht. It may be possible that future leaders of the Soviet Zone will feel more like Germans and less like Communists. The Foreign Minister also commented that East German youth do not appear to react favorably to all the pressure put on them by the Zone authorities, and that proximity of West Germany also has an effect in reducing the attractiveness of Communism. In any discussions with the Soviets about reunification, Foreign Minister Schroeder thought it important to stress that the Soviets would not lose the economic benefits they now derive from the Soviet Zone. It should be made clear to the Soviets that the type of agreement the West has in mind would take into account the economic interest of the Soviet Union. Any Western program on the German question must be flexible. The Foreign Minister commented that there are independent trends developing in the West as in the East, and that similar factors are at work on both sides. 74. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Akalovsky on December 16. The meeting was held at the Soviet Embassy. The source text is marked “Part IV of VII.” Gromyko also met with President Johnson; a memorandum of conversation of their meeting, which included a brief discussion of German issues, is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XIV. Washington, December 9, 1964, 1 p.m. SUBJECT Germany PARTICIPANTS U.S. The Secretary Ambassador Thompson Ambassador Kohler Mr. Tyler Mr. Akalovsky U.S.S.R. Foreign Minister Gromyko Deputy Foreign Minister Semenov Ambassador Dobrynin Mr. Smirnovskiy, Chief, American Section, Foreign Ministry Mr. Gromyko stated the Soviet Government attached the greatest importance to a German peace settlement. Until that problem was resolved, the situation in Europe would be explosive and could not be characterized as normal. This matter had been discussed between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. on a number of earlier occasions, and on some points the positions of the two sides had become closer. It would be only logical to continue discussion of those points. The Soviet Union was prepared to continue discussing all the points which had been discussed earlier, with a view to arriving at a conclusion. The Secretary had mentioned that he wished to consult the allies.The discussion took place on December 2 during a meeting at the Soviet Mission to the United Nations. A memorandum of conversation is in Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. The Soviet Union recognized that this was only natural and in fact it also consulted its own allies. However, the Soviet Union believed that discussion could be continued now on the same basis as before. Mr. Gromyko said that one of the crucial points was that of the presence of Western forces in West Berlin. In earlier discussions, the Secretary had raised the question of access, and the Soviet Union had stated its views on this matter. The discussion on that point had not been conclusive at that time, and the Soviet Union was prepared to continue it. If this matter were dealt with, both sides would put forward their considerations and perhaps there would be a greater chance for understanding. Of course, the questions discussed in earlier conversations were interrelated; they were those of Western forces and access, borders, non-aggression pact, GDR sovereignty, subversive activities in West Berlin, denuclearization of the two Germanys. The Secretary said there were two roads along which we could proceed. First, we could seek a final and historically satisfactory solution of the German problem, a solution linked to major steps in organizing European security and leading to a final conclusion of security arrangements by NATO and Warsaw Pact countries. Such a solution would open vast prospects for disarmament in Europe and North America, for trade, etc. As far as we were concerned, we did not see how a final conclusion could be arrived at without the wishes of the people concerned being taken into account. Of course, we were talking about a vast number of people living in Europe and North America, and we did not believe that the choice of 70 million Germans should be an obstacle to the development of our relations. Next year would mark the 20th anniversary of the end of World War II, and perhaps that would be a good time for a bold and radical solution. On the other hand, perhaps the time for such a solution was not yet ripe and we should see what could be done for the ordinary people living in the immediate area. Some progress in this respect had already been made. There had been some improvement in the relations between the FRG and East Germany, and some steps had been taken to alleviate the humanitarian aspects of the situation. For example, the U.S. was happy about the pass arrangements which had been recently developed. Also, trade between West Germany and Eastern Europe, including East Germany, was increasing steadily and importantly. Perhaps some additional, important steps could be made to make the life of the people in the area more secure. However, the Secretary said, he wished to reiterate that he did not see—and this was not a cold war view—any permanent solution unless the German people had their full say in it. Unless these elementary considerations were taken into account, there would always be a chance for manipulation and for a demagogue calling for a course no one wanted to see the Germans take. The Secretary said he would see his colleagues in Paris and get in touch with the Soviet side thereafter. He wanted to ask Mr. Gromyko directly whether in his view there was a possibility of having a solution based on the judgment of the people living in West Germany and East Germany. Mr. Gromyko responded that he did not think the term “judgment” was the right one in this context, although he knew what the Secretary meant. The fact was that there were two German States. The division between them was most profound and almost impossible to overcome. Thus, the only possibility of working for reunification was through disarming the two German States and through mutual understanding between them. Mr. Gromyko said he wished to reiterate Soviet readiness to include in any understanding among the Great Powers a provision stating that the Great Powers would make efforts to facilitate reunification. However, the method of reunification should in no way be imposed from the outside. The Secretary said there was no question of imposition of a solution “from the outside”. The U.S. was ready to accept the choice made by the German people. If the Germans should express the desire to remain as they were now, that would be all right with us. Mr. Gromyko commented the Secretary was proposing to mix the Germans together and to ask them to make their choice according to U.S. concepts. The Soviet Union’s view was that there were two German States. The Secretary noted the Soviet Union claimed that only the leaders of the East German Government could speak for the people, whereas we said the people should have their say. He also said he was not quite sure what Mr. Gromyko meant when he said that we wanted to mix the Germans. Mr. Gromyko said he meant that the Germans would be mixed at the polls. The Secretary said he had in mind separate polls. Mr. Gromyko rejoined that the people in East Germany had already voted. In any event, the idea advanced by the Secretary was unrealistic and smelled of mothballs. What we should do was to let the two German States get together and discuss their problems. Commenting that he realized Mr. Gromyko was not a spokesman for East Germany, the Secretary wondered what Mr. Gromyko would say if he were the East German representative and if he, the Secretary, were the West German representative in such discussions. Mr. Gromyko responded that he would say the two countries should improve their relations, and that this was the only way. He said he knew the U.S. and West Germany did not like it, but the fact was that this was the only realistic way. Sooner or later, East Germany would be recognized, for it was a fact that there existed two separate and sovereign German States. The Secretary stressed that if there were to be a psychologically stable solution, the German people living in the two parts of Germany would have to have their say in it. If there were separate votes in West Germany and East Germany and if the people in East Germany did not wish reunification, we would respect their desires, just as a decision in the opposite direction should be respected. Mr. Gromyko repeated that this was subject to an understanding between the two German States. He said he wished to stress that the further the rearmament of West Germany and the plans for the MLF went, the more difficult a solution would be. No solution was possible without disarmament. Indeed, even for an understanding between the two German States, it was necessary for them to be in the same position, i.e., both of them should be disarmed. He said many opportunities had been lost in the past, and what had been possible yesterday was not possible today. The Secretary said he wished to comment on the relationship between the German problem and disarmament. If one asked broadly for what purpose the U.S. and U.S.S.R. were maintaining such huge forces today, the reply was that they did so because of each other. But then, what would the U.S. and U.S.S.R. have to fight about? As we saw it, it was almost only over the German problem. Thus, if the German problem were resolved, the way towards disarmament would be open. The Secretary recalled his earlier remark to Mr. Gromyko that Stalin had made a tactical error; had Stalin maintained a quiet repose for 10 years after World War II, there would be no need for discussing disarmament today, because the U.S. would have disarmed on its own. The reason we had rearmed was the German problem. The Secretary pointed out the solution of the German problem and disarmament could go together. He said he knew that this was not as simple as it might sound; however, he was convinced that nothing would be so far reaching as the solution of the German problem, with the consequential dramatic possibilities for disarmament. The Secretary also recalled his earlier remark to Mr. Gromyko that the U.S. had not been the Soviet Union’s ally in World War II against the Nazis in order to fight a third world war over the German question. That would be foolish. The U.S. was concerned about Germany, but we were confident that the present generation in Germany and its leaders wanted peace. Yet nobody could know what was going to happen in 20 or 30 years from now either in West Germany or East Germany. Mr. Gromyko said he agreed that reunification was not possible without disarmament. However, it was not possible without an understanding between the two German States either. Nevertheless, he believed that some aspects of a German peace settlement could be resolved without disarmament in Europe and without denuclearizing the two German States. The Secretary observed that from Mr. Gromyko’s remarks, he gathered that the Soviet Union wanted the solution of those aspects to be conditioned on the acceptance of its views on the main problems, such as recognition of the division of the German people. Mr. Gromyko said that East Germany should be recognized, reiterating that a solution of the German problem could be possible only on the basis of improved relations between the two German States. If one proceeded on the basis of hate and of all kinds of incidents, it was impossible to think of a solution of the German problem. The Secretary pointed out that as far as we were concerned, the idea of reunification was subject to the will of the German people. Mr. Gromyko had spoken of the differences between the social systems in the two parts of Germany. We did not know whether that factor would influence the decision of the German people. Personally, the Secretary said, he thought that the national feelings would prevail just as he was sure they would prevail if the Soviet Union or the United States were in a similar situation. Mr. Gromyko inquired whether discussion of the German problem could be resumed after the Secretary’s return from Paris. The Secretary replied that he didn't know and that he would be in touch with Mr. Gromyko after he had discussed this matter with his colleagues in Paris.See Document 78. 75. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to Secretary of State Rusk Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Washington, December 13, 1964. SUBJECT Initiative on the German Problem At the experts meeting on December twelfth,A memorandum of conversation is ibid. I gave a fairly full account of your discussions with Gromyko,See Document 74. including hint of Soviet willingness to resume dialogue with us. The only thing I omitted was the indication that the Soviet intention was to begin with troop presence in West Berlin and the question of access. There was general agreement that the Soviets would not be receptive to any proposals on the German problem which were couched in traditional terms of Four Power responsibility for reunification based on self-determination, all-German elections, etc. The German side nevertheless put forward three versions of an “initiative,” the texts of which are attached.Not found with the source text. Number one calls for the establishment of a “Standing Council of the Four Powers for Germany,” in order to reduce tensions and achieve reunification. This is the type of broad language which would run the risks you have already foreseen in the unlikely event the Soviets indicated initial acceptance and then asked what should be discussed. The other two were generally agreed by the British, French and ourselves to be completely unacceptable to the Soviets because of the references to elections, reunification and self-determination. The German side maintains that some form of initiative is necessary to maintain the faith of East and West Germans in eventual reunification and that a proposal to the Soviets along the lines submitted would accomplish this result even though it would be rejected by the Soviets. After considerable discussion, the following four points were agreed to be suitable for discussion at the Quadripartite dinner Monday night: 1. Is an initiative along the lines proposed by the Germans desirable even though we recognize that the Soviets would promptly reject it? Comment: We feel that it would be a mistake to submit such obviously unacceptable proposals to the Soviets. The contents of the more detailed proposals would be rejected and we feel that the rejection and almost inevitable accompanying counterblast would make the proposals appear as a routine exercise having no serious objective and, as such, might have negative repercussions on East German opinion. Moreover, it would do nothing to improve Western relations with the Soviets on the Berlin problem; on the contrary, owing to the generally accepted view that Russian policy in Germany is immobilized by internal considerations, it could harden existing Soviet policy on Germany. However, if the Germans insist on the necessity of making a proposal to the Soviets, the language of any proposal would have to be worked out carefully—and should be remitted to the Ambassadorial Group in Washington. 2. Should the proposal be reworded to try to make the establishment of Four Power machinery acceptable to the Soviets, by omitting reference to reunification, and assigning it some such task as handling current points of friction with the thought it might eventually gradually work into dealing with more substantive problems? Comment: What the British apparently have in mind is to build on a small base—possibly the current Soviet moves to get together in Berlin. Such machinery could start with consideration of day-to-day problems in Berlin and then gradually spread its umbrella over more important matters such as humanitarian problems, trade and economic matters, and, after a substantial period of time, political problems leading to unification. This is such vague proposal that it should be considered in more detail at a later time by the Ambassadorial Group. 3. Should Western substantive positions on the German problem and European Security be reexamined? Comment: All four Western powers agree that the Soviet internal situation rules out Soviet acceptance of any new Western substantive proposals. At the same time, the Soviet proposals for reactivating a Quadripartite dialogue in Berlin (or at least in Western Berlin) suggests the Soviets wish to open the door by a crack. We feel we should do nothing to discourage the Soviets in this direction, particularly if it turns out that the Soviets are willing to re-emphasize Quadripartite responsibility for Berlin as a whole. We see no need for re-examination. 4. Timing of any initiative. Comment: It is interesting to note that even the Germans, although pushing the idea of an “initiative” doggedly, are not in a particular rush to do anything. They recognize the aura of political uncertainty now prevailing in the East and they note the Moscow meeting of Communist leaders just scheduled for March first. We will also need to define clearly what we are proposing to negotiate before we agree to a proposal to negotiate. Thus it is unlikely that we will have anything before mid-March or April. The question could also put to Schroeder whether it would not be wise to await further Soviet response to the query which the Germans have put to the Russians whether the projected visit to the FRG will be picked up by the new Kremlin leadership. It might be argued that no new German initiative should be undertaken until after the international meeting of Communist parties has taken place (the latest information is that a preparatory meeting will convene on March first although no information about place, participants, or terms of reference is now known). The French are likely to cite the current MLF negotiations as another reason for delay. 76. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Drafted by Spiers on December 15 and approved in S and G on January 19, 1965. The meeting was held at the Chancery. The source text is marked “Part III of III.” Paris, December 14, 1964, 5 p.m. US/MC/8 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary of State Ambassador Thompson, G Mr. Tyler, EUR Mr. Spiers, EUR/RPM Germany Foreign Minister Schroeder Ambassador Grewe, NATO PermRep Mr. Scheske, Foreign Office Mr. Rute, Foreign Office Mr. Kusterer (Interpreter) SUBJECT Germany and Berlin Foreign Minister Schroeder said that he had been disappointed with Saturday’s Quadripartite discussions.December 12; see Document 75. While he recognized that Butler and Rusk had both informally raised the idea of a Four-Power body on Germany with Gromyko, there was no reason not to approach the Soviets more formally with the idea. He recognized the chance of acceptance was practically nil. However, this was not a criterion. The question for Germany is, would such a reminder of Four Power responsibility be useful? His answer was yes. It would counter the ever repeated Soviet thesis that the problem of Germany is for the two Germanys to settle. It was an urgent German requirement that this be put forth officially and jointly to the Soviets. He did not feel that this should depend on the prior working out of a complete plan on Germany and the security problem. The latter would be difficult and take at least 6–12 months. The French would not cooperate at this point. But this does not make impossible a move such as Germany now wished. If the Soviets show interest in the idea then Western talks can proceed, and it is not necessary to answer all the possible questions ahead of time. He personally could see no risk in making such a move. If the Soviets do not accept the proposal there would be no harm in having made it. However, there is harm if nothing is done. “My very serious and frank request to the United States is to be cooperative in this project.” There is a much bigger risk in Germany and for international public opinion if discussions continue as at present with the Soviets on marginal subjects. (He noted he had no objection to these discussions if they did not touch on vital German interests.) The Secretary asked why it would take 6–12 months to agree on answers to questions which might be put to us in negotiations with the Soviets. Schroeder said that he was speaking about coming to an agreement on a complete and detailed plan for European security which would settle the status of Germany, the problem of alliances, defense, etc. This would take even more than a year if it could be done at all. Trying it could only have a negative effect among the allies without changing the actual international situation one bit. Development of such a plan was completely out of the question as far as France was concerned and maybe even for the UK and US. Nothing could be worked out which was realistic in terms of acceptability to the Soviets. That is why Germany favors the most modest starting point: an appeal to Four Power responsibility. Let the Soviets reject this. The West would have put up a proper reminder and German public opinion would gain the necessary impression of Four Power desire to deal with Germany as a whole. Such a move could be made very soon, within 4–6 weeks. Ambassador Thompson noted that timing was a problem of some moment. The new Soviet Government was working out new lines of policy which could be unfavorably influenced by a Western initiative of this nature. Schroeder disagreed, noting that the reaction of the new Soviet Government can be anticipated. They will not need to think very much before reacting. In the meantime, we would have the reminder of Four Power responsibility and we can await the changes in the international situation which are required before a realistic plan can be developed. Since such an appeal would be within the “framework of the Western thesis,” there should be no far-reaching consequences. The Secretary noted his understanding that it would be advantageous to German public opinion in the pre-election period to talk generally about reunification, and that there would be disadvantages in talking about frontiers, arms control or security guarantees. The trouble is that discussions with the Soviets cannot be so limited. President Johnson will ask him what the Soviet reaction will be to any course of action we recommend. The Soviets may make counterproposals or ask questions, “a, b, c and d.” Are we ready to deal with these on an allied basis? We are not now prepared to deal with the consequences of what we may initiate. Schroeder said he thought there is an answer to these observations. The high probability is that the Soviets will reject an appeal. On the other hand, there is nothing they could say which we would not know how to answer. Unless there is something sensationally new in favor of the West from the Soviets, we have answers to all possible Soviet questions. These have all been agreed in the past year. What Germany wants is nothing more than repeating the Western position in some suitably diplomatic form, such as a Three-Power note containing a proposal to the Soviets. Ambassador Thompson asked if it were really in the interest of the German public to court an abrupt Soviet rejection. He was surprised at Schroeder’s view that this would be helpful. Schroeder agreed that it would be necessary to discuss the precise formula to be used. It may not be necessary to refer explicitly to “reunification.” We could talk in terms of a Four-Power body to deal with “Germany as a whole.” The FRG was extremely grateful for the President’s Georgetown policy speechFor text of the December 3 address, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, Book II, pp. 1632–1635. but we now need to make a visible attempt to bring about discussion with the other side. He said that if the US were forthcoming, the French and British would come along. That is why he strongly hoped to be able to rely on U.S. support. 77. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 6. Secret; Nodis. Drafted and approved by Rusk. Washington, December 18, 1964, 1:19 p.m. 773. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. In view of Bonn’s 2324Dated December 17. (Ibid.) I want you to get a little personal view of the core of the problem as it appeared at our quadripartite dinner on the subject of an initiative on German unification. The big question the other three had to examine was whether the German attitude toward an initiative was serious from an international point of view or was merely a somewhat empty international gesture designed to meet the internal political requirements of the present government in Germany. Quite frankly, I had the impression that during the period before the election the Germans wanted to be talking about reunification but were adamantly opposed to talking about the inevitable accompanying questions such as frontiers, security arrangements in Europe, disarmament and such other issues as would inevitably arise in discussing unification. From my point of view there was another issue involving particularly France. In 1961–62 I spent almost two years talking with the Russians to ascertain whether there was any basis for negotiation and at times found myself almost alone because of the French attitude. If there is to be a public diplomatic initiative, I want to be sure that the French mean it and are prepared to stay on board; else I should be looking around and asking “where is everybody.” As I have just told you I will be seeing Gromyko on Saturday and will try to find out whether they have any interest in informal four-power talks on the German question, without agenda, in order to explore whether some progress might be made. I shall keep you informed and would want you to keep in prompt touch with Schroeder so that he will feel that we are trying to work as closely with him as possible. Ball 78. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Akalovsky on December 21 and cleared in S on December 30. The meeting was held at the Secretary’s suite in the Waldorf Towers. The source text is marked “Part III of IV.” New York, December 19, 1964, 1 p.m. SecDel/MC/46 SUBJECT Germany and Berlin PARTICIPANTS U.S. The Secretary Ambassador Stevenson Ambassador Thompson Mr. Akalovsky U.S.S.R. Foreign Minister Gromyko Deputy Foreign Minister Semenov Ambassador Dobrynin Ambassador Fedorenko Mr. Sukhodrev The Secretary recalled Mr. Gromyko’s remark to the PresidentSee footnote 1, Document 74. that he did not exclude the possibility of new elements in the Soviet position. He wondered whether there was anything Mr. Gromyko could say now. Mr. Gromyko confirmed he had made such a remark to the President with respect to Western forces in West Berlin. However, no exchange of views on the problem was now taking place. Indeed, on the basis of the Secretary’s remarks on the German question, he did not see much prospect for progress. The Secretary had been referring to such matters as unification, disarmament, etc., and it was difficult to imagine movement on that basis. The Secretary pointed out that the three governments on the Western side were necessarily involved in the German problem. As a result of World War II, the U.S., the U.K., and France have specific responsibilities and rights. It would be difficult to have discussions on a bilateral basis because we did not know what new elements the Soviet Union had in mind and also because we did not know whether we could deliver anything that might be agreed upon in the absence of the other parties concerned. In any event, there was a range of matters on which further movement should be possible. We were pleased with the Christmas pass arrangement and perhaps the four parties could sit down informally and see what could be done to move further in that direction. Of course, our approaches to the German problem were different, but perhaps it would be useful to discuss, without any agenda, the whole range of questions involved in it. The Secretary said he would advise against such discussions as could produce crises, of which we had had enough already. He also pointed out that he was not proposing anything formally. He had not been instructed to do so, but he thought perhaps it would be useful to look at the whole range of questions and see where progress could be made. The Secretary said he could not make any formal proposal to this effect until he knew Mr. Gromyko’s reaction. Mr. Gromyko said the Soviet Union was ready to enter into discussions, but he wished to stress that to tie reunification, disarmament, and other problems of that magnitude into one knot was unrealistic, and it would be difficult to have discussions on that basis. Discussions should take place on a realistic basis and the Soviet Union believed that there were possibilities for understanding on some of the points discussed earlier. The Soviet Union had come to this conclusion on the basis of previous talks, but to have talks on a new basis would be difficult. The Soviet Union was prepared to have discussions, but what would be their purpose? The Secretary said that to take the least, perhaps progress could be made in the humanitarian area, such as reunion of families, expansion of cultural exchanges, etc. Frankly, he did not believe that such discussions would lead to a final solution of the German problem. However, some progress could still be made. Mr. Gromyko suggested that humanitarian aspects could be worked out and agreed upon between the two Germanies, as had already been done in certain areas. However, such understandings did not move us towards the solution of serious problems which still remained unsettled. The Secretary wondered what level Mr. Gromyko had in mind in suggesting bilateral discussions. He personally would be quite busy over the next several weeks in connection with preparations for the President’s State of the Union message and other matters. Did Mr. Gromyko have in mind our Ambassadors or perhaps some other level? Mr. Gromyko said the U.S. should inform the Soviet side when it was ready to start discussions. We had two capitals and perhaps discussions could rotate between them. The Soviet Union was prepared to have discussions on a realistic basis at any time, and it was up to the U.S. to decide when. The problem of European security was very important to the Soviet Union; it concerned the Soviet Union’s own security as well as that of its allies. 79. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 6. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Bonn, January 5, 1965, 7 p.m. 2484. Pass to the White House for the President. Subject: Meeting with Chancellor Erhard. 1. Message from the President. I saw Chancellor Erhard this morning at 9, just before he went into a Cabinet meeting scheduled for 9:30. I advised Erhard that I had just returned from the US where I had seen President Johnson at his Ranch.According to President Johnson’s Daily Diary, he met with McGhee at the LBJ Ranch from 10:45 a.m. to 11:15 a.m. on December 30, 1964. The two men also talked by long distance telephone on January 3 when McGhee called from Middleburg, Virginia. (Ibid.) No record of either conversation was found. The President had asked me to extend his warm greetings to the Chancellor. He had recalled his very satisfactory meeting with the Chancellor at the Ranch and had asked me to tell the Chancellor that he looked forward to a return visit with him in Bonn. The President had also reaffirmed his continued interest in German reunification, and had asked me to point out to the Chancellor the reference he proposed to make to this in his State of the Union Message.For text of the State of the Union address, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, pp. 1–9. The Chancellor expressed appreciation for the President’s greetings and statements. The President’s presence in Europe was badly needed. There had been many bilateral visits in Europe, i.e., he was visiting both de Gaulle and Wilson soon.January 19–20. However, only a visit by the President could serve to ease the “tensions and difficulties” that now exist in Europe. He welcomed the President’s statement on a European visit as contained in his State of the Union Message. 2. Reunification. Since today’s Cabinet meeting had been called mainly to discuss the alleged change in US policy regarding an initiative toward reunification arising out of the “backgrounder” held in Washington on December 30,The text of the Secretary’s comments was transmitted to the Embassy in telegram 1876 to Bonn, December 31, 1964. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER) I dealt next with this subject. I explained that there was no change in US policy or tactics towards an initiative on reunification. What had been stated in the backgrounder conformed to what the Secretary of State had told FonMin Schroeder during his recent visit to WashingtonSee Document 73.—indeed, what he had been saying in all discussions on this subject for many months. It is not a question of our desire to seek reunification by all feasible means, but what could be expected to be accomplished by a particular initiative at this time. I referred to the references to reunification in the President’s Georgetown speech and in his State of the Union message. I gave orally from the verbatim text of the backgrounder the statements made as to the importance of a solution of the German problem. In the light of his experience, however, the Secretary was convinced [that]before a serious initiative could be undertaken, answers on an agreed Four-Power basis must be found to certain questions which the Soviets might raise. This did not mean answers to all questions at the outset, but at least enough so as not to be caught off balance by the Soviets. I pointed out that the US, through a series of discussions by President Kennedy, President Johnson, and Secretary Rusk with Soviet FonMin Gromyko, as well as by our Ambassadors in Moscow, had been pushing for an opening for an initiative almost continuously since 1961. The most recent discussions in this series had been held as recently as early December, between the Secretary and the President, and Gromyko.See Document 74 and footnote 1 thereto. Both had probed deeply with Gromyko, however, Gromyko had made it clear that he had no desire to talk about reunification—only subjects such as Western troops in West Berlin, security of the Soviet bloc, borders, non-aggression pact, thin-out, denuclearization of Germany, and sovereignty of the GDR—subjects which the Germans and we had no desire to speak about. I was sure that the Germans did not have in mind a mere propaganda effort, i.e. the floating of a proposal which would immediately be shot down in front of the German people. Such a maneuver would be so patently transparent that it would unquestionably create an adverse popular reaction. The Chancellor confirmed that this was not what the German Government had in mind. He referred to reports that we had, in the backgrounder, inferred that we did not wish to support the present CDU government politically through the making of an initiative. I said that no such inference had been given. I recalled to the Chancellor the fact that in the Four-Power discussions preceding the recent NAC meeting,See Documents 75 and 77. the US and Britain had agreed to the strongest statement on a reunification initiative that had yet been considered by the Four, only to have it turned down by the French. The Chancellor asked why in our judgment the French had turned it down. I replied that it appeared to have been the result of a momentary reaction by the French FonMin to the position the Germans had taken in the NAC on the MLF. McGhee’s response appears to have been based on the summary report in circular telegram 1152, December 20; see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 66. As evidence of the sincerity of our desire to see reunification pushed ahead, the Secretary had authorized me to propose to the FonMin, which I had already done in a preliminary way last evening: 1) that Four-Power discussions as envisaged in the agreement which was under discussion in Paris be resumed, if acceptable to the other three, in Bonn by the Bonn Group. 2) that Schroeder himself join the Secretary, the French FonMin, and the British FonSec when they gather in New York for the UN meeting, for further discussions on the initiative. I emphasized that nothing should be said publicly about those proposals since agreement had not been obtained from the British and French. However, if the Germans agreed we would undertake to obtain their approval. 3. MLF. The Chancellor asked the significance of the announced abandonment of the MLF organization within the State Department.Reference is to a James Reston article in The New York Times, December 21, 1964. What was the American attitude toward the MLF? Do we think there is any chance of getting the French to participate? Will we proceed without the French? Using guidance contained in NSAM nr 322, Dept Circular 1158,For text, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 65. I advised the Chancellor that we have not lost interest in the MLF. We, the Germans, and certain others had developed a position on the MLF, concerning which the British and others had raised certain questions. Since we seek a solution to the question of nuclear responsibility within the Alliance on as broad a basis as possible, we are willing to abandon our initial position in moving toward a broader consensus, which we hope will come out of the meeting planned this month between the interested nations. In arriving at this consensus we do not wish to assert pressures or create deadlines. We insist that any arrangement take care of the legitimate interests of Germany, as well as those of the other European states involved. Our position toward the French, I continued, was that we did not wish to do anything directed against them and wished to advise them fully of what we proposed to do. If they are not willing to participate now, we wished to leave the door open for them in the future. Although we do not expect them to join, we have some basis to hope that they will in the end acquiesce in whatever arrangement is made. When the force de frappe is operational the French have indicated that they will be willing to coordinate in some way its planning and targeting. 4. Bloc credits. The Chancellor said with some feeling that he had once had hopes that the Germans could make a contribution to their relations with the Soviets and to reunification by offering large-scale assistance to the Soviets in return for political concessions. This was now no longer “politically realistic,” since Germany’s allies were offering credits to the Soviets. I replied that I assumed he did not include the US Government, which has not offered such credits. Minister Westrick indicated, however, that there was a possibility that the American firms supplying East Germany with a synthetic fiber plant might offer credits on a private basis. I said that I had seen no evidence to this effect, however, I would look into the matter and advise them. I pointed out that US law, as well as government policy, prevented the granting of such credits. 5. Review of policy. The Chancellor said that he wished to discuss with me further, when there was more time, what he termed as a “balance sheet,” which he could use in his forthcoming discussions with de Gaulle and Wilson. He would, for example, like to discuss further the question of the MLF. He thought it significant that de Gaulle had now postponed his press conference until after the Chancellor’s visit. His implication was that de Gaulle was thereby putting pressure on him to be more accommodating during his visit. Comment: I saw the Chancellor immediately upon his return from a vacation at Tegern See, to which he will return for three more days on Thursday. He had had only a few moments to be briefed by Westrick, however, he appeared quite relaxed about the reunification initiative issue which has been boiling in the German press. I believe that what I told him will enable him to cope with the questions raised in his Cabinet meeting. I also believe that the government will now feel itself in a position to take action to dampen down press discussion of alleged changes in US policy on reunification. Federal press spokesman Von Hase will be holding a press conference later today. I will myself hold separate backgrounders with both the German and American press. What is not yet clear is how Erhard and Schroeder will themselves come through this latest flurry. Apart from some SPD murmurings about the lack of an imaginative government approach, the Chancellor and his FonMin have so far escaped much direct criticism because of concentration on US policy. The next phase might, however, bring some shift of emphasis to the inadequacies of Bonn policy which have brought about the present situation. In connection with the Chancellor’s suggestion for a discussion leading to the creation of a “balance sheet” for his forthcoming meetings, the Embassy will put forward to the Department suggestions as to the positions we should take on the various outstanding issues. The Chancellor was particularly heartened by the indication given in the President’s State of the Union Message that he would be visiting Europe soon. McGhee 80. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 6. Secret. Drafted by Puhan and approved in S on January 21. The meeting was held in the Secretary’s office. A memorandum of the portion of the conversation covering MLF issues is ibid. Washington, January 7, 1965, 12:30 p.m. SUBJECT German Ambassador’s Call on the Secretary Part 1 of 2—German Reunification PARTICIPANTS Germans Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein, German Embassy Minister Georg von Lilienfeld, German Embassy Mr. Berndt von Staden, Counselor, German Embassy Americans The Secretary Assistant Secretary William R. Tyler,EUR Mr. Alfred Puhan, Director, GER Ambassador Knappstein said he was calling at his own initiative. He stated that he had two questions. The first was what do you consider we four do next on the German question? He said there was a strong and growing feeling regarding the reunification question in Germany. He cited an article by Zehrer in Die Welt entitled “The German Disquiet”. According to the Ambassador this urge for reunification was becoming more and more a trauma. The feeling regarding reunification was no longer entirely rational, but approaching a state of hysteria. The Ambassador said he felt personally that after twenty years of frustration, there might be hot-heads who would lead demonstrations. He said that this brought terrible pressure on the government. The upcoming elections had also to be kept in mind. At the same time, according to the Ambassador, there was greater recognition on the part of the Germans that they would not get something for nothing. He spoke of a certain readiness to consider other matters in connection with the reunification question, mentioning the territorial and boundary questions. The Ambassador said this growing readiness to consider other questions was, of course, not to be confused with concessions. The Ambassador thought this is what the Secretary had in mind when he gave his backgrounder at the end of the year. The Ambassador said that the recent blow the Germans had suffered on the reunification initiative was actually one of two blows, the other one being what he called the change on MLF policy, from the old MLF to a combination of MLF/ANF. He said confidentially that this change had resulted in a storm in the Cabinet against Foreign Minister Schroeder and that he had been reproached for pursuing a policy already buried by the Americans. The Ambassador’s second question, therefore, was what do you envisage on the MLF? The Secretary, referring to growing German anxieties, said that one can perhaps understand sensitivities without conceding they were justified. He added that we were growing sensitive about growing sensitivities in Germany. He said that we must understand that sensitivities create counter-sensitivities. The Secretary said that on the reunification question, only the United States in the West had followed a clear, simple and persistent policy over the years. He pointed out that he had raised the German question in every serious conversation he had had with the Russians on any subject. He said that these attempts on his part to keep the question alive with the Russians had been made at least twice a year. The Secretary said that there were two problems in this connection which bothered him. The first was that if we are to take an initiative, we must be serious about it. We cannot rely on a negative response from the Russians. We must be prepared for a Russian counter-suggestion. If the Russians seriously suggest that we get our troops out of Berlin, we would immediately have the crisis of 1958 with the concomitant expense of billions of dollars and tremendous expenditure of time and effort. The Secretary emphasized that we must be prepared to face the alternatives and the Four must be together on this. He reminded the Ambassador that he had been through this before. He reiterated that if we take an international step, we must be prepared for the consequences. The Secretary said that his second observation on this subject was that reunification was very complex, having many parts. The most obvious problem related to reunification is the frontier question. The Secretary added you are really talking about a peace treaty when you are talking about reunification. The Secretary said he had told Foreign Minister Schroeder that it was easy for him to envisage the first statement made by each of the participants at a reunification negotiation, but what he did not see as clearly were the second speeches on the second day. The Secretary said that he had had the impression during recent months that what the Germans wished to discuss was reunification in its narrowest sense, and that they had been reluctant to face the questions of frontiers, security arrangements and disarmament, elements which were inseparably linked. The Secretary said that he would suggest for the immediate future that Chancellor Erhard, during his visit with de Gaulle, make sure that he have a private, serious and extended discussion with the General on the subject of reunification. The Secretary added that he was making this recommendation against the background of his own conversations with General de Gaulle. The Secretary said that although he had not mentioned this to the British and French, he would see a point in having Schroeder come to New York some time during the United Nations General Assembly after Chancellor Erhard’s talk with de Gaulle, and possibly meet with him and the British and French for further discussion of the subject. The Secretary said that Ambassador McGhee had mentioned this to Chancellor Erhard. The Secretary said that he was interested in the Ambassador’s observation, that there was now a readiness to look at substantive questions related to reunification. The Ambassador repeated his belief that readiness is growing to discuss such topics. He referred in this connection to a recent speech by CDU Parliamentarian Gradl. He added that the difficulty was not reduced by discussion of the question by political parties in Germany during an election year. The Ambassador thought that CDU Parliamentary leader Barzel would discuss this subject when he visited the United States. The Secretary said he had not had the opportunity to tell Foreign Minister Schroeder in Paris that questions raised by the Secretary with the Foreign Minister were really aimed at someone else. He reiterated the danger that if we joined in an initiative which provides the pretext for the USSR to return to its 1961 position, we would have to fly troops in and spend billions of dollars. He added that we were ready to do this, to face such an eventuality, but unless there was complete solidarity on the part of the Four the American people would question the Secretary’s actions in bringing about a repeat of the 1961 situation. The Ambassador asked the Secretary if he had detected any point of receptivity in his talks with Gromyko. The Secretary replied in the negative. He said that Gromyko appeared more completely negative on the reunification issue than at any other time. The Secretary speculated that the twenty-two Soviet divisions in East Germany were no longer there for the security of troops in Eastern Germany, but for all of Eastern Europe. He could visualize that if the twenty-two divisions left the Soviet Zone of Germany, all of Eastern Europe would join Western Europe. The Secretary said that Gromyko had said that he was willing to resume a discussion bilaterally of questions discussed last year—Berlin, US troops, etc. Gromyko, the Secretary added, had told the President that he did not discount the possibility that some new elements might enter the discussion. The Secretary concluded that when he probed Gromyko on this point, he received no clue as to what Gromyko had in mind. The Secretary said he did not believe the Soviets were prepared to discuss reunification, or saw any movement in that direction. Gromyko had indicated to the Secretary that he was aware of the feelings in Europe on this question and saw no sense in creating an illusion there is movement when there is none. The Secretary allowed for the possibility that the Soviets might come back at some later date with something else. The Secretary assured the Ambassador that despite what Gromyko had said, we were prepared to take an initiative if, as he had said earlier, it was serious and we were all aware of the consequences. He reiterated his strong belief that considerable advantage was to be gained in Franco-German talks in depth and detail in a relaxed atmosphere. 81. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 6. Secret. Washington, January 7, 1965. SUBJECT German Unity 1. This memorandum suggests a US course of action regarding German unity, for the period immediately ahead: (a) The Four Western Foreign Ministers would declare (perhaps when meeting at the GA in New York) that they favor, in principle, an initiative, such as the FedRep has in mind, for a Four Power Commission on Germany, which would provide an umbrella for mixed German commissions. The FonMin’s would declare that they have directed a quadripartite working group in Bonn to staff out the proposal in greater detail. (b) The Bonn Working Group would then be activated. Its labors could be made the subject of considerable public and press comment by the German government between now and the election. These labors would include consideration not only of procedures for the Four Power Commission and the inter-German committees but also of the substance of matters to be considered in that Council, e.g., German frontiers and other security aspects of German unity. (Prior to the German elections, it is obviously an open question as to how deeply the Germans in the Working Group would consider it feasible to delve into such matters of substance, since any leaks on these questions could and would be exploited by Strauss and Co. to the disadvantage of Schroeder and Erhard. Only time and experience can answer this question.) (c) When the FonMin’s met for the spring NATO meeting in London, they could review the Working Group’s efforts and give it further guidance. This would be the occasion for another highly publicized communiqué stressing their intent to proceed re German unity. (d) If the three Western FonMin’s should then meet Gromyko in Vienna, to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Austrian State Treaty, they could discuss with him, in very general terms, the importance of progress toward German unity. They would not unveil the specific Four Power Council proposal. Ambassador Kohler’s judgment, expressed on his recent trip, was that the Soviets would not accept any proposal on German unity before the German election, for fear of strengthening the CDU. But even very general exhortations by the Western FonMin’s, in their discussions with Gromyko, could be made known to the press, with happy results in Germany. (e) The specific Four Power proposal could then be put to the Soviets at such time, after the German election, as it had been staffed out in sufficient detail to be plausibly presented—and to be effectively executed if the Soviets should agree to set up the Council. 2. This proposal is designed to meet two needs: (a) to generate further quadripartite Western staff work in spelling out the specific substance of a German unity proposal; (b) to provide evidence of tangible progress which the CDU moderates could put to good use in repelling attacks by the German Gaullists. The second of these needs is of crucial importance. The nationalists are clearly out to get, first, Schroeder (whose position is highly vulnerable) and then Von Hassel. They would expect Erhard, if success crowns their efforts, to accommodate to the changed center of gravity in his party. If the CDU thus comes under increasing nationalist influence the SPD might be compelled to follow suit, in the degree that this commodity proved popular; the lesson of Weimar is that no major German political party can allow nationalism to be the monopoly of the opposition. Thus, the basic object of our postwar European policy—the maintenance of German moderate leadership—would be placed in some jeopardy. 3. The basic assumptions underlying this proposal are that: (a) The German proposal for a Four Power Council and inter-German committees is the most promising basis on which to proceed with further staff work. No one can predict in advance whether substantive discussions in the Four Power Council would prove fruitful; this Council might turn out to be no more than a forum for rehashing past Western and Soviet positions. In this case, the Council (meeting, perhaps, rather infrequently) might prove important chiefly in providing cover for the inter-German committees, where useful work might well be done. (b) Quadripartite staff discussion of the German proposal for a Four Power Council will only be useful, in the long run, if it gets into the subjects covered in your recent backgrounder, in its consideration of proposals to be advanced in the Four Power Council. We would have to make this clear to the Germans from the start (although, as suggested above, it may well be that the most serious staff work in this respect will only be undertaken after the German elections). 4. The French will have little incentive to go along with the course of action proposed in this memo. The main purpose of that course—the strengthening of German moderate leadership—is one that they do not share. They want to see Schroeder weakened, so that he can be replaced by a German Gaullist. The French might be moved, however, if it were evident that the US, UK, and FRG were prepared to proceed with the public declaration and the necessary staff work, without the French, if need be. There may be inoffensive ways of intimating this to Couve in New York, before France’s position is fixed. The French might well fear that continuing French isolation on this issue would place a heavy strain upon their allies in Germany: Refusing, day in and day out, to join in allied consideration of the issue which, more than any other, interests German public opinion is not the way to make the flowers of Gaullism bloom across the Rhine. 5. It may be useful to make our willingness to proceed along the lines described in this memorandum known to Erhard, before he visits de Gaulle. He will feel better able to stand up to Gaullist pressures and blandishments, in the course of that meeting, if he knows that the US is ready to back him strongly on the unity issue. It would probably not be useful for him to do more than stress the importance of the German unity issue and the need for further discussion of specific tactics among FonMin’s in his talk with de Gaulle. If he unveils the details of the course of action proposed above, this might only trigger a premature French rejection—since he could hardly lay out what may be the most convincing pro argument: The fact that a possible Western willingness to proceed with further staff work without France, if necessary, cannot be wholly precluded. Furthermore, our suggesting to Erhard at this point that he propose this course to de Gaulle might tend to confirm German suspicions that the US intends to withdraw from a role of active leadership and leave the Germans to bear the main burden from here on out. 82. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, and Moscow. Bonn, January 8, 1965, 10 p.m. 2545. Subj: Reunification initiative. I called on FonMin Schroeder yesterday (Jan 7) at my request. I had spoken to him in a preliminary way on Monday, Jan 4, following my return from the US, at which time I had conveyed to him the Secretary’s suggestion that he might wish to consider joining the Secretary, the French FonMin and the British FonSec, during the period they would be together at the UN, to discuss the question of an initiative on German reunification. I also indicated at that time that if it were agreeable to the British and French, we would be willing to initiate further Four-Power talks in the Bonn Group preparatory to such a meeting. Schroeder said that his attendance at the proposed New York meeting on a unification initiative would depend on a number of factors: when it would be held, what the agenda would be, etc. The situation had been somewhat changed by the Departmental backgrounder given on this subject on Dec 30. It was always difficult for the German Govt to authorize the FonMin to go to New York during a UN meeting, since he would not be involved in the UN deliberations themselves. Moreover, to take such an unusual step under present circumstances might arouse undue expectations. He would, however, be willing to go if there were a chance of getting approval on the German Four-Power Council proposal. Otherwise it might be best to continue discussions between governments. He had not yet been able to reach a decision on the question of whether further discussions on reunification should be held by the Bonn Group. He could see certain advantages, however, there were also advantages in continuing discussions in the Washington Ambassadorial Group, where the American representative, who is the principal one concerned, would have better access to instructions. The FonMin then went into the background of his recent espousal of the Four-Power Council concept. He had presented this idea in his meeting with Secretary of State Rusk on Nov 23,See Document 73. as well as during his subsequent meetings in Rome and London prior to the Paris meeting.Reference is to the North Atlantic Council Ministerial Meeting at Paris December 15–17, 1964. In his discussion with the Secretary in Paris prior to the evening Quadripartite dinner,Reported in telegram Secto 13 from Paris, December 15, 1964. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 GER W) he had obtained the impression that the Secretary would support the proposal. The evening meeting resulted in no specific agreement, but in the general agreement that representatives of the Four would prepare a draft communiqué. It was his impression that during this meeting the French pursued the tactic of attempting to get Sec Rusk and FonSec Gordon Walker to raise questions, to which they would then agree. During these discussions the Secretary had presented arguments very similar to those contained in the Washington backgrounder. Schroeder was at a loss to know who had given the impression to the press that the Secretary had been reluctant with respect to an initiative. The Germans had not done this. On Wednesday, it had been agreed that the Four-Power Council concept would be discussed further between governments. However, the French refused to sign the final communiqué because of the inclusion of the phrase “that the time had come to take appropriate steps to that end with the Soviet Union.” Although he had not discussed it with the French, it was Schroeder’s impression that they would still agree to discuss the Four-Power Council idea, although without any prior commitment to support it. However, no agreement had been reached in Paris as to the time and place of such discussions. In view of the backgrounder, and the Cabinet discussion on Tuesday, it was necessary that the entire matter now be reviewed, both within the Cabinet and with the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Bundestag, which includes representatives of the other political parties. Since all concerned would be in Berlin together next week, an opportunity would be afforded. Schroeder said that there was a difference between his original proposals and the version now being dealt with in the press. He did not propose putting forward a proposal to the Russians for a Four-Power Council meeting to consider reunification alone, which he knew would be turned down. Although he did not believe that a probable Soviet rejection was in itself a sufficient reason for not making a proposal, he agreed that any proposal made should be a serious one. He understood from what we had told him about Gromyko’s meetings with the Secretary and the President that the Soviets would probably insist on keeping reunification separate from other issues. The Soviets would undoubtedly introduce many topics for discussion which the other three would prefer not to discuss. Schroeder, however, still favors putting forward a proposal for a Four-Power Council meeting to consider the German problem as a whole. This would not be a new departure but would be based on the principle of Four-Power responsibility, which is still a reality with respect to certain problems. He would be willing for the Council to be called without a specific mandate. He did not consider it necessary for the Western Four to agree in advance on the answers to all questions that might be raised in the Four-Power Council. It should be possible to eliminate those Soviet proposals which we did not wish to discuss, just as they undoubtedly would seek to do with respect to issues distasteful to them. As a minimum the Council could create a series of Four-Power commissions, which might be able to make progress in their respective fields. What, he asked, is the risk in making such a proposal, even if it is turned down? The basic question is whether the making of such a proposal would, in its overall aspects, be helpful or harmful. From a German viewpoint he believes it necessary to have strong statements made by the Allies on reunification, such as the President’s Georgetown speech, and positive steps, such as his own current proposal, taken in common by the British, French and the US, even if the Soviets turned them down. He pointed out that the Sovs continually reiterate their own positions with respect to all-German questions. Why should we not? I indicated to the FonMin that our position on the question of an initiative is the same as that which the Secretary had agreed to in Paris. We had made certain suggestions to the FonMin as to how we might proceed and would await his reply. Both were subject to approval by the British and French. He was familiar with the Secretary’s views. Certainly he recognized that there are certain points of substance which must be agreed to before a proposal can be made to the Soviets. The Secretary has never said that the answers to all questions must be determined in advance. Comment: As to whether in practice Schroeder’s thinking on the issues which I discussed with him will correspond to that of the Dept, I do not know. I believe that the area of agreement can be determined only in terms of specifics—not through general discussion. My own feeling is that we would, in connection with any detailed consideration of the Four-Power Council proposal, not be far apart. Tuesday’s Cabinet discussion did not result in any decision as to the course the FRG will pursue on the initiative issue. I do not anticipate that we shall have any further reaction from the FonMin until the end of next week after the meetings in Berlin. In the meantime, if the Dept has any further guidance to give me as to our own stance at this juncture, it would be appreciated. McGhee 83. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 1 GER W. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Paris and London. Bonn, January 11, 1965, 3 p.m. 2558. Subject: Malaise in Germany. Germany is at the moment in a near crisis of confidence with respect to its external relations. As a part of this malaise a series of recent developments has, moreover, created a situation in our own relations with the Federal Republic which, at best, can be described as awkward. A typical view, conveyed to us last week by Jean Monnet’s assistant, Max Kohnstamm, who has been seeing German officials in Bonn, is that the Germans are aware that their foreign policy has suffered a number of reversals recently and that nearly all have in some degree involved the United States. Most important, he claims, is the general interpretation given our much publicized National Security Action Memorandum,See footnote 11, Document 79. to the effect that the U.S. has abandoned the MLF and has thereby suffered a major political defeat at de Gaulle’s hands. The net effect, according to Kohnstamm, will inevitably be to support the Gaullist group in the CDU/CSU and drive the Germans closer to the French. I do not believe that this view dominates Erhard’s thinking. I believe he still places highest priority on his relations with us. Schroeder personally does not have a French alternative, however, he has given me the clear impression that he feels “let down”—both in connection with the MLF and his proposal for a reunification initiative. Many German officials and party leaders go further in questioning whether their foreign policy has not run into a dead end and does not, therefore, require some radical revision. CDU/CSU Fraktion leader Barzel, for example, has recently expressed views of this kind, while FDP Vice Chancellor Mende has publicly called for more emphasis on German national interests in the formulation of policy. There are predictions of substantially closer German accommodations to the policies of de Gaulle during Erhard’s meeting with him on Jan 19. To recapitulate: Starting with the Paris meetings early in December, the Germans seem to have suffered one rebuff after another. Schroeder returned from Paris after a much-publicized failure to obtain Allied agreement on a communiqué stressing the desirability of an initiative on German reunification. Although the basic French responsibility for this has generally been recognized, there has also been much comment to the effect that the lack of U.S. enthusiasm played an important role. The public distortion of the backgrounder of December 30 has served to bring into question our basic attitude toward the whole concept of an initiative. Although the German Government gained some stature from its hard decision on the grain price problem, there has been continuing criticism from farm groups that the government has sold out their interests, and from others for having acted too late or for having failed to exact anything substantial in return for German concessions. There is a feeling that despite the sacrifice Germany made on the grain price, it has earned nothing from de Gaulle—i.e., Schroeder’s rebuff on the initiative came afterwards. The U.S. position in the grain price matter has, moreover, been interpreted as having contributed to their lack of success. We appeared to be encouraging them in the deal in making a decision which took away some of the returns they had expected. Although now put in better perspective, the approval of the construction of a synthetic fiber plant in the GDR by an American firm was at one time widely interpreted as reflecting a change in U.S. policy toward the GDR. The Germans were mainly influenced by the size of the project in comparison with previous American trade with the GDR, and by the fact that we had not advised them in advance of its spectacular exposure by a German newspaper. In addition to the widespread belief that the U.S. had in effect abandoned the MLF project, or is at least prepared to let it stagnate, there exists even in the Foreign Office a feeling that we have left the Germans to negotiate the matter out with the British, a task to which they do not feel equal. There is wide impression that the MLF is “dead.” As a reflection of German sensitivity, which is exceptionally acute at this time, there have even been expressions of uncertainty and dismay as result of the comments made by the Secretary in his TV interview with Mr. Abel For text of the January 3 interview, see Department of State Bulletin, January 18, 1965, pp. 62–74. concerning the conditions under which a review might be made of the size of our forces here. It seems significant to us that the German reaction to the news of French gold purchases has often been more critical of the United States than of France. A frequent theme taken up by both press and government officials is that the French purchases may do a service to the Western world if they lead to more vigorous American action to eliminate our balance of payments deficit. Many German editorials tend to view sympathetically the French concern over the continued flow of direct U.S. investment to Europe. Erhard’s failure up to this point to gain acceptance of his proposals for European political integration constitute another disappointment. He has on many occasions called publicly for increased efforts toward political unification and on Nov 3, 1964 put forward a specific plan.For text, see Europa Archiv, 1965, vol. 2, pp. 562–572. It received, however, only a lukewarm reception and has been followed by an alternative Italian plan. The French received the plan with little less than contempt and have, at least by implication, even after the favorable German grain price decision, continued to link it to the MLF. This is at least one setback in which we have not been involved. The constant German preoccupation is to avoid “falling between stools” which they now feel in a sense that they have done. The government tends to feel that out of loyalty to us they have both endangered the Franco/German alliance and exposed themselves to the disagreeable infighting of the Gaullist minority in the CDU/CSU. On the other hand they feel that they have not been successful with us. They purport to see in recent events our having gone out of our way to make conciliatory gestures to London (on the MLF), to Paris (Rusk-de Gaulle and McNamara-Messmer talks)A report on the Rusk-de Gaulle talks, December 15, 1964, is in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 64. The McNamara meeting under reference presumably was held during the NATO Ministerial Meeting at Paris December 15–17. No record of the conversation was found. and to Moscow (State of Union Message), during a period in which they have suffered only setbacks. In theory the Germans would like to see us reach a rapprochement with France, which would take them out of the middle where they feel caught between us. In fact they are equally apprehensive that we will make a deal with de Gaulle, whom they think we really value more than they, and that they will be left out with no “stool.” President Luebke stated publicly before the German Cabinet the other day (Embtel 2530)Not found. that the way to better German-American relations was to better German-French relations, i.e. presumably this will re-arouse our competitive instincts. There is, therefore, a great incentive for Erhard—when he meets with de Gaulle on Jan 19—to attempt to avert further open attacks by de Gaulle and inside attacks by de Gaulle’s German followers during the election period. In doing so he may be able to retrieve a small place in de Gaulle’s good graces, and at the same time make us more receptive. In the final analysis the Germans, for both their Western and Eastern policies, have to lean on someone. If they should become convinced that we will no longer provide the political support, they would unquestionably turn toward the French as the next best. In a following telegramIn telegram 2565 from Bonn, January 11, McGhee discussed the possibility of a separate German initiative on reunification. (Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER) I will attempt to analyze the issues that we face with the Germans on specific points, and to come up with a positive line on as many threads of policy as possible which can be presented to Erhard when I see him prior to his departure for his meeting with de Gaulle on the 19th. McGhee 84. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Nodis. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared by Tyler. Washington, January 14, 1965, 7:42 p.m. 1978. Eyes Only for Ambassador from Secretary. In this message I should like to give you privately my own thinking about the various subjects discussed in your several cables of the past two days.See Document 83 and footnote 7 thereto. In telegram 2569 from Bonn, January 12, McGhee provided further background on German views on major outstanding issues. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 GER W–US) In telegram 2576 from Bonn, January 12, McGhee provided “guidance for meeting with Erhard.” (Ibid.) In doing so, I must confess that it is not easy to think about the FRG in the singular nor in terms of a coherent German policy. The Chancellor is facing the tiger which he himself created when he permitted Adenauer to keep the top Party position. I have not had the feeling that Schroeder personally has entered deeply into his job or the major issues of policy confronting the FRG. To the extent that he has done so, I have found him intelligent, reasonable and a good colleague. Beyond that, moderate and balanced judgments such as those expressed by Carstens McGhee reported on discussions with Carstens in telegram 2567 from Bonn, January 11. (Ibid.,POL GER W–US) and Von Hassel, seldom break through to the surface. It is to be expected that the German press will be excitable in this preelection period and that there are limits beyond which one cannot hope to go in eliciting responsible public discussion of current issues. We shall, therefore, be dealing with a feverish friend during the next several months. It seems to me that we should try to do so calmly and with complete sympathy and friendship while, at the same time, keeping clearly in mind our own heavy responsibilities. The question of an initiative on reunification well illustrates the complexities of personal as well as political positions. Simply stated, the United States strongly supports the principle of self-determination for the Germans in the Federal Republic and in the Soviet zone of occupation. We in the West are committed to the answer reached by free plebiscite or some other means of honest consultation; that answer could be a divided Germany or a unified Germany; we think it would result in a unified Germany. Whichever answer would be reached, a settlement of the problem would require the most far-reaching security arrangements in Central Europe as well as some serious disarmament and a result could be expected to be a normalization of relations between Western and Eastern Europe. Quite frankly, I do not feel that I know what the real British position is on reunification nor whether the present British Government would wish to see any progress or illusion of progress at the expense of the prospect for the SPD in the forthcoming German election. I feel quite certain that Paris is not interested in reunification except under circumstances in which Germany would be in a position clearly secondary to France. Our response to the German suggestion for an initiative has been to say that we are ready to join in a move which is (a) serious, (b) agreed by the four of us, and (c) prepared as to substance. We say “serious” because we cannot rely upon the luxury of a public Western proposal made on a Wednesday, rejected by the Soviets on a Thursday, thereby leaving everybody happy on Friday. Making a proposal is to start something, and only the Kremlin can tell us just what. We already know that Moscow wishes to resume the bilateral talks on Berlin where they were “left off” in 1962. We already know that France won't play on that wicket and Schroeder made the mistake of telling me in Paris that such talks would lead to suspicions in Germany about American motives. I could not honestly recommend to the President a Western initiative on Germany without telling him that one result could be a return by the Soviets to their pressures for peace treaties with the two Germanies and a Free City of Berlin. You and I might guess that this would not be the result but the President would have to be prepared for whatever the consequence, including the possibility of a renewal of the Berlin crisis of 1961 which cost the United States many billions of dollars in our defense budget. We have insisted upon a Western Four Power agreement precisely because we have had recent experience in talking the Russians out of a Berlin crisis while the French disapproved and stood aside, the Germans acted as extremely nervous spectators, and the British tried to push us to points in our talks with the Russians on which Western allied agreement would have simply been impossible. On the substance of the issues which would arise in discussing reunification, there is a serious conflict between German electoral politics and sober international realities. For electoral purposes, the Germans would like to talk about reunification; but for the same reasons they do not wish to talk about frontiers, security arrangements or disarmament. The question “reunification of what?” will occur in the first five minutes. What disturbs me is that an effort will be made to add to the illusion of movement toward reunification the further and demonic illusion that Germany is somehow moving toward the frontiers of 1937 or the Munich frontiers of 1938. Some German leaders say privately that they realize that the present borders of the Federal Republic plus the GDR will not be changed beyond possible minor border adjustments. But none of them will apparently confront that issue publicly. I must tell you that I am deeply concerned about whether we ourselves can accept much longer the historical responsibility of silence upon a matter which is of such central importance to the peace of Europe and which is now being given unilateral agitation within the Federal Republic. The unwillingness of the FRG to enter seriously into these questions of substance lends an air of unreality to their proposals for an initiative. I am not talking about “advance concessions” referred to in your tel 2565. McGhee had commented that the German dilemma lay in the fact that any proposal on reunification without substantial initial German concessions was likely to be rejected by the Soviet Union. We make no concession to the Russians in trying to agree among ourselves in the West. It is no concession for the Federal Republic to abandon what it does not have. I know of no other country in the world which would support the frontiers of 1937. You may properly say that the above does not solve our present problem which arises from the present outbreak of recurring German malaise with which we have become all too familiar in the past twelve years. What would you think of telling Erhard and Schroeder, before Erhard’s visit to Paris, that (a) We are prepared to join in an initiative on reunification which is serious (i.e.: an initiative in which we believe ourselves as constituting a substantive approach to the problem, and not merely a procedural gambit undertaken for the purpose of placating domestic political pressures), agreed to by the Western Four and properly prepared. (b) We believe that there is a major difficulty in Paris which calls for the fullest and frankest discussion between Erhard and de Gaulle. You might add that some of the points I made to Schroeder in Paris were aimed not at him but at Couve de Murville. I do not believe that we should undertake to obtain British and French agreement to something worked out between us and the FRG, as suggested in your tel 2565. We simply cannot deliver Paris and might not be able to deliver London. Erhard ought to go after de Gaulle and try to find something on which the two of them would seek the agreement of the Anglo-Saxons. A United States-FRG agreement would bear the “kiss of death” in Paris. One further word on reunification. During the past four years, I have raised German reunification in every serious talk I have had with Gromyko and in my talk with Khrushchev when I went to Moscow for the test ban signing. No other Western Foreign Minister or Chief of Government has raised the matter more insistently than have I. Upon my return from NATO, I raised with Gromyko the possibility of informal Big Four talks about the German question, making it clear that we would expect to raise reunification.See Document 78. He rejected the suggestion out of hand. I would appreciate your comment on whether it would help to let it be known publicly that I took this matter up with Gromyko as a result of Schroeder’s initiative in Paris, with the agreement of the other Foreign Ministers, and with negative results. I hope that my letter to Schroeder on the MLF/ANF For text, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 68. will have served to correct his impression that we have lost interest in the matter. The substance of my message will be sent as guidance to other Missions in order to enable our ambassadors to counteract any such impression which may exist in their area. This message is not an instruction for you to discuss in these terms with any German. It does give you more detail on what is on my mind, and considerations which would affect my advice to the President. I would be glad to have your further comments. Rusk 85. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Confidential. Repeated to Berlin, Moscow, Paris, and London. Bonn, January 14, 1965, 10 p.m. 2613. Subject: Four-Power Council on Germany. Ref: Berlin’s 895 to Dept.Telegram 895 from Berlin, January 13, reported on government spokesman Von Hase’s press conference. (Ibid., POL 15–2 GER W) 1. The decision taken yesterday in Berlin by the Cabinet to endeavor to bring into being a standing Quadripartite Committee (Gremium) on Germany would seem, in our preliminary judgment, to lead to the following conclusions: A. For the whole complex of domestic and foreign policy reasons cited in Embtel 2565,See footnote 7, Document 83 and footnotes 2 and 4, Document 84. the FRG and the governing parties have concluded that the issue of some new action on the German question cannot be subordinated in this election year. B. Despite the lack of Allied enthusiasm and the clear indications, known to the FRG, that the Sovs will not buy the idea, the FRG considers the Four-Power Council concept best suited to meet the situation it faces. From the tenor of comments emanating from official sources, the FRG is taking care to avoid any expectation of significant progress toward reunification. The general presentation is that despite Soviet intransigence, a committee should be proposed not for propagandistic purposes or in the hope of an immediate solution of the German problem, but because such a body, where the German question can be kept under continuing confidential study, is badly needed. A recurring observation is that with such a council in existence, FRG/GDR cooperation in humanitarian steps will be facilitated, moreover, the argument goes, even if rejected by the Soviets, a Western initiative will once again bring home to the world who is responsible for the continued division of Germany. C. Having taken an official, publicized decision in favor of a council, the FRG will now have to continue to press the Western Allies for their agreement. Failure would expose the Chancellor to attacks for pursuing an illusory goal and would raise again the whole question of the degree of support the FRG can expect from its Allies. It must be assumed that despite the setback at Paris in December, the Chancellor still considers it possible to gain Tripartite acceptance of an initiative of this type. 2. The Berlin Cabinet meeting has received prominent attention in German media, with the main focus today on the Four-Power Council decision. The other discussions in the various committee and Fraktion meetings have also highlighted Berlin as the center of German politics and policy-making this week. Thus the government’s commitment to the Allies to avoid wide publicity in connection with the Cabinet sessions, while honored prior to the meeting, has perhaps unavoidably proved of little significance since yesterday. It was just this that the British advised against in the prior consultation on the Cabinet meeting (Embtel 2550).Not found. 3. Editorial comment on the Quadripartite Council decision is so far limited to Welt, which views it skeptically. It comments that “if Erhard really has in mind more than keeping the German question alive—possibly because he feels under domestic pressure—then more substantial proposals which provide a realistic basis for negotations are needed.” More editorial comment will certainly be forthcoming along this line but for the present the news coverage gives the impression that the FRG, while meeting in Berlin, has taken a positive step in the German question. McGhee 86. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted in the White House and approved by Bundy. Washington, January 14, 1965, 10:39 p.m. 1980. To Ambassador McGhee from McGeorge Bundy. For your private information, the President has read some but not all of your recent reports and also what Bohlen has reported of the view that Fontaine of Le Monde brought back from Germany.Telegram 3922 from Paris, January 11. (Ibid., INF 7 FR–GER W) He is not troubled by what the French say, but he does want you to know of his reaction to the German nervousness which you report. The President has made his position on Germany most amply clear on many occasions. He remembers how firm and clear he was with Chancellor Erhard at the Ranch.See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XV, Document 248. He recollects the extended assurance and the full exposition in his Georgetown speech only a month ago. He recalls that at the request of the Germans he made a further and explicit reference to reunification in his State of the Union message. He recalls his own recent conversations with you at the RanchSee footnote 2, Document 79. in which further reassurances were given and in which you explained your conviction that the Germans would be greatly relieved by the President’s shift away from pressure tactics on the MLF. The President does not now find it agreeable to have repeated and renewed German questions about the firmness of his purpose or the direction of his policy. I have discussed with the President the psychological and electoral causes of the reactions you have encountered as I understand it. He hears me but he would like you to hear him. Rusk 87. Telegram from the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Bonn, January 15, 1965, 2 p.m. 2622. For the Secretary. I appreciate your going to such length to describe the background of your thinking on the reunification problem (Dept’s 1978). Document 84. You portray very well the present confused situation here, which reflects in exaggerated form the normal suspicion and sensitivity of the Germans—derived from their basic feeling of insecurity, and lack of confidence in themselves and in their future. Despite the current attraction of de Gaulle, every German knows that his security rests only on the U.S. Even the slightest doubt about our position sends them into endless rounds of speculation and questioning. During each major period of upset, and I have gone through approximately six of them in the twenty months I have been here, every old doubt and fear is reexamined. The public reverberations reach a peak of intensity—and then die down and our relations become normal again. I realize that this is very vexing there in Washington. It is of course to us here. The Germans should have more confidence in us, as I told Schroeder yesterday. McGhee reported on his meeting with Schroeder in telegram 2610 from Bonn, January 14. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF (MLF)) However, we are not likely to see any change in their basic mood. If we hope to preserve and build on our alliance with them—as the second most powerful nation—in many respects—in the Free World, we must continue to be patient with them. We must continue to try to reassure them, to avoid apparent abrupt changes in policy on vital matters affecting them without careful preparation and explanation. When we do speak, particularly in public, we should I believe stick close to the “boiler plate” the Germans are used to and that we know will work. If we have serious questions about changing the policy it describes, we should first take it up quietly with the government. Your backgrounder has in many respects had a healthy effect here. Most serious observers are in agreement with the basic points you made. There have been many favorable reactions in the German press. Most responsible people appear to accept the proposition that any new reunification proposal should be carefully thought out, and that certain agreed positions should be reached in advance. Indeed, Schroeder is embarrassed that he is being portrayed as proposing initiatives that are not serious. With respect to the question of borders, you may be interested to know that Fritz Erler is reported in today’s press as saying that Germany should discuss the Oder-Neisse border immediately with Poland. I myself have long been concerned at the German attitude toward borders, which I think is the one most disturbing subject of discussion here. I agree that the time may very easily come when we should speak out. I would not be willing, for example, to continue supporting an irridentist Germany. I would not be willing to see the 7th Army used as a pawn for Mr. Seebohm to take the Sudetenland. His formula of Heimatrecht plus self-determination is sheer aggression. If things get worse I think we might first threaten and then, if it continues, later publicly disassociate ourselves from any German hope of territorial gain. It was not my intention in Embtel 2565See footnote 7, Document 83 and footnotes 2 and 4, Document 84. to suggest that we work out something with the Germans on a reunification initiative following which we would obtain British-French agreement. What I intended to say was merely that we would be willing to sit down in a Four-Power meeting to attempt to work something out, i.e., as we do through the Ambassadorial Group. I am quite in agreement with your proposals (A) and (B) as to what we should tell Erhard and Schroeder before Erhard’s visit to Paris. I would appreciate it, however, if you would confirm by immediate return telegramInstructions for McGhee’s discussion with Erhard were contained in telegram 1977 to Bonn, January 14. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER) since I see Erhard at 4:30 our time, that you would be willing to include as a serious reunification initiative the Four-Power Council proposal as made by Schroeder, even though it is essentially a procedural proposal. Would your requirements for substance be met if the Four Powers could agree in advance of the proposal as to all of the variables which would be involved in the proposal itself, and at least the first and second round of questions the Soviets might put to the British, French and ourselves in the event the proposal were accepted, without necessarily bringing up to date a comprehensive substantive proposal such as the Herter Plan?Reference is to the Western Peace Plan of May 14, 1959; see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 624–629. I see no objection why you should not let it be known that you took reunification up with Gromyko as a result of Schroeder’s initiative in Paris, with the agreement of the other Foreign Ministers and with negative results. Schroeder has been briefing the German Foreign Affairs Committee and the Cabinet here, using material from your meeting with Gromyko which we have supplied him with Dept approval. This fact has become known in the press. If you do not consider that it might tend to dry Gromyko up on the subject in future discussions with you, I believe it would be very healthy for you to see that this fact gets into the public domain. McGhee 88. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Telegram 2652 from Bonn, January 16, transmitted a similarly worded message to Bundy. (Ibid.) Bonn, January 16, 1965, 1 p.m. 2651. For the President. I hope you will read our Embassy telegram 2643For text, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 69. describing my meeting last evening with Chancellor Erhard on the eve of his visit with General de Gaulle at Rambouillet. I believe that this message will reassure you as to the state of our relations with the Chancellor and the German Government. The closing statement of the telegram quotes Erhard’s assurances to you that “nothing in the German position has changed,” that he “values his personal friendship with you,” and that Germany would like to consider itself “our most faithful ally”—all of which I am convinced he meant in great sincerity. I hope, therefore, that you will not allow the tempest which has been raging in German political and newspaper circles during the last two weeks to raise any questions as to Erhard’s constancy and faithfulness. The atmosphere here is the worst I have encountered during my stay here of almost two years. It was set in motion by events emanating from the US, which led to a genuine misunderstanding of the US intention 1) to proceed with the creation of an MLF and 2) to support Germany in a reunification initiative. I see from the reports of my colleagues that this was not an exclusively German reaction but was widespread in Europe—and I believe even in the US. Erhard’s reaction to the change in our pace following the National Security Memorandum of Dec 17 was, as I predicted to you in Johnson City, to seek a delay in obtaining official Bundestag approval for the MLF until after the German elections next September. Although this is embarrassing to Schroeder and does to some extent play into the hands of the Gaullists here, it is warmly welcomed by the CDU party leadership as removing a source of tension between Germany and France during the electoral period. I assume that this is not, moreover, an entirely unwelcome development from our standpoint. McGeorge Bundy has in your behalf advised me of your reaction to the recent German nervousness, and of the fact that you do not “find it agreeable to have repeatedly renewed German questions about the firmness of (your) purpose or the direction of (your) policy.” I can understand a reaction to the recent German mood. Indeed, during these periodic flurries the Germans behave in a very irrational and immature way. This is, however, their present nature, derived from their basic insecurity and lack of confidence in themselves and their future. Since we are not likely to change them, and since Germany is so important to us as an ally, we must I believe be patient and wait them out. Usually, as in this case, the tide again turns. Fortunately, I believe that we now face the Rambouillet meeting with a decided upswing in our favor. In any event I very much hope that you have not obtained from my reporting the impression that Erhard himself has not been constant. His position was deeply affected by the popular mood which prevailed here; however, he himself did not yield to it and he has now emerged, I believe, master of the situation here and, as ever, a faithful friend of yours and ally of the US. McGhee 89. Letter From the Ambassador to Germany (McGhee) to Secretary of State Rusk Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Bonn, January 16, 1965. Dear Mr. Secretary: You will have seen our 2643For text, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 69. dealing with my meeting on January 15 with Chancellor Erhard. I hope that you found the results of this meeting to your satisfaction, also how the question of a reunification initiative was handled following my telephone discussion with Bill Tyler prior to the meeting. I subsequently received your 1989Not found. which, I believe, reflects some misunderstanding of what I had in mind. I did not in my 2622 Document 87. intend to suggest that we give an answer to the Germans on any proposal by ourselves—any more than I had in my 2565See footnote 7, Document 83 and footnotes 2 and 4, Document 84. to which it referred. Indeed, in 2622 I stated quite the opposite. “It was not my intention in the Embtel to suggest that we work out something with the Germans on a reunification initiative following which we would obtain British French agreement. What I intended to say was merely that we would be willing to sit down in a Four Power meeting to attempt to work something out, i.e., as we do through the Ambassadorial Group.” My position with the Germans on this question since my return has been entirely based on what you had agreed to in Paris, i.e., to be willing to consider the German Four Power Council proposal on a US–UK-French-German basis. I assume that we still are prepared to do this and was in my 2622 merely trying to clarify a question raised in paragraph A of Deptel 1978, Document 84. merely that we were prepared to join only in an initiative “constituting a substantive approach.” The Four Power Council concept is not in reality a substantive approach. This is the latest proposal that the Germans have put forward and one that we agreed in Paris that we would be willing to consider in a meeting of the Four (France, US, UK and FRG). Although I did not even commit us to this in my meeting with Erhard, I would appreciate it if the point could be further clarified. As to the general question as to whether we should support a German initiative at all, I still feel strongly along the lines of Embtel 2565 that we should. Many observers have been saying this—Walt Rostow among others for over a year. This assumes, as I am convinced, that the Germans are, following your backgrounder, now prepared to come to grips with the substantive issues concerned and help work out agreed positions. A Four Power Council proposal would not, on the surface, appear to require answers to all issues that would ultimately be raised. I hope that if we do agree to this, that we can do so with sufficiently good grace to permit us to get some credit. Up to this point, although we seem ultimately willing to consider a German proposal, the impression we give is that we do so very reluctantly. I am convinced that the Germans are entitled to an initiative—that one is overdue whether this is an election year or not. If a man is sitting on you, you have every right to ask him occasionally to get off. I think that even if it is turned down by the Russians, that we have the right—indeed the obligation—to continue to point out to the world, the monstrosity in the 20th century of keeping 18 million people in neo-colonial bondage. I have personally never accepted the argument to the effect that the asking for an initiative would trip off another Berlin crisis. That is not what tripped off the last one. The Russians appear to want to keep the situation normal in Berlin. If we restrain ourselves in raising with the Soviets questions just because we fear an aggressive reaction, there will be little dialogue between us. The theory that we must stick rigidly to the status quo on the German and Berlin question or else the Russians will make things bad for us, does not give adequate consideration to the dynamics of the German people today. They are not content to sit still and will not. The question is whether these energies are vented through constructive action or by means which would disrupt the existing balance. I know that the Germans can be very irritating at times in their excitability, indecisiveness and constant need for reassurance. But unlike the French under President de Gaulle, their basic policies in Western Europe continue to be along lines consistent with our own broad objectives. To keep them moving in this direction, we may sometimes have to accept their lead in making public gestures which alone we would find useless or even undesirable. Sincerely yours, George 90. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL EUR E–EUR W. Secret. Received at 11:25 a.m. and repeated to Berlin. Bonn, January 23, 1965, 3 p.m. 2761. Subject: Memorandum from GovMayor Brandt to Sec Rusk. In my meeting with Chancellor Erhard yesterday, which centered mainly on his discussions with General de Gaulle at Rambouillet being reported separately,Telegram 2755 from Bonn, January 23, reported on the discussions, which dealt with European unification and the MLF. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 6) he raised with me the question of the memorandum on relations with Eastern Europe which Governing Mayor Brandt of Berlin had submitted to Secretary Rusk.Attachment to Document 67. Erhard had before him in German translation what was presumably a copy of this memorandum, which had just been called to his attention, dated August [garble], 1964. Erhard did not raise the question, nor did I, as to whether or not the memorandum had been requested. He did ask, however, in what capacity Brandt had written it and what status it had vis-à-vis the US Government. I replied that it was my understanding that Brandt had, during his last visit to America, volunteered certain views during his meeting with the Secretary with regard to a policy for Eastern Europe—which he had followed up with a written memorandum. I did not know in what capacity he wrote it. The Secretary and other high American officials, of course, receive as visitors opposition leaders from many countries, and are willing to listen to what they say and read memoranda they submit. This did not however, mean that the proposal made by Brandt had any official inter-governmental status between the US and Germany. We understand full well that this subject is beyond Brandt’s competence as GovMayor of Berlin, and we would discuss such a matter in an authoritative way only with the Federal Government. The Chancellor asked me if I had any objection to his quoting what I had said. I replied that I did not. I then advised the Chancellor of the recent démarche made to the Embassy by a representative of another party in Germany (although I did not say so, he understood that it was the FDP since their proposal has become known publicly) who wished to send a delegation to our country to discuss a further reunification initiative.Reported in telegram 2710 from Bonn, January 20. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER) I had advised them that although we would receive their delegation at a suitable level and listen to what they had to say, we would not undertake to discuss with them authoritatively or negotiate with them concerning a reunification initiative. This, again, was a matter in which we could deal only with the Federal Government or its designated representatives. I had given the party in question no assurances that their delegation would be received by the President—indeed, I had attempted to discourage them from going at all. McGhee 91. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL EUR E–EUR W. Confidential. Drafted by Tyler and Rusk and approved by Rusk. Repeated to London, Paris, Moscow, and Berlin. Washington, January 23, 1965, 7:24 p.m. 2086. Reference Bonn’s 2750.Telegram 2750 from Bonn, January 22, reported that release of a copy of the memorandum that Brandt had given Secretary Rusk had sparked Parliamentary debate. (Ibid.) While we are aware that fuss and feathers in Bundestag on the issue of Brandt’s memorandum represents largely domestic political in-fighting, there is nevertheless a question of principle involved which should be upheld. Pending final solution of the German problem, the three Western Powers retain certain clear and onerous responsibilities with regard to Berlin and to Germany as a whole, which place them in a special position. The US Government cannot accept the thesis, either explicitly stated or implied, that it may not receive the views of a Berlin official on matters relating to matters of common interest. Obviously the US Government has not and will not negotiate on such matters and will follow its practice of full consultation with the FRG on Berlin and German questions. Request you take early appropriate opportunity to remind and caution Schroeder along above lines and to express firm hope that FRG will do what it can to squelch further debate on this issue, which can only be unprofitable for all concerned.In telegram 2771 from Bonn, January 25, McGhee suggested that the U.S. approach on this issue be “low key.” (Ibid.) FYI—We must not, by easy stages, be led into position that we consider West Berlin a part of FRG to the detriment of our responsibility as occupying power. End FYI. Rusk 92. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol 6. Top Secret; Exdis. Bonn, January 26, 1965, 8 p.m. 2787. Subj: Helicopter flights over East Berlin. I was pleased to learn in CINCUSAREUR’s JCS 003943 J 3Not found. that the policy governing helicopter flights over East Berlin is being reviewed and evaluated by the SecDef as to the military factors involved and that further flights will, in the meantime, be deferred until further notice. I have in several communications (Embtels 870, 904, and 970, Bonn A–780, Oct 27, 1964) and in letters to Amb Thompson dated Sept 24, 1964Telegram 870 from Bonn is Document 68. In telegram 904 from Bonn, September 6, 1964, McGhee expressed doubts regarding the utility of helicopter flights over the East Zone. (Department of State, Central Files,POL 23–10 GER E) Telegram 970 from Bonn, September 11, reported on former Foreign Minister Brentano’s visit to Bonn. (Ibid., POL 6 GER W) Airgram A–780 from Bonn, October 27, 1964, reported on U.S. helicopter flights over the East Zone. (Ibid., POL 28–4) McGhee’s letter to Thompson was not found. expressed strongly my views with respect to these flights. I discussed them with Amb Thompson during my recent visit to Washington. If necessary in order to obtain a change in existing policy I recommend that you talk about this matter with Sec McNamara personally. I strongly recommend this because I consider these flights provocative—indeed, the only really provocative thing we now do in Berlin. It is quite clear that this type of flight was never envisaged under the original agreements. The flights have nothing to do with the maintenance of freedom of air access to Berlin in general, which is done hourly by commercial overflights. Their intelligence function is of course obvious to the Soviets. They do not in my opinion represent a show of strength or determination on our part, indeed quite the reverse, since we carefully gauge the flights on a hit-and-run basis to get out before the Soviets can locate them. The Soviets have given ample evidence that they consider them objectionable. They consistently vector fighters to find them and have threatened to “take care of them.” If these fighters do find them and precipitate an incident, either by attempting to buzz them out or shoot them down, we would be faced with the very difficult question of whether or not to abandon the flights in the face of force. I have looked into the matter carefully and am convinced that the intelligence gained is very meager and by no means worth the risks involved. I frankly would be in favor of abandoning the flights altogether. However, if we want to maintain some theoretical right of helicopter flights, which we did not, apparently, consider worthwhile until the Wall, I recommend that we send a flight over very infrequently, say every six months to a year, over some non-sensitive area, rather than over prime intelligence targets as at present. McGhee 93. Letter From Chancellor Erhard to President Johnson Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 17 GER W–US. Secret. The source text is marked “Unofficial Translation.” Bonn, February 4, 1965. Dear Mr. President: In your address on the occasion of your inauguration to the high office of President of the United States,For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, pp. 71–74. you have described the great tasks which confront your country in the interest of maintaining peace and freedom in the world and you have stressed the heavy burdens which your country is prepared to carry toward that end. That you may be granted to come closer to these high aims through a successful policy which serves peace is my sincere and cordial wish for your new term of office. On the occasion of your solemn inauguration you have expressed your desire to cooperate and to stand together with the free peoples. I am happy to be able to tell you that it is my firm conviction that my discussions in Rambouillet have also been useful in the sense of furthering the political unity of Europe, but also with regard to a close cooperation with the United States in the framework of the Western Alliance. I have already informed your Ambassador about the course of my discussions with President de Gaulle.See footnote 2, Document 90. I have received the impression that we are well on our way to reestablish a firmer basis for the vital questions of the Western Alliance. It gave me particular satisfaction to note the very positive remarks of the French President with regard to the reunification of Germany and the readiness of the French Government to discuss the German problem on the level of the Western Powers together with the Federal Republic and to examine if and in what way the Soviet Union might be prepared to find on a Four Power basis progress or solutions in all questions concerning divided Germany. General de Gaulle concurred with me in recognizing that the preservation of peace and the protection of Europe cannot be guaranteed without the immense military potential of your country. France, he said, was adhering to the alliance with the United States and was faithfully supporting the Western Alliance. I noted these very remarks with particular satisfaction. As far as the European questions in particular are concerned, the consent of the French President to preparing until summer of this year a conference of Heads of States and Governments of the EEC-countries is certainly a good beginning in the direction of a political unification of Europe. I very much hope that your plans to come to Europe in the near future will soon take shape and I am sincerely looking forward to the opportunity then to continue our exchange of views on the most important political questions. A renewed greater clarity, certainty and consent in all questions of common policy of the Western world seem to me highly desirable if not indispensable in the interest of peace. With my good wishes for a very early and complete recovery of your health, I combine my cordial greetings and respectful regards for Mrs. Johnson. m.p.: In friendship, sincerely yours, Ludwig Erhard Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. 94. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 7. Secret. Drafted by Tyler and approved in the White House on February 15. Washington, February 9, 1965. SUBJECT Message from Chancellor Erhard to the President PARTICIPANTS The President Heinrich Knappstein, German Ambassador Berndt von Staden, German Counselor William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary After mutual introductory compliments, the Ambassador referred to the Chancellor’s most recent letter to the President. Document 93. The Ambassador said that the letter was in a sense in response to the President’s oral message conveyed through the Ambassador some weeks ago at the time when certain other Ambassadors were presenting their credentials (see attachment).Not printed. According to the memorandum of conversation of this discussion, the President told Ambassador Knappstein that he would keep Erhard fully informed of any conversations he had regarding Germany and stressed the need for the two nations to work in concert. The Ambassador said that he was under instructions to amplify the Chancellor’s letter in the following respects: (1) de Gaulle’s statements on international monetary affairs in his February 4 press conferenceFor text, see Charles de Gaulle, Discours et Messages, vol. 4, pp. 325–342. had been made without prior consultation with or the knowledge of the Federal Republic of Germany. The Ambassador said that his government felt strongly that the United States and the United Kingdom must participate in any discussions on international monetary matters. (2) The Ambassador said that he was under instructions to bring to the President’s attention a certain growing concern in Germany with regard to increasing United States capital investments. The German government was not at all opposed to US investments in Germany which were beneficial to the industrial and economic health of the country. However if investments increased beyond a certain point, a situation could arise in which German offset military purchases became in fact a form of partial financing the deficit caused by massive exports of capital into Germany by the United States. For this reason, the German government hopes that further measures could now be taken to reduce the volume of US private capital exports. The Ambassador then cited the figures of $4.3 billion in 1963 and $3.9 billion in 1964 for US export of capital. He also mentioned the sum of $1 billion as the price paid by the US Ford Company when it bought up the UK Ford Company. (3) With regard to German reunification the Ambassador said that his government was most grateful for the President’s Georgetown speech in December and for his State of the Union message as well as for subsequent statements by the State Department in support of reunification. It was gratified that de Gaulle had “at last” come around to supporting discussions on ways of moving toward an initiative in reunification. At this point the President asked whether de Gaulle really wanted to go it alone as seemed to be the case from what he had said on February 4. The Ambassador stated with emphasis that Germany considered reunification to be a Four Power question, at least at this stage and for the foreseeable future, and felt strongly that a US role was indispensable. The President said that if Germany and other Europeans want to discuss reunification by themselves, this was something that he would not have difficulty with. He said he had a close feeling for Chancellor Erhard and valued the US-German relationship, but he didn't want this to stand in the way of progress toward reunification if Germany thought it could be better discussed independently of the United States. The Ambassador referred to a statement issued by the French government after de Gaulle’s press conference clarifying what de Gaulle had said so as not to exclude a role by the United States. He said that this French statement had been made as a result of the strong German feeling on the subject which had been conveyed to the French government. He said that de Gaulle is now willing to participate in Four Power talks and that this was a success for Erhard. (4) The Ambassador summarized certain aspects of the talks at Rambouillet between de Gaulle and the Chancellor on the nuclear question. He said that de Gaulle envisaged Germany’s role as being limited to participating in planning of strategic nuclear targeting. The Ambassador stated emphatically that his government considered an Atlantic nuclear force to be necessary in order to prevent the gap between nuclear and non-nuclear powers from increasing to the point where it would create grave psychological and political difficulties. He said he wished to tell the President frankly that some people in Germany had felt last December that the United States Government had gone too far in apparently dissociating itself from a commitment to move forward toward an Atlantic nuclear organization. Even if the United States Government felt that it had been exerting too much pressure before this, the fact remained that the impression now was in Germany that the United States had moved too far in the opposite direction. The President said that when Prime Minister Wilson and he had talked,Records of these discussions, held in December 1964, are in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Documents 58–61. the Prime Minister had questioned just how strongly any European government was in favor of moving toward an Atlantic nuclear force. The Prime Minister seemed to feel that such favorable views as had been expressed in Europe had been colored by US insistence. The President said that we didn't agree with the British assessment on this, and suggested that they take the matter up themselves and talk with the Germans and Italians and other countries, and that they would find that those countries would say the same things to the British as they had said to us. Then the British could come back to us after they had concluded their discussions and we could all move forward together again. The President said that we had told the British that an Atlantic nuclear force was the best means we knew to relieve the British of their national nuclear burden. It was likely that with a small majority and certain other pressing problems, the British Government might be glad to find a solution to their nuclear difficulties. We had suggested that they undertake these talks and then we could discuss the whole thing further. The President said that our position represented no advancement and no retreat from the position we had previously taken. The Ambassador said that nevertheless the December memorandumReference is to NSAM No. 322, December 17, 1964, Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 65. had been widely misinterpreted as reflecting far-reaching disaffection by the United States. The President said the important thing was for the British, the Germans and the Italians to get together, rather than that we should appear to be telling our European friends what they should be thinking. The quicker they brought their positions closer to each other the easier it would be for us to move ahead with them. In conclusion the Secretary asked the Embassy to tell the Chancellor that he appreciated the Chancellor’s letter. He said he was happy with the relationship which existed between them. He wanted the Chancellor to feel that he had the support of the United States government for efforts to make progress toward reunification. He said we were ready to participate in discussions whenever our responsible allies were. The President said he was pleased that de Gaulle and Erhard were in agreement on further moves in the field of European unity. He said that he looked forward to full exchange of views with the Chancellor when he goes over to Europe. Finally the President and the Ambassador agreed on what the Ambassador should tell the press about their conversation. Subsequently the following statement on the visit by the Ambassador was issued by the White House: “Ambassador Knappstein and I have had a good talk this morning. He delivered a message from Chancellor Erhard which reaffirmed the deep community of interest between the Federal Republic and the United States. I told the Ambassador of the full and continuing support of the United States for serious progress toward the reunification of Germany, and I expressed my clear agreement with Chancellor Erhard that the struggle for the reunification of Germany requires the interest and active participation of all of the responsible powers.” 95. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B. Confidential. Drafted by Puhan and approved in U and G on March 10 and in S on March 16. The source text is marked “Part 1 of 4.” Washington, February 18, 1965, 1 p.m. SUBJECT French Views on German Question PARTICIPANTS French Foreign Minister Couve de Murville Mr. Charles Lucet, Director General, Political Affairs Ambassador Herve Alphand Mr. Claude Lebel, Director, Press & Information Service Mr. Jacques Beaumarchais, Director of the Cabinet Mr. Bruno de Leusse, Minister Counselor, Embassy of the French Republic Americans The Secretary Under Secretary George W. Ball Ambassador Llewellyn E. Thompson, S/AL Ambassador Charles E. Bohlen Assistant Secretary William R. Tyler,EUR Ambassador Leonard Unger, Deputy Assistant Secretary, FE Mr. David H. McKillop, Director, WE Mr. Richard I. Phillips, P Mr. Alfred Puhan, Director, GER The Secretary asked what French views were on the German reunification question since the Erhard-de Gaulle talks at Rambouillet and the press conference of President de Gaulle. Couve de Murville referred to the Rambouillet meeting, saying that as de Gaulle had pointed out, in the long run the resolution of the German question was the resolution of the European question ending in European unity. If the Iron Curtain disappears, then Germany too may be reunited. The Germans, according to Couve, were pleased to be told that their problem was a European one. They realized that German reunification was a long process, but had asked what would be done to give the impression that the West was not disinterested. The Germans had left the impression that it was better to be turned down on an initiative than to make no effort at all. Couve said Schroeder had asked him what would be the best procedure for getting another initiative underway and had asked about the advisability of using the Ambassadorial Group. Couve had told Schroeder he thought this would be useful. An alternative suggestion made by Couve to Schroeder was to meet in Bonn. Couve preferred Washington because the Ambassadorial Group was accustomed to dealing with the subject, and would not be as exposed to the German press. The Secretary stated our preference for the Washington Ambassadorial Group. Couve said that Erhard had suggested a meeting of the Foreign Ministers, but this had not been followed up by Schroeder. He added that he thought the Germans would have to take the initiative, and pointed out that thus far nothing had happened. The Secretary confirmed that we had received no communication from Schroeder requesting a meeting. Couve raised a question whether we should do something or wait for the Germans to act. The consensus seemed to be that we would wait for the Germans to ask for a meeting. The Secretary said we were ready to join in some sort of German initiative. Couve asked if this meant saying something to the Soviets. The Secretary said if we agree to an initiative, we should all recognize that there may be consequences flowing from it which we would have to take into account. We cannot count forever on the raising of an initiative on Thursday, a Soviet rejection on Friday, and forgetting all about it on Saturday. He asked what the consequences would be if the Soviets bring up the status of Berlin. He wanted to be sure that in case of a Soviet reaction to discuss, we would be all together. He pointed to the possibility of a fresh crisis arising out of a German initiative. He added that he doubted such a crisis would arise, but wished to be sure everyone was aware of the possibility. He said he gained the impression that the Germans wished to talk about reunification, but that was about all. The Secretary continued, saying that we agreed with the French that the German question must be resolved in terms of resolving European problems. He did not expect any dramatic development. He did not think anyone wanted to fight a war over German reunification. The real problem, the Secretary said, is what can we do in the face of real and understandable German requirements. Couve asked whether the Secretary agreed with the French that the only real solution lay in the opening of Eastern Europe. The real problem, as he saw it, was to isolate the GDR in Eastern Europe, place it where it would have no relations with the West. The Secretary agreed. He added that he sometimes contemplated the report that Malenkov and Beria in 1955 had been prepared to do something about Germany. Ambassador Bohlen thought Malenkov would have been favorably disposed toward Germany. The Secretary said that Malenkov and Beria had even raised this thought, gave plausibility to the possibility that some day there might be a combination of German arrangements, disarmament and trade to warrant the Soviet Union going along with a united Germany. Ambassador Bohlen thought the evolution toward this end might be speeded up somewhat if an island of Stalinism in the form of the GDR finally became unacceptable to the Soviets. The Secretary asked whether the GDR would not become more important to the Russians if the Soviets pulled back their twenty-two divisions out of the GDR. The Secretary said he had tried to explain to our people why we treat the Eastern European countries differently from the GDR. He said this has compelled us to say things at times which were unpleasant to the Soviets. He referred to a speech which he had made that had had that effect. He concluded, however, that the Soviets have apparently not objected too much to our Eastern European policies. Mr. Tyler made allowance for the possibility, however, that the Soviets did view our efforts as divisive. The Secretary spoke of the extraordinary changes which had occurred in Eastern Europe. Couve agreed and pointed out that of course the Eastern Europeans were not all Slavs and also economically don't rely on the USSR. Couve also referred to the Hungarian Peter as a “nice Calvinist Bishop”. The Secretary thought it important to continue to improve our relations with Eastern Europe. In this regard, he said we were studying carefully with Congress our regulations and laws governing trade with Eastern Europe. Mr. Ball pointed out that the US had never had much trade with the Eastern European countries. More of this had traditionally taken place with Western Europe. Ambassador Thompson referred to the efforts of Berthold Beitz to develop cooperative German-Polish enterprises. Couve mentioned the growing tourism to Eastern Europe. The Secretary saw possibilities for greater tourism to Eastern Europe from the US. All agreed that this was an important element in developing better relations. The Secretary asked again if the French were prepared to support a German initiative in the Ambassadorial Group? Couve answered in the affirmative and thought the British would do so also. The Secretary said it was his impression the British would go along, but he had not yet talked to the new British Foreign Secretary about this. Ambassador Alphand asked if we waited for the Germans to make the initiative? The Secretary and Ambassador Thompson answered in the affirmative. Ambassador Alphand inquired whether we mentioned to the Germans the possible consequences of an initiative. Ambassador Thompson thought that this would depend upon the kind of initiative suggested by the Germans. Mr. Tyler mentioned the need of the Chancellor to do something before the German elections. Ambassador Thompson saw two choices as to the type of initiative raised by the Germans. The first, which would be turned down immediately by the Soviets, would call for free elections. The second might be some interim step like the setting up of humanitarian commissions. The Secretary related how he had after the December talks in Paris raised with Gromyko in a most tentative way the possibility of German unification. Gromyko, according to the Secretary, turned out to be a good Western politician. He said that there was no chance of the reunification of Germany at this time, and that he did not see what the Soviet Union had to gain in making it possible for FRG to create the impression that it was making progress in this field. The Secretary added that he would have to point out to the President that there always existed as a result of any conference with the Russians on a German initiative the possibility of a renewal of the 1958 and 1961 crises which cost us so much money and time. The Secretary wanted to be sure that we would be together if this happened, and that he would not feel so lonely as he had so often in the past. Couve said that the Soviets would try to find a solution which would give no satisfaction to the Germans. The Secretary asked Couve when the British were going to Paris.April 2–3. Couve replied that although the date had not been fixed, it could well be April 1. Mr. Tyler asked if there were any possibility of doing something on May 8, the 20th anniversary of V–E Day. Ambassador Bohlen thought that this was a rather tricky problem. Couve asked whether the Russians had said anything about May 8. The answer was “no”. Couve thought the Russians would be delighted to do something with us, which would be unpleasant for the Germans. The Secretary saw no great profit in doing something with the anniversary. Mr. Tyler suggested that much attention would be paid to the date on a worldwide basis and that the Russians should not be allowed to hold the center of the stage. The Secretary asked whether the Russians had made any suggestions to Paris. Couve replied in the negative. 96. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Confidential. Drafted by Rusk. Washington, February 18, 1965. MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION WITH THE FRENCH FOREIGN MINISTER COUVE DE MURVILLE At our luncheon today I drew Couve de Murville aside and commented quite specifically about President de Gaulle’s reference in his recent press conference to his view that the question of German reunification is a “European question”. I pointed out that the United States has a deep and vital interest in that issue, that our interest in it stemmed from World War II, and that I would like to know from Couve de Murville whether President de Gaulle’s remark implied any diminution of the American role as an essential participant in all matters affecting German reunification and Berlin. He stated categorically that no such implication was present or was intended, that France fully recognizes the United States role in the settlement of such matters. DR 97. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 GER W. Secret. Drafted by Puhan and approved in the White House on February 27. The meeting was held at the White House. Washington, February 24, 1965, 11:30 a.m. SUBJECT Dr. Barzel’s Call on the President PARTICIPANTS Germans Dr. Rainer Barzel, CDU/CSU Floor Leader in the Bundestag Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein, German Embassy Mr. Kusterer, Interpreter Americans The President Mr. Alfred Puhan, Director, GER After an exchange of cordial amenities, the President said that he liked the German Chancellor very much. He said that he had enjoyed two visits with him, and that he had enjoyed no other visit with any other foreign statesman more than that of Chancellor Erhard. He added that he liked the Chancellor’s flexibility, vision and fairness. He thought that never in our history were the American people more interested in Germany, or liked the Germans more than they do today. Dr. Barzel said he was glad to hear that. He realized that there were some problems. He said that he had called Bonn today and had found out that one of these problems, the extension of the statute of limitations for Nazi crimes, would be decided favorably. Dr. Barzel also said that he was glad that Ambassador Harriman had gone to Israel,Harriman visited Israel February 23. and that the Federal Republic would be grateful for any help he could give them there. The President said that he was very pleased with what the Chancellor had done in connection with Israel.Reference is to Erhard’s February 17 statement to the Bundestag on Near Eastern policy. Excepts are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 479–481. He said he was sorry that there had been a bit of flare-up after both sides had agreed to a “no comment” on the arms deal with Israel. The President felt that it was unfortunate that not all elements of the German Government were apparently together on this. He thought that the Von Hase statement had not been very helpful. But, the President added, his admiration for Chancellor Erhard far outweighed any lapses from good teamwork. The President said he had told Chancellor Erhard during his last visit that as long as he was President, when America would make any move of significance, Chancellor Erhard would know as soon as he would. The President said that this is why he sent a special emissary to inform the Chancellor of the decisions reached during the visit of Prime Minister Wilson. The President said that on the MLF question, the British had come here after a tough election and forming a government with a small majority. They had raised the question whether the Germans were speaking their own minds, or saying what we wanted them to say. The President said that he had told the British that the Germans were able and eloquent spokesmen and did not need us to speak for them. He had suggested to the British that they discuss this issue with the Germans themselves. Since that time he had learned from Ambassador McGhee that the question could probably not be settled before the German elections. Since that was the case, it would be better to have British-German talks. The President said that he felt strongly about this matter. The President went on to say that as for US troops in Europe, while we might not need every soldier over there, there was no doubt that so long as the Chancellor and the Germans felt they needed us, we would be willing to stay. The President repeated his admiration for Chancellor Erhard, saying that he found him to be a very understanding man, who got along well with Americans. He said that he knew that the Chancellor was under criticism at home, adding that he had experienced that himself. He said that no doubt as long as Erhard was Chancellor, we would form a good team. The President said that he had heard good things about Dr. Barzel too and his future. He said we needed young men to take place of those that are getting older. The President next said that the FRG Ambassador had our complete admiration, respect and friendship. The President was sorry that Dr. Barzel could not come later when the President would have invited him to the Ranch. The President spoke of his personal interest in Germany, his training in German through the third grade, and the fact that when one picked up the party line at the Ranch, one heard more German than English. The President told Dr. Erhard to tell his people in truth that whatever we do will be done together, that Dr. Erhard had his complete confidence and Germany has our absolute and unequivocal support, that we would do all that is humanly possible to bring about the reunification of Germany. He repeated that he never thought it was necessary to have all of our troops there, but since the Germans wanted them, we would keep them there. He expressed pleasure over the fact that the Chancellor did not require much time to explain this need to his people. He said that we wanted to see the German nation advance and continue its recovery. The President in turn expressed his appreciation for German help with the offset. Dr. Barzel stated that he was very happy to hear the President’s remarks. He was pleased at this indication of our friendship, something the young generation also had very much at heart. He said he would not take the President’s time to discuss the German question—that he would take this up with the Secretary of State and his officials—but that he had one question. He said that it had occurred to him after reading the President’s State of the Union message, why don't we develop the idea of the Great Society not just for the US, but for the entire free world. He thought it was a great idea which could find application in its various aspects (vocational education, inland waterways, housing, town planning, agriculture, structural problems) in other countries of the free world. He said he was not thinking of more aid from the US, but rather of a mutual exchange of experiences, from which we all could learn. Dr. Barzel thought that this would show the future was with the free world and not the Communist world. Such cooperation would also help dispel some of the dangers inherent in ideas stemming from the 17th and 18th Centuries. The President expressed agreement. He pointed out that in some sectors we were already doing something like that. He mentioned in this connection the Alliance for Progress in this hemisphere as well as recent conversations some of our Senators had with officials of Mexico about health problems, cancer, heart, stroke and high blood pressure. He thought that perhaps we ought to have more of this sort of exchange with the Germans too. It might be a good idea, the President thought, that certain Bundestag members could meet here with our own Congressmen to discuss such exchanges. The Ambassador said that the Germans had a great deal of experience which they would be willing to make available. The President said he would talk to leaders here about this next Tuesday. Perhaps some sort of meeting could be arranged with twenty-five on each side, possibly meeting one year in Germany and the next in the US at some resort. The President autographed a photograph of himself and gave it to Dr. Barzel. 98. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Tyler)Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 GER W–US. Secret. Washington, March 20, 1965. SUBJECT Germany: March 1965 1. Lonely and Unfairly Treated. If the object of U.S. policy is to make Germans feel closely bound to the West and fairly treated, events have conspired to produce at this time a rather extreme version of the opposite. In twenty years of following the cycles of German sentiment, I do not recall as acute and generally felt a trough as that I found in a week of intensive contacts in Bonn, Frankfurt, Freiburg, and Rheinhartshausen. Rostow reported on his discussions with German leaders in telegram 3474 from Bonn, March 14. (Ibid.) This mood arises from a convergence of specific frustrations, large and small, from many directions over recent months: —The simultaneous Israeli pressure on three fronts: military equipment, restitution, and the extension of the statute of limitations on war criminals, plus, of course, the confusions and burdens of the hasty German decision to recognize Israel. —The threatened Arab rupture of the Hallstein Doctrine plus the burning of German embassies, which is not taken with the sang-froid which we and the British have developed. —The (recently somewhat corrected) sense that the U.S. got them into trouble in the Middle East and then stood back. —The Danish protest against the appearance in Denmark of German soldiers on joint maneuvers. —The threatened removal of the German Peace Corps from Tanzania (now probably in hand).All German assistance was withdrawn following Tanzania’s recognition of the German Democratic Republic in February 1964. —The feeling that, in the face of the Wall and recent economic improvements, a kind of local identity and pride may be developing in the GDR. —What appears outside the government as a U.S. dumping of the MLF in the face of British, French, and Russian pressures—to some extent shared in the government even by those relieved that they don't have to face a confrontation with de Gaulle before the election. —A more general sense that the domestic interests of the U.S., combined with our Southeast Asia problem, have made us draw back from Europe in general and the German unity problem in particular. —The hardening policy of Moscow on Germany since Khrushchev’s departure from power and a bafflement as to how to mount a national German unity policy in either the short run (a pre-election gesture) or in the long run. —A consciousness that even the most promising recent development—a European agricultural policy—was bought at a high cost to Germany in order to limit one—but only one—element in de Gaulle’s blackmail and veto leverage over Germany; that is, de Gaulle’s threat to break up the EEC.Reference is to de Gaulle’s accusations that the Commission presidency was exceeding its powers. All this is compounded by a sense that Erhard’s leadership is infirm. The upshot is a feeling I can only describe as follows: Here it is a generation after the war; everything we try to do on the world scene fails; and it fails because others exploit systematically our war guilt; and, in the clutch, our only potential real friend, the United States, places the interests of Britain and even a disruptive France ahead of the interests of Germany, and ahead of the collective policies it espouses. 2. Stabilizing Factors. The mood, its intensity, its generality, and its causes are unmistakable. Its seriousness we will neglect to our peril—a judgment shared by Jean Laloy, Jack Nicholls, Michael Palliser, Jens Boyesen, and others in APAG, as well as by our country team in Bonn. But all is by no means lost. The roots of the German commitment to a policy of European integration and the closest possible ties to the U.S. go deeper than this painful interval. The response to my Frankfurt and Bonn speeches was: please lead us in just those directions. More important, the plea from Schroeder, Erler, Birrenbach, and Carstens, was in the same sense. Men like Barzel and Walther Casper are by no means despairing of European and Atlantic progress over the longer pull. Distinguished journalists like Georg Schroeder and Bruno Dechamps are a bit bloody but unbowed. Men like Eric Blumenfeld and Stefan Thomas are optimistic about a policy of enlarged contacts with the East and the long run implications of trends in Russia and Eastern Europe. The German youth appears more interested in contacts with East Germany than in the Hallstein Doctrine. Germany’s extraordinary continued prosperity is a substantial (but insufficient) cushion to those shocks and strains. Above all, the bilateral military tie remains strong; Von Hassel treasures his tie to Secretary McNamara; and there is only fear at the thought of U.S. troop withdrawals. But there is widespread anxiety that, without U.S. leadership that moves things forward again, even modestly, de Gaulle will gain in power. There is little attraction for leadership by Paris. It is well understood that de Gaulle cannot defend Germany and he opposes German unity and serious European integration. But, if things do not improve, I would predict the outcome will be a stronger and more nationally assertive German government, Gaullist only in the sense that it will imitate de Gaulle in a more forthright use of German national bargaining power vis-à-vis Washington, Paris, and Moscow. The Germans by and large would prefer a policy of cooperation rather than a squeaky wheel operation; but that’s the way they are likely to go unless things look up a bit. In this connection, perhaps the most interesting, if faintly ominous, moment of the APAG meeting was Muller-Roschach’s measured warning that if the Alliance cannot mount a concerted, even if modest, policy of movement on the German unity question, Germany will move towards the view that German unity is a domestic rather than an international question. 3. Six Steps in German Policy Between Now and November. The long-run answer to this problem is clear enough and old enough in our policy: to sink German nationalism and its national vulnerability in collective enterprises of Europe and the Atlantic; to engage Germany widely and, if possible, collectively on the world scene outside Europe; and, against this background, to mount a long term, pacific policy looking toward German unity and a European settlement. I can perceive no alternative to that policy that meets U.S. interests. And a week in Germany in March 1965 is most instructive; because under present strains the shape of the alternatives can be lucidly perceived, even if now far from dominant. They are all, at best, ugly and, at worst, lethal. But, of course, if our German policy is to move forward starting right now, it can only move forward within two powerful constraints: General de Gaulle’s policy; and the German election period. I believe American leadership can be exercised in this situation. I have come (under the Secretary’s prodding) to this definition of U.S. leadership: the achievement of an objective in the U.S. interest, at U.S. initiative, by a combination of example, persuasion, and pressure when: a. U.S. example, persuasion, and pressure make the object achievable at all; b. when the advantages of achievement outweigh the costs. Right now what we can achieve at all is narrowly limited by de Gaulle and the September election; but I do believe a modest policy of movement is possible and inexpensive, if we put our minds to it. Specifically, we can do the following six things, the first four of which are placed in a wider setting in paras. 4–6, below: —Generate in the Quadripartite Group, round about May, an allied policy statement in support of German unity. —Start some quiet bilateral talk, on an informal basis, on German unity at the Council of Foreign Relations, if the Germans are not ready for deeply buried planning talks, while preparing ourselves for some serious talk after September. —Maintain some quiet forward movement on the ANF/MLF in the Paris Working Group, while continuing to make clear publicly our interest in a collective Atlantic solution to an inescapable Alliance problem, and awaiting the outcome of the September election. —Use the Under Secretary’s forthcoming trip to Paris and the May Ministerial meeting to press for regular regional sessions at the U.S. Assistant Secretary level of interested countries, covering: East Europe; Africa; Middle East; South Asia; Far East; and Latin America. If this doesn't work at NATO level, offer it bilaterally to the Germans as well as the British. —The President might pick up Barzel’s (really Casper’s) suggestion that we extend the Great Society concept through an Atlantic conference (or conferences) to compare and exchange views on efforts to improve the quality of our respective affluent societies: e.g., air pollution; traffic; education in an automated age; pockets of poverty (U.K., France and Italy have them, Germany extraordinarily little); the social problem of the small, inefficient farmer; wage guidelines problems; mental health and retardation; etc. After an initial kick-off at highest level, these could give the OECD some extra life, give vitality to some unexploited strands of common interest in the Atlantic, and project to the rest of the world our common concerns with the qualitative margins of our life. (Sarge Shriver is probably the man to take this on.) —The greatest of all short-term measures would be, of course, a Presidential trip this summer to Germany. In a microscopic way, I could perceive what it means in Germany to have a live, visible American stand up and say out loud what our policy is. Georgetown and Cleveland speeches are basic; but inevitably distant and abstract. I believe a Presidential trip against the background of the other five measures suggested above, would put Germany in a mood to go forward with confidence after September on the right lines and help get men elected who are faithful to the integrationist cause in Europe and to the Atlantic connection. 4. A Strategy for German Unity. Beginning with the question of German unity, what now follows merges conclusions drawn from the APAG meeting and my talks with Germans. The APAG meeting, at its formal sessions, centered, in fact, on two matters, extensively discussed also in my bilateral contacts with Germans: an alliance strategy for German unity and the coordination of alliance policy in areas outside NATO. The third major issue of German concern was discussed privately at Reinhartshausen with the British and the Italians; that is, the Paris talks on the ANF/MLF until September and prospects post-September. These three issues are now discussed in turn. Muller-Roschach pressed the German question strongly in manner but temperately in substance (fortiter in modo, suaviter in re). And he evoked what was certainly the best APAG discussion yet of this matter. I would summarize it as follows, indicating along the way the emphasis of various members (and various Germans) where relevant. (i) It is not safe for the Alliance, for the stability of Central Europe, or for the peace for us to accept passively the split of Germany and Europe. (ii) The urgency of creating an Alliance strategy is heightened by the possible decay of the Hallstein Doctrine which will force the Germans to move in one way or another. And an Alliance strategy is the preferred course. (iii) The achievement of German unity must be peaceful—via historical process, negotiation, and persuasion. No one can tell when it will be achieved. What is important for Germany and the Alliance is a policy which involves some action in concert. Neither accepting the status quo nor waiting for the anonymous forces of history to restore unity to the German people will suffice. (iv) Aside from the Hallstein Doctrine, the major headings for an Alliance policy looking towards German unity are the following: —declaratory statements —a treaty proposal —policy towards the GDR —policy towards Eastern Europe —policy towards the Soviet Union —arms control (v) Declaratory statements have a role in Germany, in the Alliance, and vis-à-vis the Russians and the rest of the world. But if not accompanied by forward movement, they wear thin. They should be used, but sparingly. (APAG didn't discuss this but, as indicated above, I believe between now and September is such a time.) (vi) A treaty proposal to be effective must meet complex criteria: —Given the present Moscow position on Germany, it should not be designed to be acceptable now; but it should contain features (security and boundary) which will hold out some attraction for Eastern Europe and, perhaps, for Russia in the future, although not necessarily final Western positions. As Nicholls said, a treaty proposal must be regarded as part of the historical process itself. —The security issues must be dealt with in a way that, while holding out promise to the East, does not give the Russians an excessive initial bargaining position and does not set in motion neutralist forces in the West (Boyesen, Laloy, Rostow). —Since immediate Soviet acceptance is not expected, the proposal should be put into negotiation in a way that leads, if possible, to protracted Austrian Treaty-type discussions, rather than a dramatic show-down with Moscow. The advantages of a treaty proposal, if it can be devised, were judged to be these: —It would reassure the Germans of Allied seriousness while forcing serious thought in Germany about what unity entails. —It would dramatize to the East and to the world the pacific features of a German settlement. —It would permit smaller steps to be taken as part of a large mosaic, so that they would appear less ad hoc and insignificant. (As our country team in Bonn emphasized, and I can now attest, this view is held by many thoughtful Germans.) No one was confident that a proposal of this kind could be devised; although the technical success of the 1959 package led, on balance, to optimism. All agreed it was worth thinking about now and working on after the September election. (vii) As for the GDR , it was agreed that in the matter of intra-German contacts, Bonn should be the judge of the proper balance; all agreed that Allied recognition of the GDR was ruled out; as for Allied contacts with the GDR, the Belgians and Danes explained their problems with the strongly reiterated (Carstens as well as Muller-Roschach) German policy of denying Allied contacts with the GDR and isolating and focusing the Soviet zone on West German relations. Since the TTD (East German travel documents) issue was being discussed elsewhere in NATO, the matter was left. (Both Schroeder and Carstens expressed the need for more West German contacts with East Germany; and Carstens revived tentatively the old proposals for mixed commissions. The pressure for more contacts with East Germany is clearly rising in West Germany.) (viii) As for Eastern Europe, there was general agreement (with some familiar Dutch scepticism) that the forces at work in that region could be turned to Western advantage in general, and to assist the process of movement towards German unity in particular. A higher degree of concert in the Alliance in orchestrating policies towards Eastern Europe was generally approved. (Schroeder spoke in some pain of his difficulties with the credit-limit issue and with French egoism in its Eastern European policy; but agreed that identity of policy was not necessary on issues other than credit.) The central argument in APAG was that the loss of Moscow’s control over and diminution of its ideological stake in Eastern Europe would, along with other factors, hasten the day when responsible men in Moscow might think the advantages of a European security agreement outweighed the costs of surrendering ideological control over East Germany. (With respect to Eastern Europe, Vaes reported Rapacki’s discussion with Spaak on the advantages of first disengagement, then Germany unity. Laloy was wonderfully lucid and vigorous in dealing with both Rapacki and Spaak. Vaes privately agreed and deplored Spaak’s vulnerability on this issue. In the formal meeting he was somewhat inhibited—not by the presence of foreigners but by the presence of Spaak’s son-in-law, Michael Palliser.) (ix) As for policy towards the Soviet Union, (leaving arms control to section x, below), it was accepted that in talking about the peaceful unification of Germany we were talking about a basic shift in the character of the Soviet Union and its view of the world scene—a transition from ambitions to lead a global ideological system to a mature acceptance of its considerable but limited role as a nation state among many. Forces were at work tending to press Russian policy in this direction, but clearly the day had not come. Nor could anyone predict when it would come. It followed, however, that everything we did on the world scene to discourage Soviet hopes that the expansion of its ideological power was possible and everything we did to dramatize the place of dignity awaiting it as a nation state was relevant to the problem of German unity and a European settlement. At the present time, given the case of Communist policy, this bore on what we did and failed to do as an Alliance about Communist policies in Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America. And it bore also on our capacity to continue to demonstrate the cohesion of the West in defense and other matters. (x) With respect to arms control and a European security settlement, it was agreed that the relation between these somewhat separate theologies ought to be looked at closely for three reasons. First, it is possible that at a moment when Moscow would be willing to contemplate German unity it might also be prepared to contemplate an effectively inspected arms control system on a world basis: both go to the heart of the transition from a Bolshevik view of the world in Moscow to a more narrowly national view of the world. Second, given the changes in military technology since 1959, it may be more rational for Moscow, as well as the West, to conceive of a European security arrangement in broader terms than has been traditional in German security negotiations; perhaps, for example, embracing nuclear weapons systems and delivery capabilities outside Germany, from Western Russia to the Atlantic. The rational outcome might be a NATO-Warsaw Pact arms control agreement rather than a piece of surgery on Germany alone—indeed, a good piece of the total problem of arms control. Third, in general arms control negotiations the problems of allied policy towards German unity should be kept clearly in mind. They should, if possible, help move towards German unity and a European security settlement, rather than away from it. (xi) Although these were the elements in an Alliance policy for German unity and a European security settlement, and, although all of us bore a responsibility for contributing to policy-making and action to bring it to pass, Germany had a double responsibility: it had to make concrete policy suggestions under these headings, and German political leadership had a responsibility for creating a political and psychological environment in Germany which could accept the German unity problem in these wide-ranging terms. I have two final comments on this generalization of what transpired on my trip concerning the German question. First, it struck me with great force, in talking with Germans, that there was a gap between the classic Adenauer position (formalistic statements on German unity plus the Hallstein Doctrine) and how Germans thought and talked in private—not merely in talks with me alone, but in pretty large groups. The headings under which we considered the problem in APAG did not greatly differ from how Germans, in and out of the government, considered the matter (except one Herr Theo Loch of the Rheinische Merkur, who said he didn't want any Prussian provinces in Germany and was content to rely on the force de frappe for protection. But this is the view of a tiny German minority.). In short, it is my impression that after the German election, it may well be possible for a German government to talk honest sense on the unity issue. Second, there emerged in APAG a quite strong sentiment to enlarge the role of NATO on the matter of German unity and a European security settlement. The Italians, Canadians, and others spoke of their dissatisfaction with the monopolistic role of the Quadripartite Group. The dilemma is familiar enough: it is tough enough to get unity in the Quadripartite Group; but, in fact, the most vital interests of the whole Alliance are engaged in these matters and, as Mario Mondello and Arnold Smith pointed out, the cost of the present system is that those outside the Quadripartite Group feel no responsibility for the German unity question. My impression at the moment is this: If we can get anything like agreement over the next year on an Alliance strategy towards German unity and a European settlement, either in the Quadripartite Group or as among the UK, Germany, and U.S. (and I am confident this is possible), we ought to widen parallel discussions in NATO—notably on the strategy as a whole and the non-treaty aspects of that strategy (e.g., policy towards Eastern Europe). 5. Consultation. There was much talk of consultation—between Germans and myself and within APAG. I was alerted to the cutting edge of the problem by a widespread German view which is this: OK, we consulted with the Americans on the Middle East; we agreed to carry some of the White Man’s burden with the tanks for Israel; we were assured that our position with the Arabs wouldn't blow; it blew; for quite a while the Americans were out to lunch; they finally helped with courage and fraternity; but the lesson for Germany is—no consultation, just a nice, straightforward policy of narrow national interest. With Germans I tried to turn this around, arguing that the Middle East was a very tough area where you could easily meet yourself coming through a swinging door; successively, there was Suez, Lebanon-Jordan, the U.S. miseries over Yemen, the current German miseries. On each occasion one or two of us felt extremely lonely, while the others moved in gallantly to pick up the commercial change and to represent Western interests. Moreover, we felt damned lonely in Laos and South Viet Nam; the Belgians and we were lonely in the Congo; the British and Germans pretty lonely in East Africa; etc. The lesson was that the serious interests in the Middle East and elsewhere were common interests; namely, to keep the regions tolerably pacified, to strengthen the hands of the moderates, and to keep Communist influence within bounds. The answer was more sustained, wider, and more responsible consultation, not less. There was, on the whole, a German willingness to listen to this argument, although they will be shy about weapons and soldiers outside Germany for quite a while, except as part of a completely integrated NATO force. (As Barzel put it to me, better than his reported statements in Washington, what if they turned up one ex-Nazi sergeant in Cyprus or South Viet Nam?) If we move rapidly on consultation, I am convinced the Germans will play either multilaterally or even bilaterally, notably in economic and political matters. Against this background, conscious of the Under Secretary’s impending mission to Paris, and after some preliminary talks the first night at APAG, I put in a paper entitled (after Jack Nicholls' suggestion) “The Resolution of Reinhartshausen.” It was designed to dramatize the urgency of regular consultation at the one critical level where consultation does not now systematically exist; namely, that of the U.S. Assistant Secretary with operational (rather than planning) responsibilities. Its critical passage was the following: 1. They should engage government representatives who bear direct operational responsibility for the conduct of policy in the area concerned. 2. They should be regularly conducted, whether crises exist or not, with provision for extraordinary meetings. 3. They should be open to all NATO members interested in the area and prepared to attend. 4. The Secretary General, or his representative, should preside; and the Council should be informed of the results. 5. With respect to diplomatic proposals for German unity and European security, the three Western occupying powers bear a special responsibility. But, in respect to other matters, the objective should not be to yield total uniformity of action by NATO members, but rather to produce: a. a common understanding of the problems involved and of the common vital interests at stake; b. collective or individual policies designed to reflect that understanding and those interests, with the subsequent conduct of each member to be determined by the special character of his limitations and possibilities for action in the area. I knew Jean Laloy could not sign on and he understood exactly the purpose of the exercise, which we discussed. The substance of the message was broadly agreed, after various statesmanlike reservations, and, of course, not in the form of a resolution. It will be incorporated in some anodyne form in the Secretariat report to the Council; but, more important, it will be taken home to the various capitals. My recommendation is this: a. The Under Secretary should make a strong pitch for systematic consultation along these lines at NAC at the end of the month; b. The issue should be pressed at the May Ministerial meetings; c. If there is no agreement, we should beef up and make more systematic our bilaterals with Great Britain and Germany, perhaps bringing the three of us together in tune with the Canadians (now hooked in Ceylon and Tanzania), the Italians, and any other interested parties, on an ad hoc basis. In this matter of homely, practical responsible consultations on dirty, difficult problems, we should not let a French veto frustrate us. I suspect we could get agreement to consult regularly in Washington. 6. ANF/MLF . This matter was not discussed formally in APAG. I talked with Scheske and Carstens at some length. Also, at their initiative, with Nicholls and Palliser; and then, at his initiative, with Farace. The upshot is the following. a. The Germans will file, I believe, a paper replying to our questions about the UK position. b. The German anxieties about the British position are: the scale of the MLF component; the proportionate shares (which they want equal and not distorted by assorted British nationally manned hardware); the assignment to a new commander rather than SACEUR; the Italian pressure for a European clause more explicit than they or we want and the British insistence on no European clause; and their (the German) desire to avoid any further nuclear-denial commitments outside a German settlement. c. Carstens, at least, is clear that all these matters are negotiable with the British, given the underlying U.K. position (see below). d. What the Germans want right now is: a U.S. initiative to get the Paris talks going; a U.S. position that helps narrow the gap quietly in Paris so that motion is maintained and things are more nearly ready by September; some high level overt statement of the continuity of the U.S. interest on an integrated settlement with a substantial MLF component to supplement the statement at the Ranch. e. On the critical question—whether the Germans would be willing to face a confrontation with de Gaulle after September on the MLF—I got various answers which I reported by cable. The Foreign Office view is clearly (from Carstens as well as Scheske) that this is a matter of German national interest; and that de Gaulle cannot and should not have the right both to a force de frappe and a French veto on German participation in a collective effort. So far as German unity is concerned, Germany’s nuclear role must, evidently, be considered in a general settlement. But one should not forego doing what is right in the West in the vague hope of a German settlement, when none is in sight. It is, however, correct to make a change in Germany’s nuclear role explicitly a part of a German settlement, and to signal that fact in an ANF/MLF treaty. Carstens would not predict the position of a German government after September. Another view is, simply, that Erhard is dominated by a desire to be elected in his own right. If the present political constellation is returned to power, he would cheerfully face down de Gaulle on this and other matters—notably since de Gaulle’s threat of breaking up the EEC is no longer credible. There is general agreement, right or wrong, that a grand coalition of the CDU/SPD would have no problem with de Gaulle and the MLF; and this is a possible and widely hoped for result. What I would add to my cabled view is that the posture of the U.S. on the short run issues laid out in para. 3, above, may significantly determine what kind of German government we get in September and what its policy will then be. We should try to behave in such a way as to strengthen the Atlanticists in the German election, while we move quietly in Paris to bring the UK, Germany, and Italy together, so that we can move or not move promptly when we know the constitution and temper of the new German government. f. As for Nicholls and Palliser, they report the following. The present UK government wants a settlement. The MLF component, the financial shares, the command issue are all negotiable. The European clause presents political difficulties in Parliament, although a weak European clause is not ruled out. (Strangely, this may prove the toughest issue.) They are primarily concerned with: whether a new German government would face down de Gaulle; whether a new British election and the return of a Conservative government would throw the thing off the track again, for a while; and about the tendency of the Conservatives, having carefully analyzed the strong pro-European content of the Liberal vote, may turn to a loose European deterrent, notably in the face of what they regard as weak U.K. leadership in this matter. In general, they want almost precisely what the Germans want out of Paris: U.S. leadership in getting the Paris meetings started; U.S. leadership in quietly narrowing the UK-German positions so that we are tolerably prepared by September; an interval to assess the temper of the new German government in this matter; then rapid diplomatic movement to button it up. g. Although others in the Italian Foreign Office are probably more knowledgeable, Farace drew me aside to ask what we thought should and could be done in the Paris meetings. I told him that Washington was in the process of evaluating the Wilson-Erhard visit when I left. I did not know what would be decided in Washington about the Paris talks; but it was my personal view that the British and German and Italian views were not as far apart as might appear; that we should use Paris quietly to narrow the gap between now and September; and then we would see. And, indeed, that is my recommendation. 99. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Drafted by Shullaw and approved in S and G on April 2. The source text is marked “Part 1 of 4.” The meeting was held at the British Embassy. Stewart visited Washington March 21–24. Washington, March 22, 1965, 2:30 p.m. SUBJECT German Reunification PARTICIPANTS UK Side Foreign Secretary Michael Stewart Sir Harold Caccia, Permanent Under Secretary of State, Foreign Office Michael Stewart, Charge d'Affaires a.i., British Embassy R.S. Crawford, Asssistant Under Secretary, Foreign Office Michael Hadow, Counselor, Foreign Office J.N. Henderson, Private Secretary to the Foreign Secretary John Harris, Special Assistant to the Foreign Secretary US Side The Secretary Ambassador Bruce Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson Willian R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary, EUR Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary, NEA J. Harold Shullaw, Director, BNA The Secretary said that the Germans want some initiative on reunification but are reluctant to get into a consideration of borders and security arrangements. We are prepared to be helpful but are not clear what can be done. We have picked up the idea of a statement on May 8, but this has been somewhat downgraded by premature publicity. The problem is that if we make proposals to the Russians they may come back with counter proposals for a free city status for Berlin and we could find ourselves back in the crisis atmosphere of 1961. We have no desire to see a repetition of the Western disarray of that period when we found very little support among our allies, with the exception of the British. The Secretary said that we have a preliminary draft of a May 8 statement and it is up to the Germans to say whether or not it meets their needs. The Foreign Secretary said that while electoral considerations are prompting the Germans to urge a Western initiative at this time, a further motivation results from the difficulties they are experiencing with the UAR and other Arab states. The Federal Republic is concerned at the prospect of further recognitions of the East German regime and hopes to discourage such action by a Western declaration. Mr. Stewart said that there is no immediate prospect of getting anywhere on reunification and this means that a Western statement can be hardly more than a series of platitudes. Ambassador Thompson said that our draft statement emphasizes four-power responsibility, but the Germans would like to include a reference to negotiations; this causes problems since there is no agreed Western position; the Germans say that it is impossible to get their political leaders to focus on the problem until negotiations are about to begin. Sir Harold said that Gromyko had emphasized that disarmament would have to be a precondition to reunification. The Secretary noted that security arrangements and disarmament would have to be a part of an agreement on reunification. The Foreign Secretary replied that reunification cannot be achieved without the agreement of the Russians and that is not in prospect. The Secretary said that in December Gromyko had suggested that there might be some point in resuming bilateral US/Soviet talks and he did not exclude the possibility of injecting some new elements in the discussions. The Secretary recalled that the previous bilateral talks in 1961 were limited to the problem of Berlin. He said that we are not enthusiastic about resuming these talks without knowing what our allies think. The Secretary said that in the course of the German election campaign, we can anticipate agitation on the question of the Eastern territories and public statements requiring a reaction from us. Mr. Stewart said emphatically that there is no prospect of the Germans recovering the lost territories and they should be in no doubt on the score. A reunified Germany within present borders is what is required. Ambassador Thompson said Germany would like some minor border rectifications, for example in the Stettin area. 100. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Berlin, vol. 1. No classification marking. Washington, April 7, 1965. SUBJECT Western reply to Soviets on Berlin meetingFollowing a March announcement by the Federal Republic that it would hold a meeting of the Bundestag in Berlin, East German authorities began to block Autobahn and rail and canal traffic for periods of time beginning April 1 to impede Bundestag members from reaching Berlin. 1. I attach for information the text of the Western reply to Soviet protests on the Berlin meeting of the Bundestag.Not printed. For text of the Soviet note and the U.S. reply, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 891–893. Identical notes were delivered to the Soviet Union by France and Great Britain. 2. The language is not perfect, but that is the consequence of 4-Power coordination, and speed is more important than fighting over words in these matters. 3. Nitpicks aside, the message is clear, firm, and even-tempered, and I think the State Department has done a good job of coordinating. Since it meets your guidance at lunch yesterday, George Ball and I have signed off on it and it is being delivered today. McG. B. 101. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 8. Confidential. Drafted by Puhan and Finn, cleared by Klein of the NSC staff, and approved by Tyler. Repeated to Berlin, Paris for USRO, and Moscow. Washington, April 15, 1965, 3:09 p.m. 3141. Following summary of Brandt-Erler visit is FYI only, Noforn, uncleared and subject to amendment upon review of memcons.A memorandum of Brandt’s conversation with Secretary McNamara is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER. Memoranda of the Brandt-Rusk conversation are ibid., POL 32–4 GER. No memorandum of Brandt’s conversation with President Johnson was found. The briefing paper prepared for the President is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 9. 1. President saw Brandt and Erler for twenty minutes evening April 14. Background statement issued by White House being sent septel summarizes their discussions.Telegram 3096 to Bonn, April 15. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–8) 2. Vice President Humphrey, toasting Mayor Brandt at luncheon he gave for him at Blair House, said after heavy harassment of Berlin we respect Berlin more. After recent harassment we and our Allies took another good look at situation. It caused us to remember importance of our Alliance and we hope every member noticed. Brandt called Berlin success story of West and especially of US. Brandt told Vice President after luncheon FRG was not interested in becoming a nuclear power but felt it was legitimate for Germans to participate in shaping of strategy involving nuclear arms. The Vice President told Brandt our long-range missiles and Polaris submarines were most reliable and most important substitute for IRBMs. Vice President said Soviets were under no illusion re purpose and dependability of US deterrent. 3. During call on Secretary, Brandt and Erler asked for Secretary’s assessment of Viet-Nam situation. Both deeply impressed with Secretary’s presentation and promised to contribute to greater understanding in Germany for US position and intentions in Viet-Nam. On German reunification Brandt expressed hope for some kind of expression, hopefully tripartite but at minimum from US alone, on German reunification on May 8. Brandt recognized such appeal as morale factor and not substantive move toward reunification. Felt it would be useful particularly for German voters and especially youth born in 1944 who would cast first ballot on Sept. 19. Brandt hoped for more substantive moves after elections. Secretary said we were still hoping for tripartite declaration but without doubt as minimum would do something on our own on May 8. On Berlin Brandt saw recent Soviet harassmentSee footnote 2, Document 100. as support pried out of Soviets by GDR, praised US “massive political-diplomatic steps,” suggested we seek to discuss with Soviets recent “military maneuvers” so that they could not become weapon used repeatedly against Berlin. Secretary stated we had underestimated degree of Soviet-GDR reaction to Bundestag meeting. Secretary added we did not use all possible countermeasures because of pre-announced limitations of harassment and subsequent short duration. Last major theme raised by Brandt and Erler was European unity. Brandt and Erler both said British were changing their views on Common Market. Under Secretary Ball stated we would like to see UK join Common Market on Common Market, not EFTA, terms. Erler asked that we coordinate better our trade policies with Eastern Europe. Suggested that OECD be improved. He considered long-term credits for USSR nothing more than development aid. 4. In meeting with Secretary McNamara, Brandt suggested effort be made to reach understanding with Soviets re future Communist military maneuvers around Berlin so that Western access would not be interfered with. Brandt said he saw no present indication that Communists would interfere with access in future. McNamara expressed view Communists had achieved some psychological impact by showing force that they could bring to bear around Berlin. On French policy, Brandt and Erler thought French position in Common Market had passed point of no return. Erler considered French flirtation with Moscow to have nuisance value rather than as serious effort to establish alliance with Russians. On alliance nuclear organization Erler felt FRG unwilling make any decisions before September elections and eager to avoid hassle with French. Erler implied Germans would prefer greater role in strategic planning and targeting without creation of new nuclear force and felt this was also British approach. McNamara stressed US desire to be helpful to its non-nuclear allies in Europe. McNamara and Erler agreed that NATO should employ whatever weapons might be necessary to achieve its objectives and that study is required to determine that conventional weapons are available as necessary. Erler suggested that Germans should talk frankly to French about French policies indicating in which areas they could follow French and where they could not follow, as in French policy toward NATO. Erler said nuclear problem has not been solved and will recur. 5. In meeting with McGeorge Bundy, Brandt said that he thought foreign policy would not be election issue, that he does not plan go Moscow before elections but would not close door to ultimate visit. In connection with Hallstein Doctrine Brandt said problem essentially one of maintaining and broadening contacts. He agreed with FRG’s present course in Eastern Europe of building relations gradually, with initial emphasis on economic contacts. Rusk 102. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Confidential. Drafted by Appling and approved in G on April 17. The source text is marked “Part I of III.” Washington, April 15, 1965, 4 p.m. SUBJECT Allied Statement on German Unity PARTICIPANTS United States Ambassador Llewellyn E. Thompson Mr. Hugh G. Appling, EUR/WE France Ambassador Herve Alphand Mr. Bruno de Leusse, Minister Counselor Ambassador Alphand said that although his Government had been unenthusiastic from the beginning about the idea of a new allied statement on German unity, they were prepared to go along with such a gesture. The GOF believed it would lead nowhere and supposed that neither we nor the FRG had any illusions. The Ambassador said he was under instructions from Paris to submit for our consideration the attached new draft of such an allied declaration.Not printed. He believed it was substantially the same as the earlier draft but somewhat terser. The new French draft omitted any mention of the U.N. They thought this was a good idea since the U.N. had never been brought into the German matter. Neither did their draft refer to relations between the two Germanies, but rather held to the basic idea that reunification must be based on self-determination. They reaffirmed Four-Power responsibility, emphasizing the relationship of the German problem to European security. He said that the draft had been shown to the German Charge in Paris who considered it adequate. It had also been shown to the German Embassy here. The French Ambassador in London was presenting the draft to the Foreign Office. Ambassador Alphand said that a second question was the date of the declaration. May 8 would hardly be good from a German viewpoint. Gromyko would be in Paris April 24–30. The Germans wished to refer to the declaration in the communiqué following the NATO meeting May 11. Therefore, sometime between the first and the eighth of May seemed best. An early date might preempt a Soviet statement on the same matter. Ambassador Thompson suggested that May Day might not be the best time and that it might be wise not to leave the Soviets much time to respond between issuance of the declaration and the NATO meeting. Finally, Ambassador Alphand suggested that the text of the declaration and the date of its issuance be considered in a meeting of the Ambassadorial Group Tuesday, April 20. Ambassador Thompson said that at first glance the French draft seemed a good one and, subject to the Secretary’s views, we would consider taking it up in a meeting of the Ambassadorial Group April 20. We would take appropriate steps to convene such a meeting. Ambassador Thompson raised the question of how the declaration would be made. Ambassador Alphand conjectured that it might be delivered by Ambassadors of the three Western powers to the Foreign Office in Moscow. Ambassador Thompson suggested that the best procedure might be parallel public statements in each of the three Western capitals. It was agreed that this question of procedure could be discussed in the Ambassadorial Group also. 103. National Intelligence EstimateSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates. Secret; Controlled Dissemination. The estimate was prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the National Security Agency and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board. Washington, April 22, 1965. NIE 23–65 PROSPECTS FOR WEST GERMAN FOREIGN POLICY The Problem To estimate the principal trends in West German foreign policy during the next two years or so. Conclusions A. West German leaders are becoming increasingly impatient to adopt a more self-reliant, distinctively German, foreign policy. Conscious of their country’s growing economic and military strength, they are eager to attain a more influential position within the Western Alliance and a greater share in the formulation of Western defense and nuclear policies. At the same time, they are anxious to impart momentum, if necessary on their own, toward the reunification of their country. Whatever the outcome of the national election this fall, we believe that during the next two years or so these tendencies will be reflected in a more assertive style and some differences of emphasis in foreign policy. Nevertheless, barring important external developments, the West German government will probably be constrained by practical considerations—notably the rigidity of the power relationship in Europe—from making any major changes in the basic lines of policy. (Paras. 1–11) B. Specifically, we believe that West Germany will retain its present commitments in Europe and the Western Alliance for the period of this estimate, and will continue to depend on US nuclear power to protect the integrity of its borders and those of West Berlin. Though we expect sympathy to grow for de Gaulle’s idea of “Europe for the Europeans,” with some accompanying interest in a European nuclear force, West Germany’s strong defense ties with the US will almost certainly prevent a significant shift away from present defense policy during the next two years or so. (Paras. 12–19) C. In policy toward the Communist world the new West German administration will be likely to make more vigorous attempts than its predecessor to take the initiative. This will almost certainly include further efforts to expand the West German position in Eastern Europe. It may also be reflected in moves to resolve the German question by direct discussions with the Soviet leaders and additional steps to “normalize” relations with East Germany. Yet substantial progress in any of these spheres is unlikely unless an important shift occurs in Soviet policy toward Germany; a marked acceleration in the trend toward independence or internal “liberalization” in Eastern Europe could also open up new opportunities for West Germany in the area. (Paras. 20–23) D. Beyond the period of this estimate, we believe the potentiality for important changes in West German foreign policy will increase. In the event of rapid or fundamental changes outside Germany—e.g., in the Communist world or the Western Alliance—West German leaders may find themselves in a position to act independently in a way which would importantly affect the interests of their allies, favorably or adversely. For example, if the Soviets eventually are forced by events to reassess their position in Europe, this might open the way for a West German-Soviet agreement to resolve the German question at the expense of the East German regime and perhaps of Bonn’s Western allies. Or future West German leaders might be tempted to seek to exploit popular frustration over the absence of visible movement toward reunification and might thus tend to revive German chauvinism and the appeal of a boisterous and intolerant extremism.The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, feels that this Conclusion does not adequately represent either the negative or positive possibilities over the longer term. In particular, it fails to note such possible favorable developments as a post-de Gaulle softening of French opposition toward European integration, significant progress toward reunification consistent with US interests in a changed international context, continuing economic prosperity, and especially the attraction of a strong political-military tie to the US. Moreover, the Conclusion omits such critically important adverse possibilities (mentioned in Para. 27) as major disturbances in Alliance relations, which could cause Bonn to reopen fundamental questions of defense policy. [Footnote in the source text.] (Paras. 26–28) [Here follows the 9-page Discussion section.] 104. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Thompson Files: Lot 67 D 2. Confidential. Drafted by McIntyre. Washington, April 26, 1965. SUBJECT Western Three Declaration PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein, German Embassy Mr. Berndt von Staden, Counselor, German Embassy Ambassador Llewellyn E. Thompson, S/AL Mr. Stuart H. McIntyre, GER Ambassador Knappstein said it seems difficult for the four fathers which constitute the Ambassadorial Group to give birth to the child (Western Three Declaration on Germany).At the April 20 Ambassadorial Group meeting, the French had introduced their draft statement and the United States had outlined requests for modifications in its language. A report on these discussions is in telegram 3169 to Bonn, April 20. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 32–4 GER) Ambassador Thompson quipped “even a pygmy”. Ambassador Knappstein said the situation with respect to the Declaration is “bad”. If no declaration at all were issued, that would be most unfortunate. Even if unilateral declarations were made, Moscow could use the differences in them to split the Allies. Knappstein said his instructions are: (1) to support the American suggestion of an added sentence which makes clear Four-Power responsibility for the reunification of Germany; (2) to see if a unanimous declaration can be found. Knappstein said that at lunch today Alphand had said that if the Americans continue to insist on their sentence or on the compromise which they offered and which Paris has already turned down, we will then have a deadlock and he will return to the original French draft. Ambassador Thompson said if Alphand could accept our sentence there would be no impasse. Even if the sentence is somewhat repetitious of other language in the declaration, this should not be an obstacle to its acceptance. Knappstein agreed. Knappstein said, speaking personally, he had told Alphand that perhaps paragraph one of the Declaration could be changed sufficiently to take account of the American requirements. Knappstein thought the word “continuing” might be inserted before “obligations and responsibilities”; also “German reunification” could replace the word “German”; the word “incumbent” could be changed to some other word which could more accurately reflect the meaning of the French text. Ambassador Thompson said the real difficulty was that Ambassador Alphand had linked the Declaration to de Gaulle’s February 4 press conference. We did not agree with the French position as stated by de Gaulle. We have suggested a formula which does not mean acceptance of the French point of view by us nor of our point of view by them. This formula is the addition of the phrase “all of the peoples concerned” rather than the words “of Europe,” at the end of paragraph 3. Knappstein said he contradicted Alphand strongly regarding the role of the US in relation to the German problem, pointing out that at the Peace Conference it was necessary for the US to be present. Under no circumstances could the Germans envisage the US not being present. Ambassador Thompson said he felt that even though Paris had already rejected the “all of the peoples concerned” compromise he nevertheless felt this was still the best one from the French standpoint and should be acceptable to them. Thompson said we would rather have unilateral statements than buy the French line if it comes to that. Mr. Von Staden asked if the placement of the sentence proposed by the US was important. Thompson replied our preference was for after the third paragraph but we could accept it at the end of the Declaration. Another possibility would be to drop the French sentence at the end of the third paragraph and drop our sentence too. Ambassador Knappstein said that the Germans do not like the fact that the only reference to reunification is that the German people “asks for its reunification.” Thompson thought that paragraph one might be revised to include reunification. The US wants it clear that it retains its interests in the German problem and Europe; as he had stated in the Ambassadorial Group, we maintain six divisions as well as nuclear weapons there. Thompson said the future is what is important for us with respect to Europe. Von Staden thought there were many possible changes which could be made. The real problem is the French rejection of the compromise “of all the peoples concerned”, which is neutral and protects their position. Knappstein said Chancellor Erhard is strong on the need to emphasize Four-Power responsibility for the German question and supports the US suggested added statement. Ambassador Thompson referred to an article appearing in Die Welt on the Western Three Declaration, and said it was regrettable that press leaks continue. Knappstein said that Federal Press Chief von Hase had already replied as follows to this article: “The responsibility of the Four Powers is the decisive foundation of German reunification policy. There is no thought of reducing or eliminating this Four-Power responsibility as the main element of German policy. The FRG would consider it unwise to alter anything in connection with this firmly agreed state of affairs.” Thompson said that he had pointed out to Alphand that the first sentence of the fourth paragraph appeared to take adequate account of the main point raised by the French. Von Staden suggested one compromise might be to drop the final sentence of paragraph one of the French draft and put in the sentence the US was advocating. Ambassador Thompson questioned the usefulness of this but said he would have to refer the suggestion to his government. He said he wanted to be clear that we were not going to agree in the draft Declaration or any other place to the emphasis on Europe which the French were attempting to urge. Speaking personally, he thought that there were five possibilities: (1) drop the second sentence of the first paragraph and the final sentence of the third paragraph and insert in its stead, at an appropriate place, the responsibility of the Western Three governments to work for reunification. (2) The words “of all the peoples in Europe” could be replaced by “of all peoples concerned” at the end of the third paragraph. (3) The last sentence of the third paragraph could be dropped and our sentence could come later in the Declaration. (4) Eliminate both the final sentence of the third paragraph and the sentence proposed by the US. (5) We could all issue differing unilateral statements if agreement on a Western Three Declaration is not possible. Ambassador Knappstein said that on the question of the date of issuance the FRG prefers May 5, 6, or 7 to other dates that have been suggested, Ambassador Thompson thought the French may wish to make a statement on May 8 themselves. He said Ambassador Alphand had told him that the French may have to make their position clear in the public mind on the effort to arrive at a Western Three Declaration. If the French do go to the press we will probably get a polemical statement, Ambassador Thompson thought. Mr. McIntyre said that he had been told by Mr. Morizet, Counselor of the French Embassy, that the French cannot report possible compromises to Paris at this time—their instructions are so strict, Morizet said, that without an Ambassadorial Group meeting they would not be able to take up with Paris the question of possible compromises. Morizet had noted that compromises which the Americans had put forward so far had all been previously rejected by Paris in any case. Ambassador Thompson said that the French cannot run our business for us. He thought it would be better if a declaration could be worked out without having an Ambasssadorial Group meeting, but stated that we are ready to meet if the others wish a meeting, Knappstein said that the only compromise which Alphand had discussed with him was to broaden the language of the second sentence of the first paragraph so that it read “obligations and responsibilities concerning Germany as a whole” rather than “obligations and responsibilities concerning Germany”. Ambassador Thompson emphasized that it is important to stress that Four-Power responsibility continues into the future. When de Gaulle spoke on February 4 he was speaking of the future and it is important that we not lend support to his conception of how the German problem will be solved. Ambassador Thompson said that he hoped Ambassador Knappstein agreed with him that it was important, if an Ambassadorial Group meeting is held, that we do not permit the French to split the FRG and the US. Knappstein thought that the clarification issued by the French Foreign Office on February 5, which followed on the heels of de Gaulle’s February 4 press conference, could perhaps be worked into a declaration. He expressed the view that if a declaration is not agreed and it becomes necessary for individual members of the Ambassadorial Group to issue unilateral statements, it will be particularly bad for the French in German public opinion. Ambassador Thompson said we should hold firm—the French are now in an impossible position. Mr. Von Staden said the FRG would prefer the language “in the whole of Germany” to “in the two parts of Germany” in paragraph three. Knappstein did not think that the FRG should press for the change, however, and Ambassador Thompson agreed. Thompson said that is the language “in the whole of Germany” were used we would open ourselves to a propaganda onslaught by the Soviets since they would argue that self-determination applied in the whole of Germany would give an unfair advantage to the FRG since it is far more populous than the GDR. Ambassador Thompson thought, although other possibilities might exist, the most promising possibilities for reaching agreement are: (1) inclusion of our sentence at either the end of the third paragraph or the end of the Declaration; (2) drop the French final sentence of paragraph 3 and our sentence; or (3) substitute “of all the peoples concerned” for “of all the peoples of Europe”. 105. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Repeated to Bonn, London, and Moscow. A notation on the source text reads: “Handled Limdis per S/S-O.” Paris, April 29, 1965, 1800Z.The Z refers to Greenwich Mean Time. 6136. When Lucet briefed DCM on Gromyko communiqué,For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 522–523. he made declaration of profound unhappiness over Washington Ambassadorial Group problem on declaration. He said French felt they had met our point after misunderstanding when French thought matter had been settled proved erroneous. French now felt, he continued, that we were trying to impose something. He stressed French were acting in good faith and not trying undermine Four-Power responsibility for Germany. He referred again to French action in adding reference to Geneva declaration of 1955For text of the Four-Power declaration on Germany, November 16, 1955, see American Foreign Policy, 1950–1955: Basic Documents, vol. I, pp. 1926–1927. on this point. He expressed question as to whether US was trying to maneuver so that it could pin responsibility for absence of agreed declaration on French especially as time growing so short. British sources here indicate they have information to effect Foreign Office is in bind because present French language drafted by de Gaulle who instructed Quai to insist on its inclusion. Regular Franco-German monthly meeting at Lucet-Meyer-Lindberg level will take place May 3 and French plan raise matter urgently with Germans then if it is not settled in interim. Bohlen 106. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Confidential. Drafted by McIntyre. Washington, April 29, 1965. SUBJECT Western Three Declaration on Germany PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein, German Embassy Mr. Berndt von Staden, Counselor, German Embassy Ambassador Llewellyn E. Thompson, S/AL Mr. Stuart H. McIntyre, GER Ambassador Knappstein called on Ambassador Thompson under instructions to make a compromise proposal regarding the Western Three declaration on Germany. The Germans were making this suggestion, Ambassador Knappstein noted, in an effort to save the Western Three-Power declaration on Germany. The Germans were coming to us before going to the French with the proposal. The FRG was also describing its proposal to its embassies in Paris and London but they will not mention it to the French and British until it has been discussed with the United States and our reaction is obtained. Ambassador Knappstein said the Germans suggest the following re-draft of the second sentence of the declaration: “The Governments of the Republic of France, the United Kingdom and the United States of America in conjunction with the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany have recently undertaken a further examination of the German problem and of the prospects for a resumption of discussions on this subject with the Government of the Soviet Union. They have taken this action by virtue of the obligations and responsibilities concerning Germany, including Berlin and access thereto, devolving upon them without change since the end of the Second World War—obligations and responsibilities which the Three Governments share with the Government of the Soviet Union and which have been reaffirmed by the heads of government of all the four powers in Geneva on July 23, 1955, in a directive aiming at the solution of the German question by the reunification of Germany.” Ambassador Knappstein said that if the US found difficulty with this suggestion there was another one he could make, although it was not an official proposal. This would be to delete the second sentence of the draft declaration, first paragraph, and insert the following sentence at the end of the declaration: “The Three Governments reemphasize the obligations and responsibilities concerning Germany including Berlin and access thereto devolving upon them without change since the end of the Second World War—obligations and responsibilities which they share with the Government of the Soviet Union and which were reaffirmed by the heads of government of all the Four Powers in Geneva on July 23, 1955 in a directive aiming at the solution of the German question by the reunification of Germany.” Ambassador Thompson noted that even if sentences such as those suggested by the FRG were included in the declaration the fundamental difficulty with the French draft nevertheless remained, i.e., its emphasis upon the solution of the German problem as primarily a matter for the Europeans. He observed that the 1955 declaration was 10 years old; also, even though the Soviets agreed to it at one time, for many years they have attacked the declaration. Ambassador Knappstein suggested personally that one additional idea might be to say “of all European peoples as well as the other peoples concerned” at the end of paragraph three in place of the words “of Europe”. He noted, however, that this was probably unacceptable to the French. Ambassador Thompson expressed appreciation that the Germans had asked us about their compromise proposal before approaching the French. He said, however, that he did not think that revising paragraph (1) was helpful. We have offered three compromises which are reasonable and should be acceptable to the French. Ambassador Knappstein agreed with Ambassador Thompson that the French concept regarding responsibility for the solution of the German problem in the future must not be accepted. Ambassador Thompson thought that the French are now in an impossible position. Ambassador Thompson said he could not in good conscience recommend acceptance of de Gaulle’s dictat. Ambassador Thompson thought that if the sentence suggested by the Germans were placed in the first paragraph it would be impossible for the US to accept. Even if it went at the end of the declaration it would be doubtful. Ambassador Thompson thought there was a very real danger in putting the German compromise proposal to the French now for it would take off them pressure for real movement. Ambassador Thompson said it was better to hold to the compromises we have already proposed. Ambassador Knappstein stated that he personally wondered what would happen if no Three Power declaration were agreed. He referred to the conversation of the Secretary with Brandt,See Document 101. noting that the Secretary had indicated that if there were no agreed declaration the US might issue a unilateral statement. Knappstein regretted the fact that Brandt had talked publicly following his visit with the Secretary. Ambassador Thompson thought there were two possibilities: (1) that we could make a joint statement with the British or (2) a unilateral statement, possibly in a speech which might be made at a high level in the United States Government on or about May 7. It would obviously be easier on the French if we issued a unilateral statement rather than a joint statement with the British. Our preference would probably be for a unilateral statement. Ambassador Knappstein thought that if a break occurs on the negotiation for a declaration there will be a severe reaction against France within the FRG. He thought personally that the French may wish, despite the dangers for them, to avoid having a declaration at all. Ambassador Thompson agreed to discuss with the Secretary the German compromise proposal. (Comment: Following discussion with the Secretary, Ambassador Thompson telephoned Ambassador Knappstein to inform him that the German proposal was not acceptable.) 107. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by McIntyre; cleared in WE, GER, and EUR; and approved by Thompson. Washington, May 3, 1965, 7:51 p.m. 5708. Ref: Paris 6184.Telegram 6184 from Paris, May 3, instructed Bohlen to raise with de Gaulle the issue of French participation in a declaration on Germany. (Ibid., POL 1 FR–US) For the Ambassador. We do not believe any good purpose would be served by your taking initiative with de Gaulle in raising difficult and now unpleasant problem of draft Tripartite Declaration on Germany. If he raises you may wish to refer to the three possible compromises suggested by Ambassador Thompson at the Ambassadorial Group Meeting of April 27 (Deptel 3268 to Bonn, repeated Paris 5579).Not printed. (Ibid., POL 32–4 GER) These compromise suggestions, particularly substituting the phrase “of all the peoples concerned” for the words “of all the peoples of Europe,” would seem adequately to protect the French point of view. If the phrase “of all the peoples concerned” were included, we would not insist upon inclusion of the sentence we had suggested and, you may wish to note, the French draft would still include in para three the phrase “on the continent” and in para four a clear reference to the security of “all European states.” You may say to de Gaulle that we were surprised and disappointed by GOF unwillingness accept such minor change in otherwise completely French-drafted text. Nevertheless, we continue to remain hopeful that one of compromise proposals we have suggested can be accepted by France and that we can have Tripartite Declaration on Germany agreed. It was Amb Alphand’s linking of French unwillingness to consider any amendment to their declaration to de Gaulle’s Feb 4 statement that caused us to take such a firm stand.Reference is to the April 20 meeting of the Ambassadorial Group; see footnote 2, Document 104. Rusk 108. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Paris, London, and Moscow. Bonn, May 4, 1965, 1824Z. 4349. Embtels 4347, 4348.Telegram 4347 from Bonn was not found. Telegram 4348 from Bonn, May 4, reported Schroeder’s assessment of French attitudes on German unification. (Ibid.) Subj: “Meeting with FonMin Schroeder: Initiative on the German problem.” In my conversation today with FonMin Schroeder, he expressed himself as follows in response to a question I put to him regarding his intentions on a reunification initiative. I asked whether, for example, he would press for an initiative before the German elections. The FonMin said that he disliked the term “initiative without substance.” The Germans do not have in mind any such initiative, which could he thought be severely criticized. The German position is that they still have tabled before the AG their revised peace plan of August 1963,For text, see Europa Archiv, 1963, vol. 2, pp. 437–438. A copy is attached to an August 10 memorandum from Klein to Bundy in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Germany. with subsequently agreed revisions. Following discussions in the AG it was the FonMin’s impression that at the NATO meeting before last, held at The Hague, the other three powers had “almost” agreed to the German publication of their proposal as a German plan. It had been his expectation that the plan, moreover, would be given some type of separate national support by the other three, although the FonMin did not seem clear just what this would constitute. Rather than proceed virtually alone, however, the FRG had subsequently proposed at the Paris NATO meeting in December 1964,See Document 75. that the Four-Power Council proposal be put forward as an initial step which would hopefully lead to the ultimate acceptance of their revised 1963 peace plan in its entirety. They considered this substitute initial proposal also still to be before the AG. Following the Secretary of State’s backgrounder of last December, however, and the subsequent explanation of the US position by the US representative on the AG, the Germans concluded that they would be expected to agree in advance to concrete positions on such vital questions as boundaries and security measures, before we would be willing to proceed with their Four-Power Council proposal. The Germans are, according to the FonMin, ready for frank discussions on these questions at any time there is an indication of real interest on the part of the Soviets. Since the Soviets at present display no interest, he does not consider it feasible for the Germans to agree to proposals in the AG which would probably become known and merely serve to solidify the status quo. The Germans are forced into a position of “rebus sic stantibus.” As a result, the Germans' immediate objective is to revive the concept of Four-Power responsibility for Germany as a whole. In the Four-Power Council proposal they see a way of forcing a statement of the Soviet position on this question. For tactical reasons they are not, however, pushing this proposal at the present time, but have withdrawn to the position of asking what proposals the other three have to offer. In the meantime, however, they consider that both the peace plan and Four-Power Council proposals are still before the AG. In the meantime, having Gromyko’s remarks on frontiers and denuclearizationReference is to April 30 remarks at conclusion of Gromyko’s visit to France. For text, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, May 26, 1965, p. 29. go unchallenged in Paris greatly weakens the German and Western positions. If these concepts spread to Eastern Europe, there will be a psychological deterioration in the status of the FedRep even before it becomes a united Germany. McGhee 109. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Confidential. Repeated to Bonn, London, Berlin, and Moscow. Paris, May 4, 1965, 2055Z. 6242. Ref: Deptel 5579.See footnote 3, Document 107. Couve, on his own initiative, told me that he expected to discuss the wording of the declaration on Germany next Monday in London. He seemed to think a solution could be found. I told him this matter had assumed the proportions it has because the wording at de Gaulle’s press conference had created an issue perhaps where one had not existed before. I told him I could see no reason why the substitution of the words “of all peoples concerned” for the phrase referring to the peoples of Europe only was not acceptable. Couve then pointed out that it was nations in which the United States was definitely included which would work out the eventual agreement for German reunification. This would not come about except by the evolution of Europe which would involve only the people of Europe. I told him I thought this was a somewhat over-subtle presentation and would not be understood if the declaration was published. He repeated that he intended to discuss it with the Secretary in London. Couve said that the French were anxious not to have this declaration come out on the 8th and they thought it would be just as valuable next week as this week. He also told me in confidence that he himself had personally drafted this project and not de Gaulle as I had heard. Bohlen 110. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, NATO 3 UK (LO). Confidential. Drafted by Creel on May 11. The meeting was held at the Chancery. Under Secretary Ball led the U.S. delegation. London, May 10, 1965, 3 p.m. US/MC/2 UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE THIRTY-FIFTH MINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL London, England, May 11–13, 1965 PARTICIPANTS United States The Under Secretary Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson Mr. Creel, Dep. Asst. Sec. EUR Mr. Spiers, Dep. Dir. EUR/RPM Germany Foreign Minister Gerhard Schroeder Franz Krapf, Dep. Under Sec. German Foreign Office Herr Simon, Personal Asst. to Foreign Minister Schroeder Hans Weber, Interpreter SUBJECT Status of Three-Power Declaration on Germany The Under Secretary said he regretted that international developments had prevented the Secretary from being here.Secretary Rusk was participating in a meeting of Organization of American States Foreign Ministers on the situation in the Dominican Republic. He arrived in London on May 12. The Foreign Minister asked whether it was possible that the Secretary might arrive for the final stages of the NATO Ministerial meeting. The Under Secretary said this was a possibility. The Foreign Minister said the immediate concern of the Germans was what happens tonight at the quadripartite dinner with regard to the Three-Power Declaration. He made reference to several recent events, including President Johnson’s message to President Luebke on May 5,A copy of President Johnson’s message on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the Federal Republic is in Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 249. the “very impressive” speech to Europe by the President on May 7,For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, pp. 506–509. and the statement on Germany by Foreign Minister Stewart on May 7.For text of Stewart’s May 6 letter to Schroeder, see Europa Archiv, 1965, vol. 2, p. 267. He was disposed to wonder how worthwhile it would be to continue to try to get an agreed Three-Power statement, which would probably be weaker than what had already been said. The Under Secretary said that on this matter we would be guided primarily by what the Germans thought necessary from their standpoint. Our own views had already been stated by the President in what were in fact stronger terms than any text of the Three-Power statement we were now discussing. If, however, the Germans felt a Three-Power declaration to be important, we would try to get one. The Foreign Minister said he had had no recent contact on the matter with the French and had no indication of what their present ideas are. The Germans for their part have no suggestions to put forward. If the French wished to talk about a statement tonight, the Germans would not object since there still would be at least some value to a Three-Power declaration. If on the other hand the French showed no desire to continue the discussions, then we should stand on what we already have and put the question of a Three-Power statement off to some later and more appropriate time. The Foreign Minister said that in view of Ambassador Thompson’s presence, he wished to make one further point: As far as the Germans were concerned, there had never been a situation where they felt they had reached full agreement with the French in the Ambassadorial Group on the basis of the French proposal. The Germans had welcomed the American draft when circulated. They were also glad to receive the French draft but they had never identified themselves with it. The Germans had fully supported the additional sentence proposed by the Americans which stressed Four-Power responsibility for the German problem and also the intention to continue to work actively for reunification. They did not wish to get into the position with the French of putting up a solid front against the Americans. He added that with regard to the idea of “Europeanizing” the German problem, no one could be more critical of this concept than he was himself. Ambassador Thompson commented that the Germans had in fact put one specific formula to the French (that the phrase “of all European peoples as well as other peoples concerned” be substituted for the words “of all the peoples of Europe” at the end of the final sentence of paragraph 3 of the French draft). Foreign Minister Schroeder agreed but said that he was not personally very fond of this suggestion. The French had not yet replied to it. It took away only a little bit of the concept of “Europeanization,” which he reiterated he found a very dangerous idea. It corresponded to the concepts put forth recently by Gromyko. He asked, “Where would this lead if we have to talk with people who are not in the least prepared to change the status quo?” He feared it would result in the Germans having to make all concessions in advance while leaving Germany still divided. Ambassador Thompson said that for our part we were prepared to accept any of four different variations in the text. Three of them had already been advanced in the Ambassadorial Group; the fourth was the one put by the Germans to the French, to which no reply had been received. It would be a pity if we were not able to reach agreement on a Three-Power declaration or at least on a passage on Germany in the NATO communiqué. The Under Secretary commented that the two things were not quite the same. He tended to share Ambassador Thompson’s reluctance to let the matter lie. It had become public knowledge that there has been an argument over this issue. An article in Le Monde this morning had referred to this as a reflection of further deterioration in US-French relations. If no agreement were reached now it would give the public impression of a greater amount of disagreement than probably in fact exists. Schroeder repeated that the German point of view was to wonder about the utility of a Three-Power declaration which would be weaker than the statements already made. He was not particularly enthusiastic over this prospect. He said the real question was who was to take the initiative. The Germans would prefer to leave this to the French. The latter were not very happy over the situation in which they found themselves; this had been aggravated by pointed criticism in the German press over the French failure to make any statement on Germany on May 5. Maybe it would be possible to find a middle ground. This would be along the line that if there were no Three-Power declaration a statement could be included in the NATO communiqué, similar to that worked out at The Hague last year, which would stress Four-Power responsibility for Germany and the need for German reunification. The Under Secretary suggested we leave it this way: Wait to see if the French take an initiative looking to a satisfactory agreement on a Three-Power declaration. Should they do so, we would go along. If they did not, we would have a statement on Germany in the communiqué. 111. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B. Confidential. Drafted by McIntyre and approved in U on May 25. The meeting was held at Ambassador Bruce’s residence. London, May 10, 1965, 8 p.m. US/MC/5 UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE THIRTY-FIFTH MINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL London, England, May 11–13, 1965 PARTICIPANTS United States The Under Secretary Ambassador Bruce Ambassador Thompson Mr. Creel Mr. McIntyre FRG Foreign Minister Schroeder State Secretary Carstens Ambassador Blankenhorn Deputy Under Secretary Krapf Dr. Oncken United Kingdom Foreign Secretary Stewart Lord Hood Mr. Ledwidge Mr. Barnes France Foreign Minister Couve de Murville Mr. Lucet Ambassador De Courcel Mr. de Beaumarchais Mr. De la Grandville SUBJECT Quadripartite Working Dinner on Berlin and Germany The Under Secretary opened the discussions by asking what subjects the others wished to discuss. Minister Schroeder suggested three subjects: the situation in the Ambassadorial Group; the question of Berlin clauses included in agreements or treaties entered into by the FRG; and trade relations of Western countries with the Soviet zone of Germany. With respect to the first of these three questions, Minister Schroeder noted that there was no agreement within the Ambassadorial Group on a Tripartite declaration on Germany. He also referred to the fact that various proposals regarding Germany had previously been tabled in the Ambassadorial Group and were still before that Group. Schroeder said the question arises as to whether we should discuss the Tripartite declaration in this evening’s meeting. He said that the FRG had already indicated that it could agree to various compromise formulae which had been suggested. Ambassador Thompson said that the United States could accept certain modifications in the final sentence of paragraph 3 of the French draft or could agree to drop the final sentence of paragraph 3 and the U.S. proposed sentence. The Under Secretary said that it seemed to him that we were close enough on a text so that we should be able to arrive at agreement. Minister Couve said that he had no difficulty with amending the final sentence of paragraph 3 of the French draft to read: “of all European peoples as well as other peoples concerned” rather than “of all the peoples of Europe.” Minister Stewart asked the deletion of the words “in conformity with the principles of international law” in paragraph 3 arguing that self-determination does not really exist as a principle of international law. The Under Secretary added quickly, “Notwithstanding the fact that international law itself doesn't exist!” Ambassador Thompson suggested that the word “assuring” be used in paragraph 4 rather than the word “guaranteeing.” There was no objection to either the compromise language which Couve said he could support at the end of paragraph 3 or to the suggestions of Minister Stewart re deletion of the phrase “in conformity with the principles of international law” or to Ambassador Thompson’s suggestion that the word “assuring” be used rather than “guaranteeing.” Since there seemed to be full agreement on the text, the Under Secretary read it aloud and there was full agreement. (See Secun #9 for Text.)Secun 9, May 11, reported on the Quadripartite meeting on Berlin. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CR 2504) Ambassador Thompson suggested that the best time for the publication of the text might be the afternoon of May 12 or on the morning of May 13 so that it could be endorsed in the NATO communiqué on May 13.For text, including the annex on Germany, see Department of State Bulletin, June 7, 1965, pp. 926–928. He suggested that Minister Stewart present the text at the NATO Ministerial meeting the morning of May 11. The others present at the meeting agreed that this procedure would be good. Although Schroeder went on to say that perhaps publication of the Three-Power declaration should be delayed until after the NATO communiqué, Couve felt that prior publication and a reference in the communiqué to the declaration would be the best way of handling it. Schroeder said the NATO Ministerial meeting could “take note of” or “endorse” the Three-Power declaration. Couve referred to the sensitivity of the NATO partners and the need to inform them. Ambassador Thompson reiterated the desirability of releasing the text the afternoon of May 12 and then picking up reference to it in the communiqué. The Under Secretary suggested that it be provisionally agreed to publish the text on the afternoon of May 12. The Under Secretary emphasized that nothing should be said to the press other than the usual bland statement. Mr. Carstens wondered what the word “indefinitely” meant in the last sentence of the declaration. He wondered if it meant “Bis auf unbe-stimmte Zeit.” There was general agreement that this was a satisfactory translation of the word “indefinite.” Schroeder suggested looking at the communiqué issued at The Hague on May 15, 1964For text, see ibid., June 1, 1964, p. 850. which could perhaps serve as a guide for us this time. He thought that there should be mention in the communiqué of the declaration. Minister Stewart thought that perhaps working level people of the Four at the meeting this evening could meet, following the discussions in the Ministerial meeting tomorrow morning, and draft a formula for NATO communiqué language. Schroeder said that if the discussion on the declaration was completed, he wished to note that there were some proposals still before the Ambassadorial Group which had been tabled earlier. He said he would not have anything new to add to these proposals at this time. Minister Schroeder then turned to the second large subject which he had suggested for discussion this evening, namely Berlin clauses in FRG treaties. Schroeder referred specifically to the problems which had been encountered by the FRG in negotiating trade treaties with Eastern European countries. Treaties had already been entered into with Berlin clauses included, with Hungary, Poland, Rumania and Bulgaria. At the time these come up for extension, the question of a Berlin clause will again arise. Negotiations are presently pending for trade agreements with Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union. Every time a Berlin clause is included in an FRG treaty, positive action is required by the Allied Kommandatura before the treaty becomes applicable to Berlin. Schroeder now wished to suggest a change in procedure from a “positive” to a “negative” Berlin clause whereby Berlin would be automatically included in FRG treaties unless the Allies took specific action to prevent this from happening. He stated that opposition from Pankow to Berlin clauses will continue but we should not let this deter us. In its relations with Eastern Europe it will be important for the FRG to include Berlin and a “negative” Berlin clause was preferable to a “positive” one. The Under Secretary wondered whether this was meant to include all treaties or just trade agreements with Eastern Europe. Schroeder responded that all treaties could perhaps be included but that one can consider whether all treaties should have negative clauses or not. It would be difficult to determine right now to which ones a negative clause would be applicable and to which ones it would not be applicable. The Under Secretary said we would want to study the question carefully. The implications of the proposal might go beyond the immediate question of trade agreements. It raises difficult questions. He did not think we could get a consensus on the general concept. The inconven-ience presently imposed by the existing procedure on Berlin clauses is not great. Stewart pointed to difficulties with the proposal of Schroeder, including the difficulty of indicating publicly that Berlin is simply to be regarded as a part of the FRG as far as the treaties are concerned. Schroeder said he did not wish to suggest any change in the legal situation. It is only that the FRG is faced with certain practical difficulties regarding Berlin. He said the FRG could draft a paper and submit it to the Western Three so that they could consider the matter further. What is involved here are fundamental problems of relations with Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. Couve expressed some general reservations regarding Schroeder’s proposal, but agreed the matter could be studied further. Mr. Creel recalled the difficult problems of a legal character which had been involved in 1952 in working out existing procedures for applying FRG treaties to Berlin.For texts of the declarations governing the relationship, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 379–383. He recalled his personal involvement in the efforts to arrive at an agreed formulation. Mr. Creel suggested that the Germans formulate their ideas in writing and with some specificity so that we could see precisely what types of treaties are involved. Schroeder said that the Germans would do so and have a memorandum on the subject at a later date. He suggested that the problem might be examined in the first instance by the Ambassadors in Bonn. The others present agreed to this suggestion. Schroeder then turned to the third subject he had mentioned earlier, namely, commercial relations of the Western Powers with the Soviet zone of Germany. He emphasized strongly that the FRG is not afraid of competition of Western trade with the zone. However, trade increases the status of the GDR and the more Western countries move into that market, the less the GDR is dependent on the FRG. Interzonal trade rests on the fundamental principle of making East Germany dependent on West Germany. The FRG regards IZT as domestic trade. IZT is an instrument to be used to insure access to Berlin. Schroeder complained particularly about Western exports of machine tools and electro-technical equipment and also about credit guarantees by Western governments for trade with the GDR. He said that machine tools and electro-technical equipment traded by other Western countries is almost equal to the volume of trade of the FRG with the zone in such goods. The FRG is concerned for political, not economic, reasons about the rising trend of increased trade by Western countries with the GDR. He did not have any particular objections to privately financed trade but credit guarantees by governments are very objectionable. There is a great difference between trade with the zone and trade with Eastern European countries. Total Western trade amounts to $70,000,000. US trade in 1964 amounted to $24,000,000, and for the UK it was $37,000,000. The Under Secretary said that as far as he knew there were no US Government guarantees for exports to the GDR. A great proportion of US exports to the GDR in 1964 was from wheat sales. Stewart said he thought that UK sales in the GDR had decreased over the past three years. Schroeder said it is the trend that is important. If we are not careful we will quickly reach the point where IZT will lose its significance and the East Germans will cease to be dependent on West Germany. It is true there has been an increase in Western German trade recently with the GDR but the fact that there has been an increase is not the real point that we are dealing with. The FRG wants the GDR to continue to be interested in those areas where they will be most dependent on the FRG. The FRG takes certain goods from the GDR that the GDR would otherwise have great difficulty in disposing of. The Under Secretary referred to the Miller CommitteeReference is to the Special Committee on U.S. Trade Relations with Eastern European Countries and the Soviet Union, chaired by Irwin Miller, Chairman of the Board of Cummins Engine Company. report which will be taken into consideration in the formulation of legislation regarding trade with Eastern Europe. He noted that we have always differentiated in trade with the zone and the rest of Eastern Europe. We have no intention of changing our basic policy through increasing our trade with the zone. Further, we have no intention of extending government credits to cover zonal trade. Schroeder said there were advantages of a common strategy vis-à-vis the zone in this matter. The zone for its part tends to play various Western countries against each other. What we need is “contingency planning” in this field. Couve asked if Schroeder was suggesting bilateral discussions or talks in some other form. Schroeder answered that it was perhaps useful to have discussions on a Four-Power level. NATO trade with the zone has been gradually increasing. The Under Secretary thought that, since quite a number of Western countries are involved in trade with East Germany, we should perhaps consider discussing the question in a forum larger than a quadripartite group. Schroeder responded that the Western Three Powers, because of their special responsibilities for Berlin and its access as well as Germany, had a closer connection to the problem. Therefore, quadripartite discussions were preferable. He felt that other members of NATO would be interested in whatever was worked out with those powers with special responsibilities in Germany. The Under Secretary thought there was not much point in getting the agreement of the Four if other countries are going to increase their trade sharply with East Germany. The United States is very much aware of the problems involved in efforts to restrict trade since we have had our experience, which has not been entirely pleasant, with trying to restrict trade with certain countries ourselves and found subsequently that others had increased their trade with the countries in question while we were limiting ours. Schroeder said he knew of our experiences in this field but in dealing with the East Germans we are dealing with a very limited subject. Stewart thought there would be considerable difficulty in working out a common line on this question. In any case, he had the impression British trade was lower than it was three years ago. Schroeder said that in 1964 the British figures were slightly above the 1962 figures. The Under Secretary said the United States is already following the policy which is now advocated by Schroeder. We would not object, however, to quadripartite discussions, or larger discussions if they were deemed preferable. Couve said that he would be prepared for bilateral discussions, quadripartite discussions, or larger discussions if they were desired. Stewart did not object to quadripartite discussions but said we will have to work at the question from the standpoint of our trade position. Schroeder suggested that quadripartite discussions take place in Bonn and this suggestion was agreed to by the other participants in this evening’s meeting. In response to a question by Stewart, Schroeder agreed that Western German trade with the zone could also be discussed in such talks. Schroeder expressed appreciation for the relative speed with which the questions he had raised this evening were dealt with. It was agreed that the press guidance regarding this evening’s meeting would be along the following lines: We discussed certain Berlin and German questions. Foreign Minister Stewart will report at the NATO Ministerial meeting on May 11. 112. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 7 GER W. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, Moscow, and Berlin. Bonn, May 22, 1965, 1919Z. 4633. Ref: Embtel 4626.Telegram 4626 from Bonn, May 22, reported on the issues Erhard wished to discuss with President Johnson. (Ibid.) Subj: Erhard visit—political topics. In my meeting with him on May 21 (Embtel 4626), the Chancellor indicated a number of topics which he wished to discuss in Washington. From what I know of the arrangements, time will probably preclude the discussion of all of these subjects between the President and the Chancellor even though this is the Chancellor’s desire. If there is not time some of the topics might appropriately be discussed between the Secretary and Erhard, or the Secretary and FonMin Schroeder, if they hold separate conversations, or with State Secretary Carstens. I recommend that we attempt to focus the bulk of the conversation between the President and the Chancellor on certain major topics of broad mutual interest, namely, Franco-German relations, European unity, German reunification, the future of NATO, and economic relations. In general, these are the topics in para (1) of the reftel.These topics were: “The current French attitude,” French-Soviet relations, the Common Market, NATO, and “recent change in the Soviet attitude.” The topics in paras 2 and 3These were: the Middle East, India, Pakistan, and China. should be subordinated, if indeed time permits their consideration. We should accommodate the Chancellor’s wish for a statement of our attitude about the situation in Viet Nam and draw him out as to what increased support he is willing to provide on the non-military side. His support for our position can be helpful in any public statement after the talks. Comments on Franco-German relations, European unity, and German reunification are contained in this message. Separate messages are devoted to the defense and economic items. 1. Franco-German relations. Of all the subjects proposed by the German side, none to my knowledge is more crucial at this time than the future course of action we should both take with regard to de Gaulle. As the Department is aware, the problem of Gaullism in Germany has been as much a question of internal politics within the CDU/CSU as of foreign relations strictly speaking. Because of this, there are still voices heard in Germany which maintain that the policy of deference to de Gaulle has been proved all the more correct by recent developments. Those who follow this line maintain that it is only because the FRG has been willing to go along with those who would frustrate de Gaulle, that he has taken a direction which seems more dangerous in German eyes. In particular his flirtation with the Soviets, which has worried even such a staunch advocate of close ties with France as Adenauer, is cited as evidence. This is not a majority view, but is held by a number of publicists and politicians. Their conclusion is that de Gaulle’s recent actions (the “Europeanization” of reunification, the move toward the Soviets, the implied threat to NATO, etc.) make it all the more important to draw closer to de Gaulle in the future. de Gaulle will undoubtedly do all he can to stimulate this view during his visit here next month. In spite of this view, which cannot be disregarded even though held by only a minority, I feel that there is a more important segment of German official and public opinion who have reached what might be termed a “watershed” in their thinking about de Gaulle. This group includes Chancellor Erhard and FonMin Schroeder themselves. Schroeder told me recently, as reported in Embtel 4348,See footnote 2, Document 108. that many of his adversaries were beginning to admit that he had been right about de Gaulle all the time. It is believed to be symptomatic, for example, that such an influential paper as Die Welt said recently that “de Gaulle has destroyed two of the main bases on which the Franco-German Treaty rests—the understanding that the FedRep would not return to Rapallo, and that France would not return to a policy of encirclement.” The domestic political considerations which have limited the freedom with which Erhard and Schroeder could handle relations with Paris may be in the process of becoming less significant as disillusion with de Gaulle grows. This being so, I feel that the degree of firmness we could expect from the Germans in any post-electoral confrontation with de Gaulle will depend in large part on our willingness to take a strong lead. We should make clear to Erhard and Schroeder, before the German leaders begin to formulate any new policy, that we are if necessary prepared, albeit reluctantly, to move ahead with Germany and other countries which may be so disposed, toward common goals even without France. We shall need to show that the Germans have an alternative to catering to France, and that alternative may well offer the best means of bringing France back into the fold, even if fairly rough sledding must be expected in the short run. We do not seek confrontations with France for their own sake, but in order to accomplish pressing NATO and other business which cannot await his retirement from the scene. It is hard to see how we could really offer Germany any kind of European unity without France; but we can offer the FRG continued security in NATO (which can still be effective even without France) and an honorable role as partner and ally in constructive Free World endeavors. We could suggest that the time may have come for the two of us quietly to think out together how to proceed in the event France withdraws from NATO. If effective planning is begun, de Gaulle can gain less leverage from threats to withdraw. If the above points are made to the Chancellor during his Washington visit, they should serve to strengthen him in his meeting with de Gaulle the following week. 2. Reunification. The Chancellor is not likely to put forward any new proposals in this area. Although the Chancellor like other German political leaders must give constant public evidence of interest and maximum efforts to obtain progress, essentially the Germans are not interested in defining their negotiation positions until there is some indication that the Soviets are prepared to enter serious negotiations. They recognize that this condition is not likely to prevail for some time to come. Nonetheless the Chancellor will certainly wish to be in a position to say that he raised the German question and that the two governments are in close agreement on the need for reunification. He can be expected to express appreciation for the President’s May 5 letter to President Luebke and May 7 speech and to indicate the importance he attributes to continuing Four-Power responsibility for a German solution. He may ask for continuing US support in combatting Soviet efforts to enhance the GDR and perpetuate the status quo. We believe it would be desirable to state forcefully that the US has no intention of relinquishing its responsibilities in Germany; that we recognize the legitimate European-wide interest in a German settlement, but we cannot and will not accept any watering down of the special responsibilities borne by the Four Powers alone. In reassuring the Chancellor of our support vis-à-vis the Soviets, it might be well to caution against steps on the German part to change the status quo in Berlin or moves of a purely demonstrative nature which could induce strong Soviet reactions. It would be awkward for both of us if we were forced to choose between seeming to oppose the FRG or seeing some aspect of our position in Berlin jeopardized. Both of us can only lose from such a situation. 3. Soviet relations. The state of Soviet/FRG relations has seldom been less promising than at the present. Moscow has taken every available opportunity recently to attack the FedRep and Kosygin has rebuffed the Chancellor’s invitation to visit Bonn. This attitude is a concomitant of the Soviet determination to make the division of Germany as permanent as possible and is, in the foreseeable future, likely to continue. The FRG’s only hope for improving relations lies in the trade field where the Germans have some leverage. Under the circumstances, the Chancellor will probably be mainly interested in the President’s assessment of current Soviet overall intentions, and his estimate of the present Soviet leadership. 4. European unity. Despite de Gaulle’s clearly negative attitude toward European political integration, Chancellor Erhard continues to seek at least an appearance of progress toward unity. He has pushed for a meeting of EEC heads of govt and now has a “step by step” plan for European unity. As of now there appears to be little new or substantive beneath the Chancellor’s public efforts. It is doubtful whether he will have any new approach to outline to the President. He will be looking mainly for encouragement and support. He undoubtedly recognizes that the prospects of progress on political unity are dim at present. It is understood that Erhard and de Gaulle during their June meeting will agree to postpone the heads of govt meeting until after September, since otherwise Erhard might well be confronted with a failure just before the elections. The Germans are not interested in an integrated European defense policy as proposed by de Gaulle, so there can be no forward movement in this area. Only in the economic field is the process of European integration moving ahead. In responding to Erhard on this subject we should, as in the past, express strong support for an integrated Europe as a partner in the Atlantic Alliance. The Chancellor can rely on our support in his efforts toward this goal. We should stress, however, that it is the Europeans themselves who must take the lead. McGhee 113. Special Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence AgencySource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 8. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared in the CIA’s Office of Current Intelligence. Three photographs included in the report are not printed. Washington, May 28, 1965. SC 00692/65B CHANGE IN EAST GERMANY A kind of ersatz stability has been growing in the Soviet Zone, the so-called German Democratic Republic (GDR) during the last three years. Erection of the Berlin Wall in August 1961 was the turning point that forced the East German people to accommodate to Walter Ulbricht’s regime. From this accommodation, the regime has gained enough security and self-confidence to enable it to satisfy pressures both from the outside and within for some relaxation of domestic policies and a general overhaul of the country’s economy. With these developments a sense of national self-interest has begun to evolve. While the regime has as yet had no cause to regret these changes, it is still too early to be confident that it will not backtrack. Popular Attitudes The majority of East Germans remain anti-Communist but with decreasing emotionalism. The popular temper is no longer one of the potential revolt. Many of the really dissatisfied East Germans fled through the open Berlin border before the Wall closed in mid-August 1961. Among those who remain, there is a general attitude of acquiescence encouraged by the presence of 20 Soviet divisions, by the efficiency of the security apparatus, and by a few key concessions granted in the last year or so. This new attitude is reflected in the slow but steady rise in the levels of economic productivity, and in a general decrease in the incidence of barn burnings and industrial sabotage. It is also illustrated in the surprisingly small number of pension-age East Germans who have opted to remain in the West since the regime began allowing them to visit relatives in West Berlin and West Germany last November. With the relaxation of domestic tensions, East Germans have come to express their complaints openly. These center on the lack of personal freedoms—particularly the freedom to travel—a sense of being cut off from developments elsewhere in Europe, and the disparity between their standard of living and that of the West Germans. Even rank-and-file party members feel free to criticize and frequently deride official explanations of foreign and domestic political developments. The regime’s most significant shortcoming in the eyes of the people—a liability also recognized by the leadership—is its character as an unpopularly elected government running an artificially created portion of a Greater Germany. In a “poll” last December the central committee found that the people generally do not support or understand the party’s ideological and political policies, particularly with regard to West Germany. To meet this problem, propaganda techniques were revamped. Only the youngest generation, however, is likely to respond positively to the new approach. A poll conducted by the West Berlin Senat after the first Christmas Pass period reflected the first signs of a sense of national identity and consciousness among East German youth. To cultivate such sentiments the regime sponsored a nationwide youth convocation last May—the first of its kind in ten years. Economic Reforms Recent reforms in the economy grew out of the failure of earlier, quite unrealistic plans to “overtake and surpass” West Germany. Retrenchment brought obvious benefits in 1963–1964, reducing the backlog of unfinished investment projects, ending foreign trade deficits, and greatly easing inflationary pressures in the consumer market. At the same time, Ulbricht pushed the development of a new program to create popular confidence and to reassert a sense of purpose, the so-called “new economic system of planning and management.” Ulbricht set out to win over the technical elite—engineers, economists, and executives—who previously had been ignored by his planners and alienated by his economic policies. He offered them increased responsibility and greater incentives and, with their support, proposed to test the idea that the productive techniques of Western management can be blended into a planned economy. The introduction of the “new economic system” began with the reorganization of the industrial associations into super-enterprises somewhat resembling major subsidiaries of a large Western corporation. Reforms in prices, planning, and banking are being introduced in stages. The “new economic system” has brought administrative order into the East German economy and seems to be working fairly well. But without more basic reforms it is unlikely to lead to any significant increase in the presently disappointing rate of economic growth. Economic retrenchment and reform, however, have given some relief and encouragement to the long-suffering population. The process of easing inflation was painful—wage cuts and price increases for consumer goods—but produced welcome results. Daily necessities now can be bought without queuing and are generally affordable. There is renewed hope of further improvement in living conditions. The regime has promised to improve the quality and assortment of consumer goods and the availability of services, and the first results have begun to appear, although the consumer is still far from satisfied. Without promising, the regime has also encouraged the people to look forward to a five-day work week within the next few years. As a result, although East Germans have no prospect of “catching up with” West Germans, they are conscious of being better off than at any time since World War II. Travel Reforms The regime has also taken the first steps toward alleviating the people’s sense of isolation. Since last November, pension-age East Germans (65 for men, 60 for women) have been permitted to visit relatives in West Berlin or West Germany for up to four weeks a year. Three million of East Germany’s 17 million people are eligible for these visits, and 1.5 million are expected to take advantage of the opportunity. Under the Berlin pass agreement, arranged initially for Christmas 1963 and renewed in 1964, West Berliners may make four one-day visits to relatives in East Berlin each year. While the East Germans welcomed these programs, they were critical over the requirement that Berlin pass visitors must exchange a minimum amount of currency at an artificially low rate, and that pensioners must not accept the West German Government’s grant-in-aid of 50 deutschemarks. These programs have increased popular pressures to further widen travel privileges. Juridical Reforms The regime also is trying to soften its reputation for hard-fisted justice by emphasizing “corrective treatment,” imposing generally milder sentences, and resorting in many instances to restrictive measures short of imprisonment. Last October, Ulbricht announced the regime’s first large-scale amnesty which freed some 10,000 political and common criminals over a two-month period. Before the amnesty, between July and September 1964, West Germany had been allowed to ransom between 800 and 1,000 political prisoners for payments in goods and cash. Another release-for-ransom deal involving 1,000 prisoners is currently under way. Policy Toward Intellectuals The regime’s cultural policies have been ambivalent. Some of Kafka’s works, once all banned, now are being published, partially in response to pressures from other Eastern European countries. Writers denied publication only a year ago now appear occasionally in the regime-controlled press, receive official recognition for controversial works, and are permitted to lecture publicly—even traveling to West Berlin to do so. On the other hand, the regime has been fighting a rear-guard action to prevent artists and intellectuals from challenging the basic tenets of Marxism-Leninism or its self-appointed role as cultural arbiter. Last April, Ulbricht convoked the Second Bitterfeld Conference for the purpose of urging a return to “socialist realism” under regime guidance. Addressing the party plenum last December, ideologist Kurt Hager sternly warned that the regime would not permit the watering down of its cultural policies at the behest of “revisionists” inside or outside the bloc, and that “bourgeois decadence and abstractionism” would not be tolerated. The case of Robert Havemann, a professor at Humboldt University, illustrates the regime’s ambivalent policy. A year ago he was ousted from the party and fired from the university for lecturing on the necessity of liberalizing Communism. In December, he was interviewed by a Western journalist, presumably with official knowledge. The interview, published in the West German weekly Der Spiegel under the title “Marxism Suffers From Sclerosis,” urged fewer controls and claimed that the GDR had far to go in de-Stalinization. Nonetheless, he has not been imprisoned and is still allowed occasional contacts with foreigners. Religious Policy The regime has struck a bargain with the Evangelical Church, the major religious faith in East Germany. The basis of understanding is that organized religion will not be harassed if the clergy supports the regime’s political goals. After quiet and delicate negotiations last spring the regime released imprisoned clergymen. West Berlin Bishop Dibelius announced in October that, for the first time since 1933, no pastors were in prison anywhere in Germany. Church officials also report a rise in the number of baptisms, confirmations, and marriages, and a concomitant decline in the number of people apostatizing and undergoing secular regime-sponsored confirmations. The regime also is permitting church-oriented convocations, and allowing clergymen to travel abroad to international meetings such as Vatican II and the recent Pacem in Terris conference in New York.May 21. A significant concession to private conscience was the creation last fall of labor battalions—unique in Eastern Europe—in which conscientious objectors could fulfill their military service obligation. The number of conscientious objectors now reportedly exceeds the total in West Germany. Of course, the situation is still not ideal from the church’s point of view. The six theological faculties and three church training centers provide too few graduates—about 85 a year—to staff the country’s 4,500 pastorates. In the Saxony church district, for example, only 1,000 of the 1,350 pastoral offices are filled. Bishop Dibelius has warned that it would be “pure nonsense” to assume that the regime had embarked on a liberalization process. The Party In the last 15 months, Ulbricht has further rehabilitated and in some cases readmitted to party membership many of his real or imagined opponents of the past. These include former politburo member Paul Merker, former justice minister Max Fechner, “revisionist” economists Fritz Behrens and Arne Benary, and ideologue Wolfgang Harich. The East German people probably are not convinced by the regime’s continually expressed intentions to liberalize domestic policies, even though there are signs that this time the leadership means it. Rather surprisingly, Ulbricht referred favorably on two occasions in the last six months to the controversial critique of Soviet-directed Communism by the late Italian Communist leader, Palmiro Togliatti.Reference is to the so-called Yalta Memorandum, August 1964. For text, see William E. Griffith (ed.), Sino-Soviet Relations, 1964–1965 (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1967), pp. 373–383. A dominant theme at the December plenum of the central committee and in the subsequent lower level party elections was that officials must be more sympathetic and responsive to popular opinion. The party is faced with the necessity of attracting technocrats into its ranks to help with economic reform. However, their admission—many of them are opportunistically rather than ideologically motivated—causes strains with the older generation of orthodox, militant Communist functionaries. For the moment the basic power structure remains unchanged. Personal antagonisms among the top leaders are kept in check by the dominating figure of Ulbricht. Since the Wall, the aging first secretary has become something of an “elder statesman,” a court of last resort, and has delegated more and more of his responsibilities to others. Relatively young experts like Guenter Mittag and Erich Apel exercise the power of immediate decision. Erich Honecker appears to run party affairs on a day-to-day basis as Ulbricht’s undisputed deputy there. More recently, he also seems to have handled some governmental matters, normally the prerogative of Premier Willi Stoph, who after achieving that office last September suffered a period of eclipse until May Day this year. Reasons for the Reforms Pressures on Ulbricht to institute the past year’s reforms have come not only from inside the GDR but also from the USSR and the East European countries. He had long been able to evade de-Stalinization by pleading that East Germany’s exposed position on the bloc’s western frontier demanded a garrison-state atmosphere. As a result, East Germany and its party were more and more turning into Stalinist fossils and becoming a source of general embarrassment to the bloc. East Germany’s vulnerable position was brought home to Ulbricht when the loosening of intrabloc ties revealed an increasing willingness on the part of brother satellites to ignore East German state interests. Poland, Rumania, Bulgaria, and Hungary in the last two years have signed trade agreements with West Germany that include West Berlin, which East Germany considers a separate political entity. There is some evidence that Pankow fears that Moscow might ultimately make a deal with the West at East Germany’s expense. The reforms are intended to improve East Germany’s initiatives abroad. The economic reforms are also intended to make East Germany more competitive in foreign markets, both in the bloc and in the West by upgrading products and modernizing business methods. Steady progress is required if East Germany is even to hold its own in today’s markets. The reform program also is closely linked to the GDR’s policy toward West Germany. For example, Pankow portrays the Berlin pass agreement, signed with the West Berlin Senat, as supporting the GDR contention that West Berlin is a separate political unit—one of the three German states, which can and must learn to work amicably with each other. Ultimately, the reforms seem designed to help establish an atmosphere conducive to direct East-West German negotiations and to take advantage of West Berlin Mayor Brandt’s view that West Germany can ameliorate living conditions for the East German people in exchange for economic concessions. From the standpoint of its internal policies, the Ulbricht regime apparently hopes that a measured degree of unorthodoxy and flexibility will enable it to win popular commitment to its objectives. The reforms so far enacted, however, have not greatly affected the lives of most East Germans. Their loyalties are still doubtful. But for the relatively few—e.g., factory managers and farm chairmen—whose support in the first instance is necessary, new incentives should prove efficacious. Prospects The reforms suggest that, even as elsewhere in Eastern Europe, a new and more realistic element of national self-interest is affecting East German policy. Responding primarily to pressures from the Soviet bloc, East Germany has embarked on a new course. While there has been no retreat since Khrushchev’s ouster, neither have there been new concessions. The regime now appears to be marking time, assessing the results so far. The central committee plenums in December and April were distinguished by an undertone of caution in all but economic policies. It appears doubtful that Ulbricht will carry through his promise to add duplicate candidates to electoral lists this year, to increase pensions, or to lengthen vacations. However, the future of the present trend is not assured. There are strong conservative forces within the party opposing even those reforms already granted. There are several reports, for example, that the Ministry for State Security bitterly opposes the Berlin pass agreement and the pensioner visits. Ulbricht’s incapacitation or death could serve to spark a conservative resurgence. 114. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 8. Secret. Drafted by Obst and Kent and approved in S, U, and G on June 23. The meeting was held at Blair House. The source text is marked “Part II of II.” Part I, a discussion of Eastern Europe, is ibid. Washington, June 2, 1965, 8 p.m. SUBJECT German Question PARTICIPANTS US Secretary Rusk Under Secretary Ball Ambassador Thompson Assistant Secretary Leddy Ambassador McGhee Mr. Puhan Mr. Obst, Interpreter German Foreign Minister Schroeder Ambassador Knappstein Dr. Simon, Aide to Schroeder Mr. Weber, Interpreter Minister Schroeder said that closer ties between East and West are a value in themselves. They might not always have a direct bearing on progress towards reunification, but that objective is always in German thoughts. Ambassador McGhee observed that de Gaulle thinks that only by economic and some other closer ties can the reunification of Germany be brought about. Minister Schroeder suggested that in approaching the German question in the future, the United States and Germany should first explore the matter bilaterally. Then these discussions could be broadened to include the others. Minister Schroeder added that the talks should be kept highly informal. Ambassador Knappstein emphasized that they must be kept absolutely secret. Ambassador McGhee asserted that any suggestions prepared for the group of powers should have substance. Minister Schroeder pointed out that the FRG attitude towards the Four Powers has not changed. The FRG knows the prospect for reunification is not good now. The German position is to continue to rely on the Four Powers for the settlement of the German question but initially to discuss bilaterally what is possible. Mr. Ball said there should also be talks with the United Kingdom. Minister Schroeder replied that he did not have exclusive talks in mind. The British could be included a little later. 115. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 8. Confidential. Drafted by Puhan and approved in S and U on July 8. The meeting was held in the Under Secretary’s conference room. The source text is marked “Part 1 of 4”; memoranda of other portions of the conversation are ibid. A memorandum of conversation of the portion of the discussion dealing with France and NATO is Document 116. Washington, June 4, 1965, 11 a.m. SUBJECT Trade with Eastern Europe and the Zone PARTICIPANTS Germans Dr. Ludwig Erhard, Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany Dr. Gerhard Schroeder, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein, German Embassy Dr. Karl Hohmann, Assistant Secretary; Chief, Planning Staff, Federal Chancery Dr. Horst Osterheld, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of the Chancellor Dr. Dankmar Seibt, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Personal Aide to the Chancellor Mr. Georg von Lilienfeld, Minister, German Embassy Mr. Karl-Guenther von Hase, State Secretary; Federal Press Spokesman Dr. Klaus Simon, Aide to Foreign Minister Schroeder Mr. Jorg Kastl, Foreign Ministry Press Spokesman Mr. Ulrich Bewerunge, Press Officer, Federal Press &Information Agency Mr. Hermann Kusterer, Interpreter Mr. Heinz Weber, Interpreter Americans The Secretary Under Secretary George W. Ball Ambassador George C. McGhee Ambassador Llewellyn E. Thompson, S/AL Mr. John M. Leddy, Assistant Secretary,EUR Mr. Robert C. Creel, Deputy Assistant Secretary, EUR Mr. Alfred Puhan, Director, GER Mr. Richard B. Finn, Deputy Director,GER Mr. Harry Obst, Interpreter The Chancellor spoke of his pleasure at being here. He said that he was certain the Secretary knew how keenly he felt about the Alliance. He referred to his upcoming talks with de Gaulle which he said would not be easy. They would concern not only the problems of the Six, but the problems of NATO. The Chancellor felt it was not necessary this morning to mention the German problem in particular. He was grateful, as the Secretary knew, for the recent statements by the President and other American leaders on the German problem. The Chancellor said he had one question he wished to explore with the Secretary. He stated that one heard a great deal today about the relations of the West with the countries of Eastern Europe. de Gaulle, according to the Chancellor, had described the solution to the German problem in terms of a better relationship between the East and West. The Chancellor said it was his view that the Eastern European countries had their own identity, were national states whether Communist or not and that they threatened the FRG with giving equal treatment to the GDR. In the US, Chancellor Erhard said one hears more and more that commercial relations with these Eastern European countries are useful. He referred to an article in Life by Professor Brzezinski.Not found. The Chancellor said the FRG was not hostile toward the Eastern European countries, but it was premature to speculate regarding diplomatic relations between these countries and the FRG. He felt the time for such action was not opportune. He thought that in view of the rupture of relations caused with the FRG by ten Arab states and the upcoming Algiers conference of Afro-Asian countries,The Conference was held October 28–November 2. It ended without any agreements. any speculation regarding the establishment of diplomatic relations between the FRG and the Eastern European countries would only create an atmosphere of uncertainty. The Chancellor asked if all Western European countries grant long term credits to the Eastern European states, what will be achieved? Are we not basically deceiving ourselves into thinking that we may achieve German reunification in this way? He felt it would be difficult to explain such actions to the German people. He thought that even when viewed from a long range point of view, it was necessary for us to proceed with great caution. If everybody gives long term credits to the Eastern European states, what will they do with these credits? Perhaps they will increase their armaments. The Chancellor asked if it was not to be expected that the Soviets would increase the pressure on the Eastern European countries as we are trying to develop better relations with them. The Chancellor asked, as an economist, when and under what conditions would these Eastern European countries be ready to repay the credits extended to them? He was concerned that the position of the creditors would in the last analysis be worse than that of the debtors. We would be forced to continue giving them credit in the hope of getting repayment. He warned that we could not give them the impression that we are doing this as a gift. He voiced the necessity for the development of an economic strategy in this field, a strategy based on a study of the results achieved. He asked if granting credits has resulted in greater readiness to move away from the USSR. Had the chances for German reunification actually improved? Or are these Eastern European states making use of these funds to undermine the Western position? Were they financing armies of liberation in other parts of the world? He said he felt ill at ease at these thoughts. The Secretary replied we saw considerable advantage in more relaxed relations between East and West Europe, including improved relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Communist states of Eastern Europe. He believed important developments were taking place in Eastern Europe. The smaller Eastern European countries have achieved a considerable degree of national autonomy. This is decidedly to our advantage. The Secretary felt there was underlying nostalgia in Eastern Europe for greater association with the West in the cultural, intellectual as well as other fields. The Secretary said the role of the US in such a policy toward Eastern Europe is fairly restricted. US trade with Eastern Europe is only a small fraction of Western European trade with that part of the world. It was not easy for us to change this situation. There was legislation governing our trade with Communist states. Congress would want to look with great care into any change of this situation. Moreover, the attitude of Eastern Europe toward us cannot help but be affected by developments in other parts of the world—in Viet-Nam and Cuba, for example. Some Eastern European countries, the Secretary suggested, may stand aside in conflicts involving us with the Communists in other parts of the world, but a crisis like that of Viet-Nam imposes inevitably limitations on us to improve the atmosphere, the relations between us and Eastern Europe. The Secretary expressed his full agreement with the Chancellor on the problem of credits to the Communist Bloc. He said that we and the Federal Republic had tended to view the problem in the same light, but that we have often been disappointed by the positions taken by other NATO powers. He felt it would be unfortunate if there developed in the West a policy of giving easy credit terms to Eastern Europe. He said when credits became aid, we were making a mistake in our priorities. We should obviously not increase the capacity of Communist strength until the prospects for much better relations with the Bloc looked brighter. The Secretary felt that the idea of a détente had gone far beyond the facts. He cited the nuclear test ban treaty as a stimulus to the notion that a détente had been reached. To prove that this was not so, he cited crises which had arisen since that time. He said there were indications the Soviets may press us on Berlin again. He reminded the Chancellor of Gromyko’s suggestion that there be four-power talks on Berlin. Gromyko, he said, also tried to have bilateral talks with us on Berlin and our position there. The Secretary said he gathered Gromyko in Paris took up the German and Berlin questions, hinting that the Soviets were growing impatient. The Secretary added that we had intelligence reports concerning very large military maneuvers in Eastern Germany, suggesting that we might find ourselves again with very great pressure over Berlin. It was thus important for NATO to try to talk out in some detail the wide range of questions affecting our relations with Eastern Europe. He deplored the absence of a strong Western policy on this subject and the tendency to create confusion. The Secretary said, in summary, we have noted a steady relaxation of tensions in Eastern Europe which made for better East-West relations. He said our role in increasing this better relationship would be somewhat restricted. He believed this subject should be discussed further in NATO. The Secretary asked Mr. Ball to comment further on this subject. The Under Secretary referred to the difficulties which the Federal Republic had encountered when it sought to take the lead with Belgium in restricting credits to Eastern Europe to the Berne Union rules. Mr. Ball said we made our support of this position clear and tried to persuade our NATO partners to agree. The UK, however, would not make any distinction between credits to Eastern European countries and to others. As a result, a split developed within NATO with the UK followed by the French and the Italians going beyond the Berne rules. The result was that we had no common policy, which was a matter of great regret to us. Our suggestion to have the Berne Union rules accepted as a standard was taken up in the OECD. The British showed little sympathy for this suggestion. Subsequently, Mr. Leddy undertook to push this further, but I am not very sanguine as to what might be accomplished. Mr. Leddy said the UK would go along with general rules applicable to all, but was afraid they would want to grant credits for as much as ten years. We feel it was appropriate to limit them to five years. Mr. Ball added that as long as we have members of the Alliance who believe in no discrimination, it would be very difficult to develop a common policy. The Secretary said he wished to add that it was important to draw distinctions between the smaller countries of Eastern Europe on the basis of the role they played in Communist conspiracies in other parts of the world. For instance, Rumania was quite inactive, whereas the Czechs were very troublesome. The Chancellor said he would like to speak about the Soviet Zone of Occupation of Germany. He said we heard more and more about FRG trade with the Zone. In this connection, he wished to make it clear that interzonal trade was not a matter of choice for the FRG, was not engaged in for economic reasons. The FRG undertook originally to help Germans in the Zone when the FRG was literally the only source for aid. Now, he said, the situation had changed and the Zone can buy more from other countries which has altered zonal trade a considerable degree. If the GDR gets long term credits, it will in turn be able to offer credits to countries like the UAR (350 million marks) to Indonesia and Tanzania. By enhancing the economic status of the Zone, the West will in turn permit the GDR to enhance its political status with countries like those above by assisting them economically. The Chancellor added he agreed with the Secretary in making a clear distinction between the Zone and the Communist Eastern European states. Referring back to trade with the Communist Bloc, Erhard said that even viewed from a businessman’s point of view, it was a bad bargain. He urged that we look at trade with the Bloc from an economic point of view. He saw disaster ahead if developments in the trade field in this area were not kept under control. He noted there was already competition in Western European countries to grant credits to Eastern Europe, a ridiculous situation. The Secretary said he did believe trade with the Zone represented a special case. He thought that this affected us very little since the volume of trade between us and the Zone was so small and so much less than that of Western European countries with the Zone. The Secretary asked the Chancellor how he saw the so-called co-production schemes like those of Mr. Beitz in Poland. Would they involve long term credits? The Chancellor thought the possibilities of anything coming of these schemes were rather limited. He envisioned no great opportunities for Krupp. He again suggested that it would be up to the OECD to achieve better coordination in the general field of trade with Eastern Europe. He suggested that these countries could offer mainly agricultural products only. The EEC was not in a position to expand its imports of agricultural products to any substantial extent. How were they going to repay the credits? The Secretary assured the Chancellor that we had no intention of relaxing our limitations on credits to the Communist Bloc. The Chancellor warned that German industry would try to emulate the actions of other countries. He pointed to FRG trade with the Eastern Bloc as representing only four per cent of the total German volume. Before Hitler, German trade with the same area was twenty per cent of the total volume. The Secretary asked Mr. Leddy if there were any possibility of getting neutral countries like Switzerland and Sweden to agree on credit terms if there was no unanimity in NATO. The Chancellor interposed the suggestion he was skeptical that neutrals like Switzerland and Sweden, who were so sensitive lest they be accused of being drawn into Alliances, would be influenced by NATO decisions. He thought the most useful forum was the OECD where the situation could be discussed in sober commercial terms without openly mentioning the political angles. Mr. Leddy expressed complete agreement with the Chancellor. He said that our efforts to achieve an agreed policy in NATO had made no progress. To get the neutrals in, you would have to proceed on a commercial basis. He agreed fully it was wise to pursue this in the OECD and to see how far we could get. 116. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 8. Confidential. Drafted by Puhan and approved in S and U on July 8. The meeting was held in the Under Secretary’s conference room. The source text is marked “Part 2 of 4”; a memorandum of conversation of the portion of the discussion dealing with trade with the Soviet Bloc is Document 115. Washington, June 4, 1965, 11 a.m. SUBJECT de Gaulle and NATO PARTICIPANTS [Here follows the same list of participants as Document 115.] The Chancellor stated that as for de Gaulle’s solution of the German problem in strictly European terms, this is entirely unacceptable to the Germans. The Chancellor wanted to emphasize that point. The Chancellor said he had no objections to Gromyko’s going to Paris. What was sought after there was a certain tactical effect. The Chancellor stated that German reunification must be achieved by peaceful means. It was not possible for the Germans, however, to make advance concessions which would be cashed in by the other side without granting anything in return. He said the Germans would be ready to discuss substantive matters when serious discussions were in order, but there could be no advance concessions. The Secretary said we pay no attention to de Gaulle’s suggestion to solve the German problem in the European context. He said that we were not children, that we had important rights derived from our victory over the Nazis which we would not surrender to either the USSR or the French. The Chancellor assured him that he never doubted this, but was glad to hear it from us from time to time nonetheless. The Secretary asked if he expected in his upcoming talks with de Gaulle to get more specific information about the prospects for NATO.The Chancellor and de Gaulle met June 11–12 at Bonn. The Chancellor replied that he was somewhat confident that de Gaulle would not reveal a great deal. de Gaulle may realize that he has gone too far. Erhard said de Gaulle had not kept his promises to him on the MLF, moreover he knows that his pawns in the Federal Republic, the Gaullists, have grown more skeptical. He said de Gaulle knows he is running the danger of losing the Germans. At the same time we were all in agreement that we should try to keep de Gaulle in the Alliance. As for the French elections, the Chancellor thought even de Gaulle cannot afford to show consistent stubbornness, disclose new and violent differences and still keep the French people behind him. The Chancellor said he was not ready to make concessions to de Gaulle and assured the Secretary that he intended to represent German interests. This involved standing by those who helped the Germans. The Secretary said he had had interesting talks with Foreign Minister Schroeder about the timing of de Gaulle’s moves against NATO. The Secretary said this was a vital matter. He cited as an illustration of the importance of this question the fact that de Gaulle had asked his people not to discuss with us the question of a new headquarters building for SHAPE. Erhard suggested jokingly that we ask him after September 19, but said we can't face this issue now before the German elections. He said that the Federal Republic was the most loyal ally in NATO. He referred to a German poll which indicated that the German people had twenty-four times as much confidence in the US as in France. 117. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 8. Secret. Drafted by Kent and approved in the White House on June 10. The meeting was held in the President’s office. The source text is marked “Part Nine of Nine.” A memorandum of conversation of the portion of the talks dealing with NATO is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 88. Washington, June 4, 1965, 12:30 p.m. SUBJECT President’s Summary of Conversation PARTICIPANTS US The President Harry Obst—Interpreter German Chancellor Erhard Hermann Kusterer—Interpreter The President concluded the discussion with the following summary: 1. He understood Erhard’s problems with General de Gaulle. He believed Erhard was handling them right. They would continue to work together on this problem, and he would support the Chancellor as much as he could. 2. The NATO Alliance must be preserved. The American commitments were extremely solid and he would stand by them. NATO would continue with or without France. 3. The Chancellor should bring forward any ideas, suggestions and possible approaches on the question of reunification of Germany. The President assured the Chancellor these ideas would be warmly received and studied with care. 4. The President and the Chancellor should keep in touch on the Great Society and the Formed Society. They should continue their work in that direction. 5. The President appreciated the interest of the Chancellor in development programs for Asia. This subject should also be brought up at the United Nations. 6. The President assured the Chancellor he would do the best he could to solve the conflicts in Viet-Nam and in the Dominican Republic. He appreciated the Chancellor’s sympathetic attitude toward these problems. The Chancellor could be assured that, if it came to defending Berlin, the US would also do the best it could and stand firmly by its commitment. 7. The President apologized for being unable to give the Chancellor more time for talks during this visit. This was partly due to the cancellation of the Shastri visit. The President hoped they would be able to continue their conversation at another date. 118. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 8. Secret. Drafted by Kent and approved in the White House on June 10. The discussion took place during lunch. The source text is marked “Part 2 of 4.” Washington, June 4, 1965, 2 p.m. SUBJECT Europe PARTICIPANTS Germans Dr. Ludwig Erhard, Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany Dr. Gerhard Schroeder, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein, German Embassy Mr. Karl-Guenther von Hase, State Secretary; Federal Press Spokesman Mr. Hermann Kusterer, Interpreter Americans The President The Secretary Ambassador George C. McGhee Mr. John M. Leddy, Assistant Secretary,EUR Mr. George E. Reedy, Press Secretary to the President Mr. Harry Obst, Interpreter Chancellor Erhard said the visit of the QueenQueen Elizabeth visited Germany May 18–28. had been a great success and that it refuted de Gaulle’s thesis of a continental Europe. Ambassador McGhee complimented Erhard on his compromise in the grain price conflict. He said this had pulled Germany out of a position of isolation in the EEC and had left de Gaulle in isolation on almost every point in the EEC. Secretary Rusk said he had been favorably impressed with the attitude of the Labor Government in Britain towards Germany after the British elections. He had been concerned before the elections, but was happy with the situation now. Chancellor Erhard commented that one problem with the French was that you never knew how long they would keep their promises. de Gaulle had agreed to the MLF, and one-half year later he almost broke the Franco-German Friendship Treaty. In Rambouillet he had promised him the chiefs of state would have a meeting on European political union, and four months later he declared the issue dead and said a meeting was impossible. No basic feeling of trust was possible with such a partner. De Gaulle’s idea of Europe was French hegemony. He knew he could not bring this about alone, but needed Germany’s support. Germany did not want that, nor did it even want Franco-German hegemony. He believed that de Gaulle felt he was running out of time and that he had to press the issue now. de Gaulle believed that if he could not bring about French hegemony, no one after him would ever be able to accomplish it. 119. Telegram From the Mission in Berlin to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Berlin, vol. 3. Secret; Immediate. Also sent to the White House for Bundy. Repeated to Bonn, Paris for the Embassy and USRO, London, USNMR, USCINCEUR, USELMLO, USAREUR, USAFE, and Moscow. Berlin, June 21, 1965, 1630Z. 1769. Subj: Current Sov/GDR moves on Berlin: motivation and prospects. Evidence of increased Soviet/GDR pressures on the West in Berlin has mounted in recent weeks. The current East German helicopter activity presents the most immediate problems, but there have been other indications: (1) The Bundestag harassments in April. (2) The action against the USMLM house in Potsdam.Reference is to a June 1 demonstration of about 800 persons against U.S. policies in Vietnam. The demonstration degenerated into violence. The Mission reported on the incident in telegram 1674 from Berlin, June 2. (Department of State, Central Files,POL 23–8 GER) (3) The arrests during the Eastern and Whitsun pass periods. (4) The tougher East German propaganda line on future pass negotiations. (5) The June 15 shooting.East German police shot two East Berliners seeking to cross the Wall into the West. One was killed. (6) Indications of possible difficulties with civilian rail and barge traffic. These developments raise a number of broader questions—in addition to the practical problem of how best to counter this or that Eastern move. Are the current pressures the prelude to a new Berlin crisis of major proportions? If so, what is the likely form and scope of the new crisis? If not, what are the probable limits of the pressures? What is the Sov/GDR motivation? Berlin Senat views: Berlin Senat circles have for some time been advancing a two-fold explanation of what they see basically as a new hard phase of GDR—as distinct from Soviet—policy. First, it is said that hard-line elements within the SED have been winning out over more moderate elements who are prepared to seek accommodation with the West. Second, the GDR is said to have acquired a certain independence of the USSR since the fall of Khrushchev, including a certain freedom to mount pressures on the West on its own initiative. Strength and limitations of Senat views: Senat representatives have contacts of various kinds with the East German authorities—at the Korber level, through unofficial intermediaries such as the East Berlin lawyer Vogel, and through newsmen and other informal channels. They presumably obtain certain insights into the internal workings of the East German regime. Two reservations seem in order, however. First, the East Germans—and the Soviets—have an interest in trying to draw the Senat further into contacts and negotiation. On this view, it would make good sense for the East to give the Senat the impression that there are people on the Eastern side who are prepared to do business reasonably, that these people are involved in an internal struggle with hard-liners, and that the West should take this factor into consideration and in turn be prepared to be reasonable in order to make things easier for the moderates on the other side. This is an old approach. Second, Brandt has an equally obvious interest in trying to make the point in the West about the hard-soft struggle on the Eastern side. His policy of small steps and the larger vistas it holds out make much better political sense against a background of factional dispute within the SED than on the assumption that the East German leadership is united. Moreover, in the West German election context Brandt presumably fears that an actual sharpening of the Berlin situation would work in favor of the party in power. He has already shown sensitivity on this score. Brandt’s concerns were reported in telegram 1698 from Berlin, June 9. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B) Situation within SED: So far as facts observed by the Mission go, there is little to support the Senat view. We have often asked Senat representatives to identify the supposed SED factions, but without result. The reason could be caution on the Senat’s part about divulging sensitive material. It could on the other hand point to a lack of precise information. Without dismissing the first factor, we are inclined to give more weight to the second. East Berlin lawyer Vogel has also often talked to Mission representatives about hards and softs on the Eastern side, but he has been evasive and vague when pressed for details. The Mission is far from dismissing the possibility of factional dispute within the SED. In the post-Ulbricht period there may be important developments as the new generation jostles for position. We believe, however, that so long as Ulbricht continues in command, the chances are slight that differences will become an important practical factor in East German relations with the West. Soviet-GDR relationship: In the question of the relationship between the Ulbricht regime and Moscow, the Mission has previously expressed its belief that Ulbricht doubtless feels more comfortable now than he did before Khrushchev’s removal. The new Soviet leadership turned away sharply from Khrushchev’s somewhat experimental approach to the Federal Republic. Soviet efforts to muffle the Sino-Soviet dispute in the wake of Khrushchev’s removal must also have been a relief to Ulbricht, and he has used the opportunity to improve his own relations with Peiping. In purely personal terms, Ulbricht—now an elder statesman of the Communist world—probably feels on more equal terms with the Brezhnev-Kosygin team than he did with Khrushchev. He must also realize his value to the post-Khrushchev leadership, confronted as it is with difficult internal and external problems it has—one with demonstrated ability to keep things together in East Germany in times of stress. Ulbricht’s foreign policy successes, notably his visit to the UAR and Tito’s recent visit to the GDR, and the modest recovery of the East German economy, have no doubt also given the East German leader added confidence which would be reflected in his relations with Moscow and in his public posture towards the West. Nevertheless, it is a large step from these considerations to the proposition that the East German regime has a new-found freedom to run harassments on Berlin which would affect the Allies directly, and thus bring broader questions of Soviet-Western relations into play. Such a development would be contrary to what we have assumed—and what long experience has shown—is a basic Soviet interest, namely to keep Berlin matters affecting relations with the Western Powers firmly in their own hands. It is difficult to imagine that this interest is now in process of changing. In a period of apparent overall caution in Soviet policy toward the West, it would seem that the need for control of the Berlin situation would be more than ever necessary for Moscow. It will be recalled in this connection that the Polish defector Tykocinski was categorical on the point of Soviet control of any moves in Berlin which might affect their relations with the West. Positive factors in current Soviet-GDR attitude: In short, we believe the Senat’s views are not in themselves altogether satisfactory in explaining the current situation. It is also relevant to note that the pressures on the West from the Soviets and the East Germans have been accompanied by some factors which point in the other direction. (1) The Soviets have moved with reasonable speed to repair the damage to the USMLM house. (2) The East Germans finally released the two West Berliners arrested at Easter, even though the East German who duped them and escaped to West Berlin with their identity papers was not extradited. (3) The East Germans have designated an official to conduct future pass negotiations. (4) The Reichsbahn position on rail tariffs seems not to be as hard as it was once thought to be. (5) US official civilian entry to East Berlin has been resumed without difficulty. (6) Ambassador Seydoux seems to have found Abrasimov in a fairly relaxed and uncombative frame of mind last week. (7) The GDR is apparently continuing to [garble] to the FRG through private lawyer channels. (8) There are no indications that the East Germans intend to stop or curtail pensioner visits. (9) The Allied and German civilian access situation is normal. (10) The FRG and the GDR have made progress toward settlement of various IZT problems. Conclusions: The Mission is inclined to see the following as the main factors in the Soviet-GDR position. A. West German elections: The elections have introduced a kind of pause in Soviet-GDR relations with Bonn and the Berlin Senat, in the sense that there is probably little point in taking positive initiatives until the new German government is formed. At the same time, policy tends not to stand still, and there is perhaps a disposition to believe that with the West German Government and Mayor Brandt increasingly swept up in the election campaign, the next few months can be used with greater impunity for increasing pressures. US absorption with Southeast Asia and Caribbean affairs is presumably also a factor on the Eastern side. B. East German pressures on the Soviets: The East Germans may be pressing the Soviets to let them try to increase their presence in Berlin, and it is Soviet policy also to enlarge the GDR role—with the proviso, we believe, that the situation brought about by any initiatives be relatively safe and capable of being brought under complete Soviet control should need arise. We could imagine the East Germans arguing with the Soviets that the attack on the USMLM house and the GDR helicopter flights over East Berlin and around the West Berlin sector-zonal borders would be safe yet politically useful. They could point to our past record of caution in retaliating against the Soviet Liaison Mission and guess that we attach enough importance to the USMLM that we would be prepared to swallow the Potsdam incident. As for the helicopter flights, the East Germans probably argued that these could be carried out with little risk. Perhaps the Soviets gave conditional approval to the flights, reserving the right to enter the picture if the Western reaction were such in their view as to warrant their intervention. C. Vietnam: The Soviet predicament with the Vietnam situation may have inclined Moscow to accede more readily to East German pressures for initiatives on Berlin. On this view, which has been most explicitly stated in Berlin by Boelke, the editor of Tagesspiegel, the current pressures on Berlin represent a kind of substitute crisis laid on in part to counterbalance US policy in Vietnam. Theoretically at least, the Soviets enjoy a very wide range of options on Berlin as a “substitute crisis.” They could go all the way to resumption of the direct Khrushchev challenge to Allied access. They know pretty well what difficulties this would bring on in the West. On the other hand, they also know from the Khrushchev period that it is difficult for them to go beyond a certain point in challenging the West without bringing on the risk of direct confrontation with all the uncertainties this involves. In this reading, pressures on the West on Berlin at the present juncture must seem attractive to the Soviets, yet they must also be aware of the political limitations. It is difficult from Berlin to judge the present Soviet mood. We have the impression from recent Soviet and GDR statements stressing the need to observe the status quo in Berlin that the current Eastern attitude is not a radically forward one. Admittedly, the statements called on the West to observe the status quo without committing the East, but it seems worth noting in this connection that Tito during his recent East Berlin visitJune 8–13. seemed to be calling on both East and West to do nothing that would increase tensions in Germany. Prospects: In summary, I would conclude that we are in for a period of increased probing in Berlin subject to careful Soviet control, in which—as always—the Western reaction at any stage will be an important factor for the Soviets in weighing further moves; that the Soviets will continue to be flexible and keep [garble] maneuver towards the GDR and the West in following any course of action; and that the evidence so far does not point to a Soviet-GDR intention of bringing on a crisis of major dimensions. A failure—which would be publicly apparent—on our part to react with firmness to probes, such as the helicopter flights, against established Allied rights could seriously mislead the Eastern leadership as well as the West Berlin leadership and populace. The East is apparently prepared to accept a measure of risk—not so far a very large measure—in carrying out the helicopter flights. It is difficult to see how the West can influence Eastern views without itself accepting some measure of risk. Calhoun 120. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 8. Secret. Washington, June 23, 1965. The Secretary, George Ball, the German boys, and I had a useful discussion yesterday with Dean Acheson and Jack McCloy on the helicopter problem in Berlin.As part of the campaign of harassment undertaken by East German authorities at the time of the April Bundestag meeting in Berlin, East German helicopters began to enter the Berlin control zone and air corridors between West Berlin and the Federal Republic of Germany with increasing frequency. For text of the April 8 U.S. protest note, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 893–894. In a June 23 memorandum to the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended “concerted political action by the Western allies” to force the Soviet and East German authorities to cease this harassment. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 8) There was no disagreement with the steps we are already taking, such as official representations in Moscow and/or the three capitals. It was also agreed that we should press the Germans to suspend negotiations between Airflot and Lufthansa relating this to the helicopter problem. The main issue discussed was whether or not we should ourselves resume helicopter flights over East Berlin. The military are in general opposed to doing this at this time as they fear that linking these with the East German flights might end in our losing our right to fly over East Berlin. We probably have little chance of stopping the East German flights over East Berlin unless we take some very strong action, such as paralleling their flights along the sector border with flights of our own inside East Berlin. It is not certain that this would lead to cessation of their flights but if it did, we would probably end up by having to give up our own flights. The general judgment of Acheson and McCloy was that we should maintain the legal position that all East German flights are a violation of quadripartite rules but that in fact we only act to prevent the East Germans flying over East Berlin. They would go quite far in this connection even to the point of using force to bring down an East German helicopter over West Berlin. The Secretary suggested we should investigate the “dirty tricks” department to see if we could not make the East Germans look ridiculous. The most hopeful idea which we are investigating is to encourage West Berlin youths to fly kites along the sector borders to harass the East German flights. General Clay was not available but may be able to come down tomorrow. Tommy 121. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris for the Embassy and USRO, and Moscow. Bonn, June 23, 1965, 1817Z. 4986. Subj: Erhard’s views on Berlin. Following is the discussion on the question of Berlin, during my meeting yesterday with Chancellor Erhard. Other subjects discussed are being reported separately.In telegram 4973 from Bonn, June 23. (Ibid., POL GER W–US) I recounted to the Chancellor the recent series of adverse events in Berlin: The damage to our Potsdam Mission; the shooting at the Teltow Canal on June 15; the GDR denunciation of the barge and rail agreements, and the flight of GDR helicopters initiated on June 5. I asked the Chancellor for his own appraisal of whether this represented a general stiffening of the Soviet-GDR posture in Berlin. The Chancellor replied that he construed these events to represent a well-planned, large-scale attempt to build up the pretense of GDR sovereignty. It was hoped thereby to show the world that there are two German states. If the Soviets and the GDR are able to make good their present threats, damages would accrue which represent a greater price than the FRG can pay. The whole future of interzonal trade is at stake. The Chancellor deplored, along familiar lines, the granting of credits by the Western states to the GDR. (He admitted that the US is not involved, as I pointed out.) As one of the results, iron and steel, which had formerly played an important part in IZT trade, were now largely furnished to the GDR by others. The Western credits may have played a role in encouraging the GDR to seek further to diminish the right of the FRG to represent all Germans. The pass discussions held between Korber and Kohl on June 21 had ended in a few minutes. Twenty percent of the passes issued to West Berliners during the Whitsun vacations had not been used; he interpreted this to mean that the people were afraid to use them. With respect to barge traffic, the GDR aim is to replace permanent barge permits by permits which must be granted for each trip. The GDR threat to terminate rail traffic is a “devilish” thing. The East Germans say that future arrangements must be made as between states—i.e., at the Cabinet level. If there is no new agreement they may disrupt traffic. In either case the GDR would be able to prove its two-state theory. The FRG must either negotiate at the Cabinet level, or face proof that the GDR has the right to stop shipments at the border. Free access to Berlin, continued the Chancellor, is based on Allied agreements and the IZT. The possibility exists that IZT can be interrupted in retaliation against a denial of access; however, this could only be done if the Allies would guarantee that the necessary goods for Berlin would be provided. He referred to his recent discussion with French Amb Seydoux on this point, in which the latter had raised the question of the possible re-mounting of an airlift in such circumstances. The Chancellor asked whether this would be possible. He emphasized that the IZT does not exist for purely commercial reasons—only as a means of assuring access. Comment: The Chancellor took a more serious view of the barge and rail problems than the FonOff projected last week. Generally speaking, I think that his assessment is overly gloomy, in that he almost seems to assume that some stoppage of rail and waterway access is likely, unless, as he says, the FRG agrees to “Cabinet level” negotiations. Our judgment to date, in which both the French and British Embassies as well as the FonOff concur, is that the Zone, with its implication of a July 1 deadline, is probably demonstrating its standard pre-negotiating tactic of trying to maximize pressure on the FRG. As we have reported (Embtel 4916),Not found. the East Germans have in fact backed down from earlier extreme demands that international (CIM) rail rates be introduced on July 1. The barge situation is less clear, but I also do not presently expect a “blockade.” The FRG and the GDR will probably settle down to a prolonged, and perhaps not overly comfortable dickering over barge permits—of a type familiar to us in past talks on the Hof Bridge and a fourteenth train path. What I think the Chancellor’s views reflect, is that the weekend developments have upset a cautious German optimism of last week. Over the weekend the Zone has sharpened its air demands, posed brusque demands in the pass talks, and begun a new line of attack against FRG “war plans.” While this GDR activity has proved upsetting to the Germans, I think that it is mostly declamatory in purpose, rather than the signal for a serious test of strength on Berlin. McGhee 122. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow, CINCEUR, USAREUR,USAFE, and USELMLO. Bonn, June 25, 1965, 0917Z. 5015. Subject: Chancellor Erhard’s views on Berlin. Chancellor Erhard called in the French Ambassador and British and U.S. Charges on June 24 to impress on the three Occupation Powers the seriousness with which his govt regards the developing situation in Berlin. Surrounded by Vice Chancellor Mende, Minister Westrick, State Secretaries Carstens and Hrautwig, and other German officials, he made a lengthy opening presentation lasting some thirty minutes along the following lines: 1. The situation in Berlin, which was causing great concern to the FRG, should not be played down. It was the result of a conscious and concerted policy clearly aimed at the enhancement of GDR status and intended also to cause trouble in the FRG before elections by raising the level of insecurity and fear. GDR threats and actions were obviously supported if not stimulated by Moscow. Ever since the Bundestag session in April (about which he did not wish to speak at this time), a developing pattern of harassments had emerged. 2. After enumerating the various GDR actions which fell within this pattern, he stressed that the helicopter flights over West Berlin were the most serious and dramatic. (He actually said “Soviet helicopter flights” but Westrick corrected him by noting that the flights in question were East German.) Erhard had spoken to Bundestag Fraktion leaders earlier in the day and all had agreed that something must be done. The helicopters over West Berlin had to be forced to land, and the German Govt would welcome it if—without launching an air war of course—this could be achieved. The East Germans were probing to see how far they could go and they had to be resisted. 3. As to the Interzonal Trade agreement, the German Govt would give it up tomorrow if it were not for the connection between the IZT and free access to Berlin. If such a step were to be taken, the FRG would have to consider, in consultation with its Allies, the effects on Berlin and what must as a consequence be done. 4. It was necessary to make a basic distinction between trade with the Eastern European countries and trade with the GDR. The former were at least partly independent national entities. As Erhard had previously suggested to President Johnson and President de Gaulle, it was desirable that the subject of trade with the GDR be discussed in the OECD. The German Govt had noted that the IZT was becoming progressively less interesting to the GDR, since it was getting increasing deliveries from other countries as well as long-term credits. Since the FRG’s allies supported her opposition to the two-German-state theory, it was inconsistent and wrong to undermine this opposition by giving trade and credit assistance to the Soviet Zone. 5. After repeating that his views had the support of all party leaders in the Bundestag, Erhard again stressed the importance of action against GDR helicopter flights in order to maintain West Berlin morale. Mere protests would not suffice; the helicopter flights had to be stopped. 6. It was also essential to prevent any upgrading of the GDR. If the IZT were to be involved as a countermeasure and access to Berlin were interrupted as a result, the Western Powers would have to proceed on the assumption that an airlift of the 1948–49 variety would no longer suffice to keep Berlin supplied with its basic requirements. 7. The German Govt had lived through August 13, 1961, when the initial erection of the Wall took place, without sufficiently serious reactions. The Allies likewise had limited themselves to protests. The experience of 1961 could simply not be repeated. 8. Erhard requested that the Allied representatives present report the German position back to their governments, and hoped that official responses would soon be available so that a further exchange of views could take place and agreement on action could be reached. French Ambassador Seydoux responded that he could assure Erhard the three Occupying Powers were concerned about the Berlin situation and efforts to enhance the status of the GDR. The three Embassies in Bonn were consulting on a daily basis with German Foreign Office representatives as well as keeping in close touch with all pertinent developments. The Wall had been a brutal and decisive act, Seydoux observed, which was different in kind from the isolated actions under discussion today. It was too soon to know the precise scope and significance of the GDR threats and harassments. The French Embassy still saw the possibility that Ulbricht was acting largely on his own initiative although obviously with general Soviet permission, and it was not clear how far the Soviets would permit him to go. It was necessary to distinguish, Seydoux continued, between the helicopter problem, which clearly fell within the responsibility of the three Occupying Powers for the security of West Berlin, and the various other issues raised by the GDR, which were initially matters of German concern. The three governments were presently considering the helicopter problem and following the Berlin situation closely. It was obviously desirable and necessary that a common policy be worked out on problems of mutual concern. In response to Seydoux’s query, Erhard repeated that the German Government would like Allied support when the Germans raised the problem of Western trade with the GDR and the extensions of credits in the OECD. When Westrick pointed out that no OECD meeting was scheduled in the near future, Erhard said he would then ask for a special session. He believed it better to use the OECD for this purpose rather than NATO, since discussion in the latter forum would seem to give the subject an aggressive character. If there were a united Western front against the GDR in this field, Erhard continued, Ulbricht would soon retreat in order to avoid losing prestige. The German Government wanted to disabuse other countries of the idea that the IZT was simply a matter of business for the Germans which as such they were reluctant to sacrifice. But assurances first were necessary that the whole exercise of cancelling the IZT would not be futile because other Western countries would move into the gap with the GDR. The U.S. and British Charges concurred generally in Seydoux’s remarks, pointing out that the evidence was still not conclusive that a major Berlin crisis was in the offing but that the Four Powers had to be vigilant and united in meeting any difficulties that might arise. U.S. Charge noted that, while the West was being confronted with new challenges, at the same time we were winning some victories, for example, the East German backdown after a nine-month refusal to acknowledge in writing that the basis of civil rail access to Berlin was Allied instead of purely intra-German; abandonment by the Reichsbahn on June 15 of the demand that international rail rates be introduced as of July 1; GDR concession on the Hof Bridge reconstruction project; and GDR return this month of one of two West German aircraft downed in East Germany without FRG compliance with the original demand for negotiations at the plenipotentiary level. In all these instances, Western perseverance and firmness had won out. Hence it was hard to claim that a clear pattern of obdurate GDR harassment had emerged in June. Erhard concluded by emphasizing again the necessity for some Allied action beyond mere protests against GDR helicopters over West Berlin. Otherwise West Berlin morale would suffer seriously. Mende chimed in to say that he had just heard from former Berlin Mayor Friedensburg. The latter had confirmed that it was psychologically of greatest importance to West Berlin that the Occupying Powers do something about the helicopter flights. Otherwise the effect would be much worse than over the Allied failure to react sufficiently against the harassments attendant upon the April Bundestag meeting in Berlin. Finally, Westrick added that Senator Schutz of Berlin had telephoned him just before this meeting to stress the need for action against helicopter infringements. Comment: It seems clear that the Germans have already worked themselves up very much over the Berlin situation, with special emphasis on the Allied failure so far to do anything effective against East German helicopter flights over West Berlin. Erhard and the other officials present were in a somber mood, and their concern was obviously genuine, though the Chancellor was occasionally a bit shaky on his facts. He seemed particularly sensitive about criticisms which seemed to have reached him as to German reluctance to use the IZT weapon against the GDR. Osterheld, the Chancellor’s personal assistant, later told U.S. Charge that in his view Erhard’s dominating fear was of being caught short again in an election year, as was Adenauer’s government in August 1961, after the time of the Wall, by unexpected and drastic East German actions to which no adequate response had been prepared.In telegram 3892 to Bonn, June 25, the Department of State expressed agreement with the line taken by Hillenbrand and expressed concern with Erhard’s suggestion that East German trade issues be taken up in the OECD. (Ibid.) Hillenbrand 123. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, vol. 11. Secret. The source text is annotated with an “L,” indicating that the President saw the memorandum. Washington, June 26, 1965. SUBJECT East German Helicopter Flights—A Report 1. We have reviewed this problem further and are now seeking Allied and German agreement to the following guidelines: (1) By a series of graduated steps to bring about cessation of East German helicopter flights over West Berlin. (2) So long as East German helicopters do not overfly West Berlin and do not constitute safety hazard to Allied air access to Berlin, we will not take direct action to prevent such flights. (3) We shall continue to protest in all cases East German helicopter flights as violations of quadripartite agreements, and to seek practical means short of use of force to discourage them. (4) We retain right to fly US helicopters over East Berlin when we so desire. (5) We do not believe US helicopter flights should be equated with East German helicopter flights. 2. We distinguish flights over West Berlin from those over East Berlin on the same practical ground that has governed our Berlin policy for many years: namely, that we have power in West Berlin but none in East Berlin. We lodge regular protests over what the Soviets and the East Germans do in East Berlin when it violates quadripartite agreements, but we do not use force on the far side of the wall. 3. We are asking our people in Bonn and Berlin, and Lemnitzer’s people, for recommendations on the ways and means of stopping any further helicopter flights over West Berlin. We will then try to get British and French agreement on these specific measures. 5. This matter is politically urgent because of the German election and the sensitivities of Brandt and Erhard. But there have not been new violations of West Berlin air space in recent days, so that its military urgency is not so high for the moment. McG. B. 124. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Confidential. Repeated to Berlin, Moscow, Paris, and London. Bonn, July 2, 1965, 1159Z. 19. Subj: The reunification issue after the German elections. Part 1 (of 2)—The case for an initiative. In discussions of the reunification question with non-Germans one encounters: (1) The perennial question of whether the West German people really want reunification very strongly; (2) A current variation, whether the present professed interest of the German politicians is not mainly for electoral purposes; and (3) Independently of what the Germans think, whether an effort to reactivate negotiations with the Soviets is worthwhile so long as the latter clearly have no interest in changing the present situation. My own judgment is that, after the question of their own security—which Germans naturally regard as their most vital interest—they have no political objective or interest more important to them than the achievement of national unity. Recent polls indicate that reunification remains the leading national preoccupation, particularly among the youth. Once it is introduced, any politician will subordinate every other question to the discussion of this theme. It is not, moreover, merely a preoccupation of the politicians. One German out of five came from the East when the Federal Republic was established. There has been a movement of 3.7 million refugees from the Soviet Zone since 1950. Close to 40 percent of all West Germans have close relatives in the Zone. Particularly in light of the continuing vulnerability of West Berlin, the division of the country affects too many persons for the problem to subside. The prosperity of West Germans in comparison with their Eastern brothers weighs heavily on their conscience. The less decisive Soviet leadership combined with the increasing freedom of maneuver of the Eastern European states gives rise to more hope than during the regimes of Stalin and Khrushchev. In short, I do not think we can, after the German elections, avoid facing the reunification issue anew. This is, I believe, true despite the fact that, in point of time, the Germans unquestionably regard the third basic tenet of their foreign policy, Western European integration, as realizable sooner. It is true that there is no great popular clamor about reunification—or signs of unrest. There is, however, a large and active lobby, the “indivisible Germany” organization —fortunately not extremist—which is supported across the board by all three parties, the government, and private concerns such as the Springer publications. Reunification is also the principal theme of the refugee organizations and their annual rallies. I would, however, judge the attitude of the average German individual to be the realistic one that this is a problem for their government to do something about and that, in the last resort, progress will depend upon the four original Occupying Powers more than Bonn. Moreover, he recognizes that, given the present Soviet attitude, the reunification problem will take a long time to resolve. Finally, he would expect that Germany will still have to pay a heavy price for reunification. All this, however, does not affect the average person’s critical question: What is being done about reunification? The answer to this, for the average man is—very little, certainly not enough. It is widely known that even the government’s modest efforts—such as FonMin Schroeder’s proposals at the NATO meetings in December and May for a Tripartite declaration, and the various suggestions submitted to the Ambassadorial Group—were not well received by the Allies. There is no public evidence, on the other hand, of new Allied proposals or enthusiasm for progress on reunification except for public statements of approval in principle—which, although the Germans continue to want, they have come to discount. The feeling is widespread that the Allied performance suffers by comparison with efforts made at the time of the Berlin and Geneva Conferences. The question is not likely to arise in an acute form during the pre-electoral period. So far as the German Government is concerned, I believe that the Tripartite declaration of May 12 meets their requirements for the record, at least to remove the pressure for an initiative toward the Soviets at this time. However, after the elections, one of the first measuring rods that will be applied to the new government—regardless which party wins—is what it will try to do about reunification. If the SPD wins, they are already committed toward a policy of more flexible and active efforts toward the East. If, as is more probable, the present CDU/FDP coalition remains in office, they must at least try to give new life to the efforts they have made in the past to enlist support for a new initiative on the German question. If—as cannot be excluded—a grand coalition of CDU/SPD should be formed, an agreed plank will almost certainly be the enhancement of efforts to achieve reunification. It would, moreover, be the first government so broadly based as to be able to pay an additional price if that became relevant (e.g. recognition of the Oder-Neisse boundary). To my mind it makes no great difference whether or at what point the Soviets reject a Western proposal, assuming, as the Soviet experts predict, that this is likely. If we were governed by the Soviet attitude toward outstanding issues across-the-board, we would have to refrain from making any proposal known to be unpalatable to them. I do not believe that there is any conclusive evidence that the Soviets would “hot up” Berlin just because the Allies made a peaceful reunification proposal. It seems more likely that such a move would be made only if it would serve some more vital current interest. It seems to me elemental that if someone is “sitting on you,” as Moscow is on East Germany, you should be entitled from time to time to ask them to “get off.” Fundamentally, all that the Germans demand of us is that we join them in such a request. It keeps the record straight that the Communist take-over of East Germany is still regarded as an unsettled question by the Western Powers—as well as an affront to humanity. It prevents any misinterpretation—this is the point the Germans are interested in—that our various efforts towards increased contacts with the East, normalization of relations, relaxation of tensions, and all that is popularly described as “détente,” signify acquiescence in a status quo confirming the continued Soviet occupation and legitimizing the Communist government of the East Zone. I regard our efforts toward increased contacts with the East, normalization of relations, etc., as of much importance and perhaps the only practicable course under present conditions. I am convinced that most Germans do too, if they can feel reassured that we are not resting with regard to reunification. I believe that we should, in order to so reassure them, be willing not only to support a revived and revised German initiative, but that we should, if necessary, be willing to take the lead with our Allies in formulating new proposals, as we did before the Berlin and Geneva Conferences. In any event, we must expect the Germans to approach us again about an initiative after September. I feel that, in the intervening period, we should prepare ourselves for the next German approach and I understand that studies directed toward this end are going forward in the Department. Preliminary suggestions with respect to an approach will be given in a following telegram.Not found. McGhee 125. Letter From the Ambassador at Large (Thompson) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 31–1 GER E–US. Secret. Washington, July 17, 1965. Dear John: The Secretary has carefully considered the points mentioned in Secretary McNamara’s letter of April fifth,Not printed. regarding the flight of United States helicopters over East Berlin. He has decided that we ought not to resume helicopter flights at this time. In light of his decision, I am sending to you for DOD concurrence a draft joint State-Defense message.2 Sincerely, Tommy 126. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, vol. 12. Secret. Washington, July 21, 1965, 6:10 p.m. SUBJECT Your Meeting with Ambassador McGhee at 1:15 P.M. on Thursday—East German Helicopters 1. Between March 23 and June 21 there was a series of identified East German helicopter flights over and/or along the borders of West Berlin. Our guidelines for responding to such flights have been and presently are relatively conservative—e.g., protest; attempt to chase the intruders away. 2. When Ambassador McGhee meets with you on Thursday,July 22. According to the President’s Daily Diary, McGhee participated in a short lunch with the President and other senior officials that began at 2:11 p.m. (Ibid.) No record of this meeting was found. he may indicate his interest in obtaining authorization for taking sterner military/diplomatic counter-actions in the event another East German helicopter flight occurs over or along the borders of West Berlin. He may also indicate his interest in obtaining authorization to resume U.S. helicopter flights over East Berlin. 3. Both of these problems, which, as you know, are extremely complicated and sensitive, are presently being staffed out in detail in the Departments of State and Defense. While there is no need at this point to burden you with the details, you should know that State and Defense (and especially State) tend to be more conservative and cautious on this spectrum of problems than McGhee. McGhee, who is understandably more sensitive than Washington to West German heat, feels that we should be prepared to go to some fairly extreme lengths to halt future East German helicopter flights over and along the border of West Berlin; in certain circumstances, for example, he would probably be prepared to cause East German helicopters to crash. 4. If McGhee does raise the issue with you, you may want to hear him out and tell him (a) that you understand that the Departments are now studying his recommendations, (b) that you don't want to prejudge the issue until you hear from Rusk and McNamara, and (c) that, given Vietnam, you are interested, generally speaking, in keeping the Washington/Moscow temperature at a low level. McG. B. 127. Paper Prepared in the Policy Planning CouncilSource: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 71 D 273, Division of Europe and Germany. Secret; Noforn. Drafted by Huizinga. An August 11 memorandum by Huizinga attached to the source text notes that the paper was initially prepared for discussion at the August 20 meeting of the Policy Planning Council. A subsequent memorandum of September 10 by Rostow indicates that the discussion took place on September 16. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 32–4 GER) No record of either meeting was found. Washington, August 10, 1965. SUBJECT The Division of Germany and of Europe I. Introduction and Purpose For a variety of reasons, the problem of divided Germany has not been at the center of diplomatic activity for some time. Critical situations outside of Europe have held major attention. The Soviets have been preoccupied by the tensions and uncertainties of a change in leadership and by the spreading disarray in the Communist world. The West has been distracted by discords of its own over the organization of Europe and the structure of the alliance. It may be that problems like these will continue for some time longer to take precedence; the new approach to the USSR which had been contemplated for the period after the West German elections in September does not now seem likely to be timely. We can be sure, however, that Germany as the most central of all the issues between the West and the USSR will sooner or later return to the active agenda. This paper appraises, against the background of our two decades of experience and the changing scene in Eastern Europe, various approaches which have been suggested for Western policy. It states some views about the probable long-term development of the German problem, and draws some implications for American policy, especially in relations with the Federal Republic. II. Some Suggested Approaches to the German Problem A. Formal Initiatives for Negotiation The three Western powers will continue from time to time to be under pressure from the West Germans to undertake formal diplomatic approaches to the USSR in quest of a return to Four-Power negotiations. This is a natural by-product of German internal politics, as well as of a need for reassurance that the allies remain actually committed to Germany’s reunification. We know that such “initiatives” will be barren of any result. The Soviets are committed to maintain the division of Germany indefinitely if they can. They consider that the survival of Communist power in East Germany is inseparable from their hegemony in Eastern Europe as a whole; they are unwilling to hazard that power position, the prize of victory in World War II, by permitting a reunited Germany to revive the historic struggle of Germans and Russians in that area. Any leadership under the present regime which allowed a reunited Germany to emerge and, as the Soviets would expect, to challenge their dominant influence in Eastern Europe, would suffer the most severe ideological and political consequences. Considerations of this kind, more than a concern for military security in the specific sense, or even for the great economic value which East Germany has for the USSR, almost certainly determine the unyielding nature of the Soviet attitude. The USSR’s intention to maintain the status quo in Central Europe would probably hold firm whatever guarantees the West might offer against wayward conduct by a reunited Germany. The Soviets would agree to the dismantling of Communist power in East Germany only if developments there took such a turn that it seemed likely to become more costly or dangerous to remain than to withdraw. Short of a contingency like revolt or other serious difficulties for the East German regime, the Soviets mean to stay. This Soviet attitude is based in the last analysis on a view of Russian national interest and might not change even if there should be a considerable dilution of the ideological elements which presently condition the Soviet outlook. At the very least, it is necessary to posit an end to the cold war and the power alignments associated with it in order to make such a change seem plausible at all. Since proposals for negotiations which aim at the removal of Communist control from East Germany will not gain a favorable response in the foreseeable future, the only relevant question concerning them is what advantages or costs they may have. Clearly they do serve the purpose of cementing relations with the West Germans. Beyond this, they are of use in reminding the Soviets, and the world, that we continue to regard German reunification as essential to a general settlement, should they ever be disposed to seek one. There may be circumstances, however, in which relations with the Soviets are unduly burdened by proposals for negotiations on Germany. When the main focus of Soviet-American dealings is elsewhere, as at present during the Viet Nam crisis, or perhaps at some moment when a desirable arms control measure becomes possible of agreement, would be such occasions. On the whole, we should probably continue to be sparing of formal approaches to the Soviets for negotiations and calculate carefully the suitable occasions. We should try to satisfy the Germans as much as possible with unilateral declarations in lieu of formal initiatives. These might also give primary stress to the theme of self-determination as the ground on which a German settlement remains a pressing issue, rather than to the theme of the Soviets' legal obligations under the Four-Power arrangements. Periodic enunciation of self-determination for Germany as the key to security in Central Europe should serve to underline our position adequately. Such statements are also more effective as political warfare in Germany and Eastern Europe than yet another curt Soviet rejection of a formal invitation to negotiate. B. Arms Control and Security Measures This approach proceeds from the view that certain arms control and security agreements could reduce the danger of conflict in Central Europe and consequently over time create an atmosphere which would favor a general political settlement. Standard proposals of this sort include observation and inspection of military dispositions on both sides, prohibition of nuclear weapons in an agreed zone, partial troop withdrawals and non-aggression pacts. The error in this approach lies in the false assumption from which it proceeds, namely that the Soviets insist upon remaining in Germany primarily because they fear for their military security. In fact, as argued above, there is more at stake than that. But even if the Soviets were primarily concerned with military security, they would almost certainly continue to believe that the division of Germany itself was for them essential in any combination of security-arms control measures. The Soviet and in particular Polish interest in negotiating about undertakings of this kind, therefore, is precisely that these would have the effect of consolidating and guaranteeing the status quo. And because this is so, they would have the further effect of bringing discord into our relations with Bonn, as indeed even negotiations in this field tend to do. These undesirable consequences are not balanced by any meaningful gain for peace and security. The risk of conflict in Central Europe is in fact slight; the East-West frontier drawn by the 20-year-old military confrontation in the center of Germany is probably as stable as any in the world. The one respect in which stability could be improved would be by obtaining firmer guarantees for the security of West Berlin and its access routes. The measures referred to above have little bearing on this problem, and the Soviets and East Germans have shown little interest in providing such guarantees. As a general rule, our policy should be governed by the proposition that limited arms control and security measures in Central Europe have little interest for us when they are unrelated to political developments which advance a general settlement in Germany. Measures of this kind serve Communist political objectives and not our own, and by so doing burden our relations with West Germany to no purpose. On the other hand, of course, we cannot do what the Germans sometimes seem to want us to do, that is, to make all arms control agreements conditional on progress toward their national goal. C. Bridges to Eastern Europe Recognition that the division of Germany and of Europe cannot be ended by negotiating devices designed to have effect in the short term has focused attention on possible efforts to prepare a settlement by furthering a long-term process of fundamental change in Eastern Europe. Broadly stated, this view argues that the development of East-West economic and cultural relations can gradually erode the ideological commitment of the East to maintain the present reach of Communist power into the heart of Germany. In its more elaborate forms, this thesis speaks of all-European economic development schemes under which Western assistance would become the persuader which would diminish ideological tensions and convince the East that the division of Germany was no longer essential to its interests. It is evident that the retreat from monolithic ideology and the assertion of national independence in Eastern Europe are real. These trends result from a variety of factors—the disappearance and the subsequent denigration of the semi-divinity who embodied Moscow’s authority in the period when Moscow’s power was first thrust into Eastern Europe, the later recognition by the Communist regimes thus artificially created that they needed local sources of authority to be viable, and finally the Yugoslav and Chinese challenges to the idea that there should be any central fount of authority for the Communist world at all. What is emerging from the former satellite empire in Eastern Europe is a system of states whose ruling groups still regard their ideological, security, and economic ties to the USSR as essential, but who wish to define the latter’s overlordship in terms of maximum advantage to themselves. What would Western programs of aid, contact, and even inclusion in Western multilateral arrangements offer to such ruling groups? The Communist leaders would, of course, welcome easier access to Western markets, and probably also generous aid if this could be dressed in business garb and seem to be without ideological implications. These would advance economic development and buttress national independence. But any inference that such an elaboration of East-West relations should lead on to a broader structure of European unity, presumably bringing with it free cultural and political intercourse, would be fatal to the present ruling groups. Their survival rests on the preservation of Communist theological myths, however changed or attenuated, on national exclusiveness, and ultimately on Soviet guarantees. Contact and intercourse with the West can probably contribute only marginally to a change in the political character and external orientation of the Eastern European regimes. If the political order in Eastern Europe for some considerable period ahead consists of a system of national states in hegemonial relationship to the USSR, what contribution can these states make to a settlement of the German problem? The answer for Bulgaria, Rumania, and Hungary must be virtually none; even if they come to favor German reunification, which is not inconceivable though more likely they will be simply indifferent, they would not promote or advocate it against the will of the USSR. Even if Czechoslovakia liberalizes its regime and becomes more accessible to Western influences, as seems increasingly likely, it would have no real interest in supporting a German settlement, and could not significantly affect the chances for one in any case. Poland is and seems likely to remain unalterably opposed to the reunification of Germany. The special feverishness with which this attitude is held is due in some part to the weakness in the country of the Communist regime, which finds in anti-German sentiments its main political resource. But the attitude would be the same in essence even if the Polish Communists held power more securely. The Poles have no desire to serve once again as the shuttlecock in a Russian-German power contest. They evidently believe that the present arrangement, with a Communist buffer state carved out of Germany, gives them greater security and freedom of action than they could enjoy under any other arrangement. These Polish attitudes are an additional strong factor in determining the USSR’s insistence upon preserving the division of Germany. Should the Soviets for other reasons entertain the idea of consenting to Germany’s reunification, they would have to face the possibility that such a development could place the existence of the Polish Communist regime in jeopardy. It seems likely, therefore, that however much the elaboration of economic and cultural ties with Eastern Europe may help to reduce tensions and improve East-West atmospherics, the hard sense of an overriding interest in Germany’s present division will remain unaffected. And this is especially the case where it matters most, in the USSR and Poland. The same general prognosis must apply to West Germany’s growing interest in developing economic, cultural, and eventually, by a change in the Hallstein doctrine, formal diplomatic ties with Eastern Europe. These steps are also unlikely to stimulate real incentives in Eastern Europe to support a German settlement. Economic leverage and cultural influence can seldom override what is conceived as a serious national interest. The approach by way of enlarging economic-cultural contacts somehow vaguely implies that the German problem will not be settled but dissolved—in a process which will see the Communist states lose their ideological coloration, a “unity” of all Europe created, and national interests cease to have effect. Even if one does not think this entirely utopian, he must at least concede that it will take a very long time, and in the interval offer the Germans no very sure promise. In short, this approach is not a policy aimed at foreseeable consequences; it is a way of living hopefully with the problem. D. Interim Conclusion on Alternative Approaches The conclusion implied in the foregoing review of suggested approaches to a German and European settlement is that none of them offers any real promise. They all suffer from the defect that they give the East no incentive for altering its view that the status quo serves its interests better than would any settlement embracing a reunited Germany. That is why Communist policy is directed to buttressing, legalizing, and normalizing the status quo in every possible way. The premise of this latter policy is that Communist power in East Germany can be made viable for the long pull. Only if this should not prove true, only if the effort to sustain the Communist regime seemed likely to become more costly and dangerous than a settlement reunifying Germany, would the Soviets and Poles have any real incentive for consenting to such a settlement. III. The Key Question: Possible Developments in East Germany A. The Viability of the East German Regime The key questions bearing on the future of the German problem are therefore the following: Will the East German regime in fact prove viable indefinitely? What political changes are likely to take place within it over the long term? What can the Federal Republic and the West do to promote changes which would favor an all-German settlement? The vulnerabilities of the East German regime are manifest—its lack of national appeal and of legitimacy based on popular mandate as compared with West Germany, its Wall as graphic demonstration of these facts, its ultimate dependence on Soviet military power. Though now apparently improbable, it can never be ruled out that this brittle pretense of a state might one day be faced with popular resistance. Soviet military power could, of course, cope with this contingency, but it would confront the Soviets in acute form with the question of whether the costs and risks of the effort to maintain this regime were worth its value to them. Probably they would still think it was, but it is also conceivable that the Soviet attitude toward Germany could change in consequence of such an episode. A flexible Western policy at such a moment might induce the Soviets to take serious steps toward a final German settlement. A more fruitful area of speculation relates to what changes may occur within the East German regime over a prolonged period. Will its leadership group continue to believe in and have the will to maintain a separate state existence? Or will the Soviets be increasingly hard put to find a leadership even as capable as the present one? It is a fact that East Germany has a more vigorous and promising appearance today than it did, say five years ago. Doctrinaire inanities in economic planning and administration have been done away with and a respectable if not sensational trend of economic advance attained. It is even reported, though one must remain skeptical of this, that the East German population manifests an increasing degree of identification with East Germany as a separate state entity. Probably it is true that over a long period the discontents of the population will be less a threat to this regime than the quality and commitment of its leadership. It was created by men, with Ulbricht as their archetype, who thought of themselves as Soviet apparatchiks first and Germans second. The successor generation of leaders may be men of a different cut, in which case the internal political life of this regime could become very complicated, perhaps even quite unstable. In any case, if the trend towards national autonomy and internal liberalization continues elsewhere in Eastern Europe, the regime in East Germany will tend to have an increasingly anomalous character. It might, but would not necessarily, nor even probably, collapse from this defect, though it might become a growing embarrassment to the Soviets. They, however, do not embarrass easily, and probably would still find men long after Ulbricht who were able and willing to govern such a state. On the whole, it seems wiser to assume the continuing viability of the East German regime rather than to count on its internal evolution in ways which would make German reunification easier to achieve. B. The Policy of “Isolating” East Germany Advocates of the approaches to the German problem discussed above generally say that it is a necessary concomitant of those policies that the Federal Republic and the West must work for the “isolation” of East Germany. The inference is that this means something more than merely continuing the present policy of diplomatic non-recognition. How realistic is “isolation” and how effective is it likely to be in changing Soviet attitudes or in acting on political conditions within East Germany so as to reduce the viability of the regime? The real tendency of West German attitudes in fact now runs opposite to any effort to enforce greater isolation on East Germany. Bonn is, of course, not moving toward conceding legitimacy to the regime. But West German politicians are responding to what appears to be an increasingly impatient desire on the part of the West Germans, especially younger people, for more human contacts. For their part, the East German leaders deem it prudent to respond at least cautiously to similar pressures in their population, and they may be willing to go further if economic advance is sustained. The prospect probably is that, as Germans confront more frankly the fact that unity through action of the Four Powers remains remote, such pressure will increase rather than diminish. Greater contacts may or may not have any significant political consequences in East Germany, but they are in any case incompatible with a policy of stricter isolation. With economic advance in East Germany, the volume of interzonal trade will probably increase and the interests associated with it in West Germany are likely to favor more normal relations. As East Germany becomes able to develop significant trade with other Western states, the West Germans may feel obliged to handle interzonal trade more generously and in a more formal framework, even at the cost of some implied “recognition” for East Germany. Altogether, the trends now operating seem likely, over a prolonged period, to favor a gradual movement toward normalization of relations rather than an increased effort by West Germany to isolate the Communist regime. Such a change would not necessarily mean that the West Germans were phasing over into acceptance both of the Pankow regime and of the indefinite division of Germany. They could describe it to themselves as a policy of engagement which had become necessary due to changed conditions but which still sought the same aims. They could continue to refrain from formal recognition on the ground that the East German regime, never having obtained a genuine popular mandate, has no real claim to legitimacy. Contact and presence in East Germany could nevertheless be pressed as a step toward the goal of unity to which even the East Germans pay lip service. Such a policy would no doubt soon find the East German leaders back-pedaling furiously from their pretense that they were the ones who sought contact and normalization. At the very least, their internal political position would be weakened and complicated. Such a change in Bonn’s policy would not affect the Soviets' attitude or their basic interest in maintaining the Pankow regime. They would advise Pankow to advance cautiously on the road of normal relations, seeking to construe these in accordance with standard Soviet theses on the future of Germany. One by-product, however, might be an easing of Berlin problems. Should the West Germans eventually move toward such a course of normalization and engagement, we would not need to be alarmed and it probably would not be prudent to attempt to discourage them. We cannot honestly say that the present policy of halfhearted, legalistically defined “ isolation” will have greater effect in moving the German problem toward settlement. On the other hand, it is not a course which we can urge either, since in the present state of German opinion we would only sow confusion and misunderstanding, and perhaps become embroiled in party politics. We ought to be prepared, however, to see German attitudes change as the long stalemate drags on, and perhaps especially after Ulbricht leaves the scene. IV. Implications for US Policy Toward West Germany If it is true that the problem of divided Germany will not in the foreseeable future yield to settlement by any policies open to the West to pursue, then our vitally important relations with the Federal Republic must be handled with all priority, care, and delicacy. There is no great danger that the West Germans will move to come to terms with the Soviets or undertake some act of desperation. But there is some possibility eventually of political demoralization and internal divisions which could make the Federal Republic a burden and a problem for the West rather than the asset it is today. American relations with Bonn are basically sound at present, but some suggestions can be made which may help to insure that those relations withstand the dangers and challenges of the long period ahead during which the “German problem” is likely still to be with us. A. The Quality of the Relationship Although contacts between West Germans and Americans have been numerous enough, one senses that they have not been marked by any special intimacy. All too frequently, comprehension and communication break down and lead to flurries of misunderstanding and even mistrust in the German press. There are obvious historical, cultural, and psychological reasons for the somewhat distant quality that seems to characterize the relationship. Certainly the Germans ought not to be as sensitive and mistrustful as they are. Their leaders ought to cultivate a more courageous and “democratic” style in dealing with public opinion and the press. But for our part, we ought not to burden the relationship psychologically by bringing to it the unspoken but not unnoticed assumption that the Germans may once again become the sick children of Europe, and that their care and feeding is a matter of nervous concern to us. On the level of official and political contact we ought at least to aim for the kind of candor that has obtained in the Anglo-American relationship. The German leaders know, and know that we know, that their national problem cannot be solved now, nor probably for a very long time. Acknowledgment of this reality in private dialogue does not mean that we are any the less committed to their interest; it might help to undergird genuine trust if the common tasks could be frankly addressed from this starting point. One wholesome by-product might be that the German leaders would be emboldened to communicate more candidly with their own people and thus help to steady German opinion for the long pull. The suggestion here is not that our present relations with West Germany are seriously unsatisfactory. It is that, in view of the prospect ahead, a steady and deliberate effort to improve the quality of the relationship at all levels will be in our interest. It would also be helpful if other allies did the same, especially the British. B. West Germany’s Role in the West It scarcely needs reiteration that the Germans must have a responsible role in the common undertakings of the West. They will take a more wholesome view of their national situation if their part in the affairs of the Western community is the significant one which their power and resources warrant. If a settlement of the German problem can in the end only come about through a long process of change in Eastern Europe, their intimate association with the West will be a help to this process and not a hindrance. And if it does come about in this way, the stability of a Europe made whole again will be all the more sure. The precise institutional forms of West Germany’s association with the West are less important than that she be part of a West which is as politically united as possible. Divisions within the West which force the Germans to take sides carry the risk of persuading them that the Western association will not after all serve their national interest, and carry also the danger of stimulating the sort of political demoralization referred to above. Various projects for Western European and Atlantic “integration” may be desirable, but they are probably not urgent enough to justify such risks, assuming that they can be consummated by a forcing process at all. Integration has one other risk of which we should be wary. It may lead some Germans to say that this is a device for binding down a permanently partitioned Germany, a manifestation of continued Western mistrust of the Germans. C. West Germany’s Eastern Policy It was argued earlier in this paper that the more active policy in Eastern Europe which Bonn is increasingly disposed to pursue is unlikely to have any decisive effect in advancing a German settlement. Nevertheless, we ought to encourage it. We should do so in part because of the effects on the West Germans themselves. The sense of being active in their own interest will assuage their chronic distemper over being merely the “object” of the policies of others. They will have a more concrete appreciation of the obstacles to a German settlement, and perhaps be less inclined to suspect inadequacies in the American effort. Moreover, it is possible that in certain unanticipated circumstances a larger West German presence and influence in Eastern Europe could have some beneficial effect in advancing a German settlement. If Western policy cannot do much positively at present to bring about a settlement, it can at least be alert to exploit any break in Eastern Europe which might open up possibilities not now evident. Some issues in international politics are not solved by gradualism but by a sudden crystallization of new factors. Political deterioration in East Germany or some form of internal crisis in the USSR might be such factors; there may be others we cannot now imagine. The fact that the West Germans were on the scene and known in Eastern Europe rather than seen as a distant bogey might some day prove helpful. What particular steps the Germans should take in developing their policy toward Eastern Europe is a difficult question and any advice we provide should be delivered with tact and careful timing. The “policy of movement” appears still hazy in the minds of its advocates. It is subject to partisan controversy in which we would not wish to become involved. The primary target of the German effort should be Poland, since, apart from the Soviets, the Poles would have most to say about any change in Eastern attitudes on the German problem. For reasons given earlier, it will be difficult to initiate a meaningful dialogue at all. In order to do so, the Germans will probably at some point have to make a clean-cut statement recognizing Poland’s present Western frontier. They should do this if they are at all serious about an active policy in Eastern Europe. It is fantasy to pretend that this “concession” can be held out as a bargaining counter in some eventual negotiation of a final settlement. There are other things the Germans could do to enlarge their access to Eastern Europe. They could forthrightly renounce national acquisition of nuclear weapons. Schroeder’s recent attempt to toy with this by making it conditional on reunification can do nothing but harm to the Eastern policy he proposes; put this way, nobody in Eastern Europe will be reassured. The Germans could also give up the ambiguous but ominous references to Heimatrecht for purposes of domestic politicking. It would improve the face the Germans present to the East if the Socialists gained access to the government, though this obviously rests on other considerations and could not be devised for purposes of foreign policy alone. The Germans do not normally speak of embracing the USSR in a “policy of movement” toward the East. But they must hope that one of its results would be an opportunity to talk more meaningfully with the Soviets. We would not need to take alarm at this if it actually happened. There cannot be a ground of common interest between the Soviets and Germans who seek the unity and freedom of their country. Only if the political complexion of the Federal Republic underwent a profound change and the country came to be governed by Germans willing to accept Soviet tutelage, at the cost incidentally of all the ties and interests which now bind it to the West, is it possible to imagine a development of Soviet-German relations prejudicial to Western interests. This is an extremely remote danger and will remain so if the West stays close to the Germans and provides them a worthy place in its councils. V. Conclusions and Summary The view of the German problem and of the indicated American policies set forth in this paper has the following principal elements: 1. A settlement based on the reunification of Germany in freedom cannot in the foreseeable future be obtained by any policy approach the West can now pursue. This applies to new initiatives for negotiation, to regional arms control and security measures, and to the development of economic and other contacts in Eastern Europe. 2. The Soviet and Polish attitudes, the only ones that really matter, rest on a belief that the status quo is essential to their national interests. Their views will not change unless the costs and risks of the present situation seem likely to become greater than those of a general settlement, or unless they themselves undergo a profound internal political change and the cold war is in effect terminated. 3. Present Communist policy rests on a calculation that the East German regime will remain viable indefinitely. This is probably correct, but there is some chance that it is not, owing to that regime’s unique vulnerabilities and to possible change in the character of its leadership. In any event, such policies of “isolation” as the West Germans are likely to pursue would have little effect. Bonn may in fact turn eventually to normalization of relations, while still withholding formal recognition and still pressing for reunification. 4. It would not be in our interest to oppose such a change in West German tactics. However, American policy should continue to declare that German reunification on the basis of self-determination is an essential ingredient of the East-West settlement we seek. There is declining advantage in doing this by way of formal appeals to the Soviets to resume Four-Power negotiations, and such initiatives, or at least their timing, should take account of other aspects of our dealings with the Soviets. 5. Because we can do little to move the German problem toward settlement, the cultivation of a sound and intimate relationship with the Federal Republic must have the highest priority. This means in particular working for an adequate role for West Germany in the affairs of the West, and playing a tactful part in relation to Bonn’s attempt to develop a more active Eastern policy. The German problem offers no promising outlook. For the present, it appears to be one of those issues in international politics which has mainly to be lived with until the political forces surrounding it change in some profound way which cannot now be foreseen. If American policy in the world as a whole meets with reasonable success, presumably it will help to promote such change. 128. Memorandum of Conversation Between Vice President Humphrey and the Ambassador to Germany (McGhee)Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Erhard Visit, December 1965. Confidential. Drafted by Ted Van Dyke of the Vice President’s staff. Washington, September 1, 1965. German Election Campaign Ambassador McGhee predicted that Chancellor Erhard and the GDU would win the September 19 elections, and continue to govern. The envisioned “Grand Coalition” (between CDU and SPD) would not materialize. Willy Brandt has been unable to seize any issues or offer a real choice in the campaign. Ambassador McGhee discounted many of the campaign statements made by former Chancellor Adenauer. Adenauer has been bitter re the United States “since the election of John Kennedy,” he said, and increasingly pro-Gaullist. (But even Adenauer has been lately critical of deGaulle and twice has publicly criticized him. Gaullism was weakening, in general, inside Germany.) Chancellor Erhard remains staunchly pro-American and pro-Atlantic. In fact, Erhard readily admits he was “made in America” and placed in German politics by U.S. military government. His policies after the election will continue to be moderate. He was most favorably impressed by his visit to the LBJ ranch, and hopes the President will be able to reciprocate the visit. U.S. Policy Toward Germany The Vice President posed the question for consideration: Is our European and Atlantic policy conditioned too greatly on what Germany might or might not accept? The Ambassador replied that he thought not. There are those in Germany, be said, who feel indeed the opposite—that Germany is a U.S. puppet and that German policy is too often formulated on a basis of pleasing the United States. In reality, the Ambassador said, there is a great identity of interest for the U.S. and Germany and that, 90 per cent of the time, we are in agreement to begin with. Our policies coincide, he said, because they serve both our interests. Nuclear-Sharing and MLF The Vice President asked whether the Federal Republic really wanted the MLF. The Ambassador replied that Germany did not necessarily want the MLF per se, but that Germany did seek some arrangement of nuclear sharing for two reasons: 1. It would give Germany political equality with France and Great Britain, both of whom possess nuclear forces; and 2. It would give Germany a greater guarantee of military security. On the second point, the Ambassador said most reponsible Germans felt that participation in a nuclear-sharing arrangement or multilateral force would insure that Germany would be left with some protection in event of a non-proliferation agreement—if a non-proliferation agreement were reached today, Germany might feel completely on the outside, looking in. Her only protection would be the U.S. guarantee. The U.S. sold the German government on the MLF concept, the Ambassador said, and then when “the rug was pulled out from under them,” both Schroeder and Von Hassel took a beating at home. There is no sense of urgency in Germany at present re nuclear sharing, the Ambassador said. However, the Ambassador felt we should take initiative toward further discussion of the problem. He suggested, as a starting point, the calling of a high-level meeting early next year in framework of the Paris Working Group to renew initiative toward some solution. The Ambassador frankly felt that the assignment of more Polaris missiles to the Mediterranean, under NATO, would reassure the Germans militarily—at least for the next two or three years. It was possible that the desire for nuclear sharing could, in fact, be satisfied with greater participation in nuclear command and control, targeting and planning. The U.S. should, he said, make clearly known its offer to “work something out” so that we did not appear to be the all-powerful big brothers of the Alliance, imposing our will on our partners. Kennedy Round and Common Market The Vice President asked whether the Ambassador thought General deGaulle meant to permanently sabotage the Kennedy Round trade negotiation. The Ambassador replied that he thought this would be too great a blow against France’s five EEC partners, who favored the Kennedy Round. The Vice President asked whether the Ambassador felt deGaulle would demand the removal of EEC President Hallstein and Vice President Mansholt as his price for remaining in the EEC. The Ambassador said that this, too, would press France’s partners too far. The Germans, particularly, could not accept such a demand re Hallstein. If France continues its policies of threat and ultimatum within the EEC, she will ultimately alienate the rest of Europe, the Ambassador said. Eastern Europe The Ambassador felt Germany was increasingly liberalizing her attitude toward relations with Eastern Europe. He pointed to the large amount of German-East European trade. He pointed out that Germany was highly upset concerning long-term commercial arrangements concluded with the East by the U.K. The Vice President replied that he was upset, too. Common Western policies were badly needed in this regard. Visits to Europe (Private Discussion) The Ambassador said he felt Western Europe badly needed some important signs of U.S. interest and commitment. He had hoped for some time that President Johnson could make an official visit to Western Europe. The Vice President asked for the Ambassador’s candid opinion regarding the usefulness of a visit by himself to Western Europe. The Ambassador said he thought it would be useful, but that it might create circumstances which would cause a delay in a Presidential visit—and the Presidential visit was badly needed. The Vice President said that this was his opinion, too. He disclosed, privately, that there had been discussion regarding possible foreign travel by himself. He felt, personally, that visits to Africa and Asia might be most useful to the national interest. He thought the President should visit Latin America and Europe as soon as possible—perhaps a European trip in early December. Both the Vice President and Ambassador agreed to work toward stimulation of such a European visit by the President. 129. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CF 2547. Confidential. Drafted by Stoessel and approved in S on October 6. The meeting was held in the Secretary’s suite at the Waldorf Towers. The source text is marked “Part IV of VI.” New York, September 27, 1965. SecDel/MC 9 SUBJECT Dinner Conversation with French Foreign Minister (Germany) PARTICIPANTS French Side Couve de Murville Ambassador Alphand Claude Lebel, F.O. Press Spokesman Jacques de Beaumarchais, Director of Cabinet for Foreign Minister U.S. Side The Secretary Ambassador Thompson Ambassador Bohlen Walter J. Stoessel, Jr., Dep. Asst. Sec.,EUR The conversation at dinner was general and discussion of substantive matters was limited. Couve seemed relatively relaxed and affable, but he was not disposed to get into political questions. The following subject was touched upon. Germany Couve wondered what the Soviet attitude would be concerning German reunification if the two problems of the German boundaries and of access to nuclear weapons were solved. He thought these were the two basic questions of concern to the Soviets. The Secretary questioned whether this was accurate; he was inclined to feel that the Soviets were more concerned about the over-all problem of their dominant position in Eastern Europe. If there is a plebiscite in East Germany, the Soviets know it will go against the Ulbricht regime and they fear that the impact of this could roll back Soviet influence throughout Eastern Europe. The Soviets do not wish to gamble their position in this area on German self-determination. Couve suggested that the best prospect for Germany might lie in having the “two German states” (he said he could use this phrase since no West Germans were present) proceed to establish a pattern of increased contacts and political relations between themselves. If this occurred, he predicted that within five years reunification would occur without the necessity for a plebiscite. Ambassador Bohlen remarked that he had always felt Adenauer had made a mistake in refusing to deal at all with East Germany in the mid-50s. Couve said he thought that even now it was not too late for this to begin. 130. Letter From the Ambassador to Germany (McGhee) to Secretary of State Rusk Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Bonn, September 27, 1965. Dear Mr. Secretary: As I mentioned to you when I saw you in Washington last monthAccording to Rusk’s Appointment Book, the meeting took place at 10 a.m. on September 1. (Johnson Library) No record of the discussion was found. we have, here in the Embassy and in consultation with our Mission in Berlin, been working on a paper analyzing how the United States can best handle the German reunification issue—under the various circumstances which may arise. We assume that the Germans will raise this question with us after the formation of Chancellor Erhard’s new government later in the month—and in the Chancellor’s meeting with the President which will probably take place in November. This paper has now been completed and is enclosed for your information, in the form of a Memorandum on German Reunification. The paper devotes itself to both substance and tactics, of which the latter appears to us be the more important. I hope that it can contribute usefully to the consideration which I know that you personally, and others in the Department, have been giving to this problem. We have all learned from past experience how very sensitive the reunification issue is. Should it become known that the American Embassy in Bonn has prepared a paper along the lines of the enclosed Memorandum, there would be immediate adverse repercussions in Germany. I am accordingly restricting distribution of the Memorandum to seven copies. In addition to the one enclosed, copies are being sent on a personal Eyes Only basis to the Under Secretary, Tommy Thompson, John Leddy, Walt Rostow, and to Foy Kohler in Moscow. The remaining copy will be retained in the Embassy. I urge that no other copies be made. Respectfully yours, George C. McGhee Attachment Secret. No indication of drafting officer is on the source text. MEMORANDUM ON GERMAN REUNIFICATION United States Embassy, Bonn [Here follow a table of contents and a list of annexes. The annexes were not found.] Introduction As was pointed out in Embtel 19 of July 2, 1965, Document 124. reunification will remain a basic objective of the Federal Republic. It is believed that its emotional appeal for the German people will in the future be more likely to increase than to decrease. Any German Government will need to devote energetic attention to this subject and can be expected to look to Germany’s Allies, particularly the United States, for support and assistance in this regard. There is, however, no consensus in Germany as to how—if at all—reunification can be achieved. Rather, thinking generally centers on two entirely different approaches to reunification. A. The first approach, which until now the Federal Government has favored, foresees a new initiative with the Soviets in which substantive proposals (as distinct from procedural proposals or purely demonstrative proposals) for achieving reunification would be put forward. In pushing this idea, however, the Federal Government has been reluctant to define the German position on a number of the critical subjects which would have to be covered in any serious discussions with the Soviets on reunification. For this reason, the Government has been subject to criticism for pursuing an ineffectual policy. The opposition Social Democrats have been among those sharply critical of the Government in this respect. At one point during the election campaign they came out in favor of an initiative with the Soviets. They proposed that this take the form of a peace treaty which, before presentation to the Soviets, would have been the subject of consultation with the Three Western Allies. However, under attack from the CDU the SPD withdrew its support from this proposal. (It will be recalled that Governing Mayor Brandt has in the past publicly favored a Western initiative in the form of a call for a peace conference.) B. The second general approach to reunification foresees progress mainly in increased contacts between the two parts of Germany. This point of view is usually based on the premise that Soviet agreement to reunification is, within the foreseeable future, extremely doubtful. Therefore, the most promising course of action in bringing the Germans on both sides of the demarcation line into more comparable circumstances and closer together is one of “little steps” and, eventually, hopefully, “larger steps” aimed at increasing intercourse in all fields between East and West Germany. This would not, however, go so far as political recognition of the East German regime. The SPD and the FDP, in their present policies, favor both a substantive initiative with the Soviets and, at the same time, greater direct contact with the East Germans. The CDU does not reject the idea of greater contact with East German residents, but gives the impression of being drawn along in a policy of such “small steps” as the pass agreement with the East Germans, because of public pressure rather than real conviction. As a matter of fact, the Adenauer-Strauss-Guttenberg faction opposes this policy as dangerous and self-defeating. Looking to the future, the United States will need to be in a position to react to both approaches to German reunification. In so doing, our principal objectives should be the following: A. We should attempt to satisfy, to the maximum extent possible without jeopardizing other American foreign policy interests, the German desire for forward movement on the German question. The Germans will remain perennially suspicious that their allies are not really interested in the achievement of German reunification; that they, on the contrary, would be willing to accept the status quo in Germany as part of some over-all understanding with the Soviets. We must continually make efforts to counter this German tendency—annoying though it may be—since it could in time lead the Germans toward a nationalist policy, entailing serious dangers for the West. B. We should continue to keep clearly on the record that it is the Soviets who remain responsible for the division of Germany, and that their uncompromising German policy and their harsh statements about the Federal Republic stem from the Soviet desire to justify to the world their continued enforced division of Germany. C. We should attempt to make whatever progress may be possible toward lessening the potential danger which the continued division of Germany entails. The tensions thereby created in Central Europe, where there exists the only direct Soviet-US confrontation, constitute a serious threat to world peace. The present paper is an effort to suggest how the United States can seek to achieve these objectives, under conditions likely to prevail during the next few years which will see Germany under a CDU/CSU-FDP coalition. It includes a review of past US, German and Soviet positions on reunification, a suggestion as to how we might deal with the German authorities on the question of a new substantive initiative and certain ideas on an alternate procedure should a substantive initiative not prove feasible or desirable. In addition, annexes are attached outlining what the United States might be able to accept as part of a substantive initiative and describing the logical sequence of events under a reunification plan should an initiative meet with success. [Here follows the body of the paper.] 131. Memorandum Prepared in the White HouseSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, vol. 16. Secret. Washington, undated. TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR MEETINGThe President’s Daily Diary for November 11 indicates that he did hold morning and afternoon meetings with Rusk, McNamara, Ball, and Bundy at the LBJ Ranch. Moyers sat in on the afternoon meeting. (Ibid.) No record of their conversations was found. November 11, 1965 The President, Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, Secretary Ball, Mr. M. Bundy 1. Preparations for Erhard Visit There are a number of important issues for discussion with Erhard—France and NATO, offset agreements and troop levels, funds for under-developed countries, policy toward Russia, reunification, trade and finance. But the one which needs urgent discussion today is Atlantic nuclear defense policy and the German place within it. Three views have developed in recent weeks in Washington. One is that it is important to have US leadership in pressing for a “hardware” solution—a collective nuclear force in which the Germans would buy a share and in which they could look forward to mixed-manning and increasing responsibility. This solution is strongly preferred by Under Secretary Ball, who would couple it with resolute pressure upon Great Britain to give up a finger on the trigger of an independent nuclear force. The second school of thought which includes Bundy would argue strongly against pressing for a hardware solution now and would prefer a candid statement to the Germans that no such solution seems immediately possible since there is no consensus whatever on its shape or form in Europe. This school believes that the Germans mislead themselves about the real meaning and value of such a hardware solution and that it would be wrong to proceed now even if we could easily get the agreement of other Europeans. This school would prefer to seek maximum value from increased consultation on matters of intelligence, targetting, planning, budgeting, and weapons system design. This school would not foreclose an eventual shared weapons system and would not give up existing US language in the non-dissemination treaty at German expense.Marginal notes by McGeorge Bundy that begin in the left margin next to the third paragraph read: “A basic reason for discussion now.” “What do we say after Erhard visit. Surface words are easy, but general words are hard—even impossible unless they are agreed.” Secretary McNamara would support a hardware solution if it is the President’s judgment that such a solution deserves intense and continuous US pressure for its achievement. If not, he would prefer a decision now that we do not expect a hardware solution. Secretary Rusk recognizes also that we cannot afford a feeling of betrayal among the Germans. Unlike Ball, McNamara, and Bundy, who believe that this issue requires prompt decision, the Secretary has kept open the possibility that the matter might be discussed right through the coming winter. McNamara and Ball will be in Europe in the last week in November, McNamara was scheduled to attend the NATO Defense Ministers meeting in Paris November 27–29. and it is essential that they have a clear sense of the President’s own desires before they go. [Here follows discussion of issues unrelated to Germany.] 132. Memorandum From Henry Kissinger to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator)Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Erhard Visit 1965. No classification marking. According to notes attached to the source text, which is marked “For White House Use Only,” Bator passed the memorandum on to Bundy who “noted” it. Cambridge, Massachusetts, November 22, 1965. At your request, I am sending you some observations on Schroeder and Von Hassel. Psychoanalyzing foreign statesmen is a notoriously difficult task. In the Federal Republic it is complicated further by the fact that the political spectrum has been distorted by the defeat in World War II and the trauma of the Nazi period. Traditional nationalism has had to find a home in middle-of-the-road parties and must be pursued with more embracing slogans—of which Atlanticism is one. Schroeder and Von Hassel seem to me to fit this generalization: Schroeder as an active manipulator, Von Hassel in a more passive role. Both are North German, Protestant, Prussian—distrustful of France, nostalgic towards Britain, profoundly national in orientation. Strauss is a condottiere: he wants the maximum influence of whatever unit he represents and he will be brutal in pursuing it. But he has no particular interest where the frontiers of this unit are. Schroeder and Von Hassel feel personally unfulfilled as long as Germany remains divided. Schroeder told an absolutely reliable acquaintance of mine once: “Not a day goes by but that I think of Koenigsberg (now the Soviet city of Kalinengrad) as a German city.” These primary objectives must always be kept in mind in explaining Schroeder’s—and to a lesser extent—Von Hassel’s nationalism. Schroeder is anti-French because he considers it foolish to subordinate Germany to a second-class European power and a traditional enemy to boot. In building up Germany he wants to rely on the most modern technology. His vision of Atlanticism may go something like this: If the United States supports German national aims, Germany will have the backing of the strongest country in the West. If the United States fails to do so, the Federal Republic will have become the strongest European country with American help. It will be in a position to be the dominant country in Western Europe. German national interest—not the integrationist concept of Atlanticism—may thus be the driving force. Schroeder’s record indicates that he is a cool operator, proud of his tactical skill, determined not to be in an exposed position. Every gaffe of Erhard’s has been accompanied by press leaks from his Foreign Minister absolving himself of responsibility. It is also well to remember that until 1961 Schroeder as Minister of Interior stood on the Right Wing of the CDU. He was detested by the SPD; indeed grouped by them with Strauss as their arch-enemy. He was a staunch supporter of Adenauer. Within months of being appointed Foreign Minister in 1961—on the basis of his presumed loyalty to Adenauer—he began undercutting the Chancellor and wooing the Socialists. Schroeder is not an ally on which to count when the going gets tough—as Hallstein is learning now. As for Von Hassel, it is well to remember that he returned to Germany from East Africa at the height of the Nazi period. This does not make him a Nazi—it can be explained in a non-Nazi only by very strong nationalism. To sum up: We are playing recklessly with fire. France is difficult but it has no unfulfilled national aims. Germany is in a different position. Its goals must be revisionist. Its leaders are growing increasingly assertive—partly because of American encouragement. We are substituting a German for a French problem, one that will prove much more dangerous in the years ahead. 133. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Bonn for Ambassador McGhee. Moscow, December 11, 1965, 1205Z. 1907. For Secretary, Under Secretary, Amb Thompson, Leddy, Rostow. 1. In response Amb McGhee’s request, I would offer following comments on his thoughtful memorandum on German reunification. Document 131. 2. I agree we must continue seek allay German suspicions that Allies not really interested in reunification. We should therefore keep issue alive and raise it with Soviets on every suitable occasion, as has been done, of course, by Secretary in his conversations with Gromyko over past five years and most recently in New York, as well as by Stewart during his visit here last week. We will thus continue to keep record clear that responsibility for continued division of Germany rests with Soviets. 3. I also agree that in pursuing above objective we must, of course, not jeopardize other U.S. foreign policy objectives. Soviets are now (and, I suspect, will be for some time to come) disinterested in reunification and desirous maintain status quo in Central Europe. I therefore see no reason for us to take any initiative which, given this Soviet position, bound to fail and would only force differences existing among allies and with Germans on various aspects of issue. Moreover, I see no reason why we should arouse Soviets on thorny problem which they themselves seem prefer leave dormant at this time. Despite vehemence their anti-FRG propaganda, Soviets clearly not seeking open “second front,” as it were, in Germany in connection their disagreement with us over Vietnam, and such front is certainly not in our interest either. 4. I see no percentage for anyone at this time in any formal procedural initiative. Chances of Soviet acceptance such initiative are nil, as shown by Gromyko’s reaction to Secretary’s and Stewart’s probing re possibility Four-Power talks as recently as last October and last week, respectively (Embtel 1890, Dec 10),Dated December 10. (Department of State, Central Files, POL UK-USSR) and it is hard to see what Bonn could derive domestically from such unpromising initiative except increased demands for further and more far-reaching moves requiring painful decision. 5. As Amb McGhee’s memo points out, Soviets seem to take broader view of quadripartism than East Germans, and they have repeatedly stated that while Four Powers could not solve reunification, they could facilitate it. In view of this, Bonn’s interest in having Quadripartite umbrella for bilateral West German-East German negotiation could perhaps be met by simply assuming any such negotiations were in fact being conducted under Four-Power aegis. As recently as yesterday Gromyko explicitly reaffirmed continuing validity Potsdam Agreement, and such implicit arrangement covering FRG-GDR contacts would be difficult for Soviets to denounce. 6. Meanwhile, I believe we should continue quietly to encourage Germans to sort out their own thoughts on various short and long range issues relating to reunification problem. This connection, I note from Bonn’s 1683 to Dept Dated December 8. (Ibid., POL 7 GER W) that exchange of messages between German and Polish Bishops may have set a hopeful trend in this direction, and I fully agree that we should make every effort to ensure that these possible opportunities be fully utilized. Kohler 134. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, NATO 3 FR (PA). Confidential. Drafted by Hemenway and approved in S on March 7, 1966. The meeting was held at the German Ambassador’s Residence. Paris, December 13, 1965, 8:30 p.m.–12:30 a.m. US/MC/7 UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE THIRTY-SIXTH MINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL Paris, France—December 14–16, 1965 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Federal Republic of Germany Foreign Minister Schroeder United Kingdom Sir Paul Gore-Booth, Permanent Under Secretary Republic of France Foreign Minister Couve de Murville (For guest list showing attendance at conversation see appendix #1)Not printed. SUBJECT Quadripartite Dinner Discussion on Problems Relating to Germany including German Reunification Summary: The two-hour after-dinner discussion on the German question followed orthodox lines. Only one seemingly new element was introduced by the Secretary when he suggested that German policy may mean more for the Soviets than a way of holding on to East Germany—perhaps, in the Soviet view, all of Eastern Europe is at stake. The Secretary suggested—and all present agreed—that the Western Allies should devote more attention to an examination of this and related questions. Schroeder began the discussion by analyzing what he felt were the two main objectives of Soviet German policy: 1. Denuclearization and isolation of Germany. 2. Destruction of the Federal Republic’s ties with Berlin; an example of this was seen during the April harassment of the Bundestag meetings in Berlin. Schroeder felt that German policy enjoys top priority in Moscow’s Foreign Policy. He had noticed two contrasting tones of the Soviets; in confidential talks their manner is entirely different than the polemical approach used by Gromyko in his most recent address to the Supreme Soviet.Extracts of the relevant portions are in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 494–496. In September in Moscow, Carstens received a polite response in the economic area but in political areas the atmosphere was as negative as ever. The Foreign Minister felt that the Soviet Zone of occupation has improved both its internal and international positions in recent months as evidenced by several significant events: 1. The Zone regime has become a leading trade partner of the USSR, and indeed important in world production; 2. The Ulbricht visit to the UAR February 24–March 2. has led to establishment of a UAR Consulate General in East Berlin; 3. The Olympic Committee’s decision to include “GDR” participation;On October 8, the International Olympic Committee announced that East German athletes would be invited to participate as a separate team. 4. Ulbricht has cleverly exploited the Sino-Soviet split so that both Moscow and Peiping support him. As a result of these developments we see increased acerbity in the politics of the “GDR”, and we have witnessed the helicopter flights over West Berlin during early summer and the strong national overtones of recent “GDR” propaganda. Reportedly Ulbricht went so far recently as to assert that he—Ulbricht—continued Bismarck’s policies Foreign Minister Schroeder claimed that a resistance exists in the “GDR”, but that it is not strong and not organized. For public indications of ideological strife in the Zone he would have to cite the Havemann case and the Apel suicideHavemann was fired as a professor at the University of Berlin after publication of an article critical of Communism. Apel, the Chairman of the State Planning Commission, committed suicide after public criticism of his management of the East German economy.—not all the details of which are yet clear. But it seems certain that Apel resisted exploitation of the Zone by the Soviets through unfair terms of trade. In Eastern Europe the Soviets put pressure upon all the States to resist German reunification. Czech reluctance to accept a Berlin clause is one result of the pressure. In general, the Soviets are attempting to revive anti-German feeling. Yet Moscow ignores the Federal Republic’s renunciation of ABC weapons and declarations that the FRG does not intend to acquire nuclear arms under national control. In conclusion Mr. Schroeder requested comments on his analysis before inviting a discussion on what might be done if there is agreement concerning that analysis. Couve de Murville responded with observations from his recent Moscow trip: Couve visited Moscow October 28–November 2. 1. It is a fact that for the Soviet Union the German problem is not only an essential problem but the essential problem. You only have to go to Moscow to see it. 2. It’s also true that in the USSR there is great anxiety over Germany and a reluctance to change the present situation even after it is admitted—and the Soviets do admit this—that some day the situation must be changed one way or another. 3. The Soviets always stress that their relations with the FRG are not good—this is said with apparent regret—the Soviets simply note the fact and maintain that as long as there is no confidence it is difficult to make any progress. Therefore the situation is just as Dr. Schroeder had analyzed it; Couve wanted to add only that it appeared to him that the Soviets admitted this with a note of regret—as if there were little they might do about it. Sir Paul Gore-Booth observed: The UK did not notice the motif of regret during Minister Stewart’s visit. Stewart visited Moscow November 30–December 3. The motives of propaganda were all stereotyped in Moscow. It occurred to the UK that the Soviets might want to sow confusion in the West. The Soviets avoided the China question. Couve confirmed that the French also noticed Soviet avoidance of the China question. Gore-Booth: The UK concluded that the Soviet concentration on Germany was a distraction for our benefit. Generally the UK’s analysis agrees with that of Dr. Schroeder. It agrees that the East Zone has made progress, but the UK can assure Germany that this has had no effect on British policy. British experiences in Eastern European countries are varied, but the UK tries to encourage these states in any way that might tend to improve relations with the FRG. All of these thoughts seem to lead to the idea that the Federal Republic’s general policy line is correct—and one which the UK can only encourage. Couve observed that Berlin was never mentioned during his visit to Moscow. Gore-Booth: This was the UK experience too. They didn't want to talk about Berlin. The Secretary: Gromyko did not raise the subject of Berlin in his New York conversations either.September 29 and October 1. Memoranda of conversation are in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CF 2547. At the very end he made a point as if it were a postscript. He noted that we hadn't talked about Berlin and that it is quiet there, but he emphasized that Berlin was nevertheless very important. The Secretary gained the impression that something new might be injected—but it never was. We have the impression that China is a preoccupation with the Soviet Union. Germany is important, but perhaps not the most important foreign policy problem for the Soviets. The Secretary wished we knew more about Moscow’s relations with the countries of Eastern Europe. The only thing the Arab States can agree about is Israel. Is something similar true of Eastern Europe? Perhaps the presence of Soviet divisions is more important to Moscow’s policy in Eastern Europe today than five years ago. If those divisions were removed what would happen in Eastern Europe? We get an impression from Eastern European diplomats that there is a change but it is not yet clear what the change is. It is curious that there is no interest among the Soviets in settlement of the German problem or in reunification, even though the German problem remains the major outstanding East-West difference. Since 1947 roughly $800 billion have been spent by the United States for security. Perhaps half of this can be attributed to the unsolved German question. The Soviets have been forced to make similar military efforts yet they are unwilling to concede that giving a free choice to 17 million East Germans might be in the interest of both the United States and the Soviet Union. Perhaps more is at stake. Maybe the Soviets believe that the future course of all of Eastern Europe is at stake. We should examine this thesis more closely. Schroeder: We have the impression that Moscow does not prevent increased trade between Eastern Europe and the FRG because it knows: 1. It is the desire of most of these countries to trade. 2. Development of Eastern Europe helps the USSR in turn. In any event, we know of no case where trade with the West goes much above 20%. We have no evidence that the Soviets have a real worry that any of the lands of Eastern Europe are about to leave their orbit, and I don't think this likely. Moscow’s most unpleasant experience has been with Rumania, but that has not exceeded proportions that Moscow can accept. I think we should consider carefully what our American colleague has said. Joint study of Moscow’s relations with Eastern Europe might lead us to interesting conclusions. The Secretary: I want to make it quite clear that I was posing questions and not stating conclusions. I was expressing hypotheses which I think merit further investigation. Schroeder: We seem to be agreed with the analysis of the problem. The question arises of what to do about it. The FRG feels that it is necessary to present the German case to world opinion: that the Germans have a legal and moral right to self-determination and a right to national unity. There is a need to repeat this over and over again. Otherwise the impression is given that the West has accepted the division of Germany as permanent. For this reason we would like the communiqué of this NATO meeting to include the usual remarks on the German question. We are aware that Germany should do what it can to make reunification attractive to Eastern European countries. We are prepared to make sacrifices in connection with reunification which relate to three general areas: 1. The Eastern borders, 2. The military status of a reunified Germany, and 3. Economic and financial contributions. But the Federal Republic will make these concessions only in connection with reunification and never without it. In this regard we ask the three Western powers to help us in countering Soviet propaganda charges of militarism and revanchism. The Church Documents of a recent date include the Evangelical Church memorandum and the statements by the Polish and German Catholic BishopsFor texts, see Europa Archiv, 1966, vol. 2, pp. 1–19. which have had a strong public impact. We think that these documents are of great importance but are not in the first line of political importance. With respect to the USSR and Eastern Europe we will continue to improve our economic relations. We think that there also exist good chances for improvement in such things as exchange of students and professors, and in the tourist area. However, the most difficult question for us is how to behave with respect to the East German regime. Somehow, after restudy, we always seem to come back to our original conclusions. We must reject that regime and we must point out that the USSR and its armed forces prop up that regime. We feel that this policy is correct. We ask your support of it. It is not merely a question of recognition or non-recognition, but a problem of countering the upgrading of that regime. Trade plays a role here and we ask that trade not receive state support. Also we must stick to the four-power principle. We fear that our policy will fail if the Soviets succeed in shifting us from this principle which has been supported by the three powers (together with the FRG). Further, we must consider what steps can be taken to forestall possible Soviet moves against Berlin. It is a comfort to know that the Berlin question was not raised by the Soviets during the recent visits. But the possible introduction of passes and visas by Zone authorities remains a perplexing possibility which might easily become too hot to handle. It has been discussed in the four-power group, but I think that there still is some disagreement. We would like to bring this matter to a conclusion soon. The Secretary: It seems to me Minister Schroeder has made some extremely interesting remarks this evening. It seems to me that disarmament, normalization of trade, and such questions are of interest all over Europe. The communications among the Church Leaders also seems to be of some significance. Do you plan to mention them in your speech? [Dr. Schroeder’s NATO plenary speech]Brackets in the source text. Schroeder: Yes, I would like to mention the Church Documents, but not in detail. Couve: I too think it would be good to say something about the Church Documents and I agree with you (the Secretary) that we should follow up on these suggestions. Mr. Leddy: How will we deal with Germany on the final communiqué? Schroeder: As we generally do, I presume. (General agreement indicated.) Gore-Booth: I prefer saying that we discussed problems related to Germany rather than the “German problem” because the latter implies somehow that the Germans themselves are a problem. The Secretary: As far as we are concerned, we also spoke of the problem of reunification. The four parties agreed that press communiqués could say that the Quadripartite Group discussed problems relating to Germany including reunification.Not found. There was general agreement that the press should be told, if inquiries are made, that the nuclear question was not discussed at the Quadripartite Dinner. 135. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Paris, December 15, 1965, 2015Z. Secto 14. For the President and Acting Secretary. For your preparation for talks with Erhard I should report a conversation with Schroeder on further German help for Viet-Nam.See also Document 136. I pointed out to him that the full revelation to the Congress of the extent of our requirements in Viet-Nam will raise major questions about what others are doing in the face of our own continuing commitments in such areas as NATO. I told him it was of the utmost importance that Germany find a way to send considerable numbers of people to South Viet-Nam. I mentioned specifically engineers of all types, medical personnel, private contractors to undertake building programs, police personnel, etc. Schroeder’s reaction was very negative. He mentioned that they were the second largest contributor to Viet-Nam economically but said that they had not been successful in getting volunteers to go to perform services. He had talked with a number of organizations with little result. He commented that people in Germany are under the impression that all of South Viet-Nam is a war zone. I told him this was in effect true and that it was a dangerous place and that was a major reason why free countries ought to take a hand in it. When he discounted the possibility of private citizens I raised the question of military or police units to perform similar services. He seemed to think they had legal as well as policy obstacles to any such answer. I report this because I was very disappointed with his general attitude. It seems to me that we should marshal a strong case for Erhard and put to him some very specific suggestions as to units or type personnel that we strongly want from the Federal Republic. I would advise against combat units as such but it is important that we get some Germans into the field. Rusk 136. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Exdis. Paris, December 15, 1965, 2315Z. Secto 15. Following based on uncleared memcon FYI Noforn subject to revision on review: Secretary met with Schroeder at 12:30 PM December 15 and reported he had just discussed communiqué problem with Couve, informing him that we could not agree to place specific time limitation on special committee. Secretary said he had suggested to Couve that communiqué omit any reference to timing. Schroeder agreed this would be satisfactory.For a summary of discussions at this December 15 meeting, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 118. For text of the communiqué, see Department of State Bulletin, January 3, 1966, pp. 7–9. Secretary said that while President and Erhard spoke alone together during forthcoming Washington meeting he hoped that he and Schroeder could pursue question of possible declaration on Germany following up on Schroeder’s comments at Quadripartite dinner. Secretary had impression that there were some things which could be said about political settlement in Europe which, while they might not have an effect in Moscow, could have impact in Eastern Europe. We could spell out some of prospects which would open up if Germany were reunified in freedom, i.e. boundary settlement, arms control, trade and economic assistance. What might be considered is unilateral Western declaration outlining these prospects. Schroeder seemed relatively cool to this idea noting FRG had already given direct indications of these possibilities on various occasions. He agreed however on need for more emphasis on advantages reunification would bring to the East. In absence prospect serious negotiations, however, it was difficult and dangerous to get into details. Secretary recalled that Schroeder had talked of formalizing “arms status” of FRG and wondered if this referred to control over arms levels or covered such matters as German membership in NATO. Schroeder replied this formula went back many years and was intentionally vague. No real discussion on European security system possible in abstract. Secretary suggested this matter be pursued further in Washington. Secretary asked whether there were any special developments in FRG-Polish relations. Schroeder said there were no developments of positive nature. Poles have held FRG trade mission to exclusively trade problems. There has been no trace of Polish desire to use FRG mission as point of departure for political discussions. Polish Bishops' overture to German Bishops has been squelched by political authorities although it was still not clear whether Poles would actually attempt to prevent their entry. Secretary said President would wish to discuss Vietnam with Chancellor. In early January he would have to go to Congress with more specific recommendations re future US commitments in SEA. These would include substantially larger number of men and large increase in US defense budget, and would inevitably stimulate discussion of US commitments in Europe. Secretary McNamara had tried to fend off consequences this questioning by stating our intention not to make major changes in US combat forces in Europe. However questions would arise as to what our Allies are doing to help in SEA. It would be helpful if FRG could consider this issue and specifically whether it could send engineers, medical, or other specialized personnel. He recognized problems this would raise but wished to flag it as subject for discussion with Chancellor. Schroeder noted in reply that FRG economic aid was second only to US and that personnel represented major difficulty. This could only be done on voluntary basis and matter had been raised with many private organizations. Response so far was not encouraging. Secretary asked whether “official units” such as police, hospital or engineering units could be sent. Schroeder said that he would have this matter looked into in detail.Regarding this discussion of Vietnam, see also Document 135. Discussion concluded with review of status negotiations on communiqué with US promise to support sentence rebutting Soviet anti-FRG defamation campaign and promise by Secretary to speak to Danes,A handwritten notation reads: “Not French?” who constituted major resistance to inclusion of this thought. Secretary made clear his personal disenchantment with entire process of communiqué drafting and disinclination to devote many minutes of Ministerial time to it. Schroeder noted that communiqués have some importance for European public opinion and for historical record. Rusk 137. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Barber) to the Director of the Office of Atlantic Political and Military Affairs (Spiers)Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Also sent to Vincent Baker (D) and Llewellyn Thompson. Washington, December 16, 1965. Dear Ron: I have been struck by the continued discussions of the unification question in private at high levels within the NATO community. It seems to me that we may not be able to keep this issue in a low key much longer. We may face a choice between a US initiative or a German initiative. I, and I think the Germans, would prefer a US initiative with widespread European support to a German initiative. I would suggest that we consider a statement of principles on Europe similar to those of McCloy/Zorin on disarmament.Reference is to the joint statement of agreed principles for disarmament negotiations, adopted by the UN General Assembly on September 20, 1961. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 1091–1094. Attached are my thoughts on such a statement of principles. I realize these are somewhat different than the 1961 statement of principles on EuropeFor text, see ibid., pp. 470–472. but the situation has changed and a statement which reflects the need and a solution which is acceptable to both Eastern and Western Europe is necessary if we are to maintain the support of those on the Continent who believe, whether mistakenly or not, that the Soviet Union might agree to an evolutionary program. Clearly thoughts of early unification are illusory. If there is merit in such an approach, it should be discussed with the Germans and our NATO allies before any discussions with the Russians. I hope the above is useful. Sincerely, Art AttachmentConfidential. STATEMENT OF AGREED PRINCIPLES (FOR DISCUSSION WITH THE GERMAN, FRENCH, AND BRITISH GOVERNMENTS) 1. The nations of Europe agree that armed force should not be used to change the political and social systems, or geographical boundaries of any nation in Europe, and that peaceful negotiations should be utilized to resolve problems between nations. 2. Progress toward a lasting peace in Europe should proceed by stages, with provisions for a stage-by-stage review to insure fulfillment of past obligations prior to initiation of new ones. 3. Each stage in the process should be balanced in such a way that no state or group of states will gain a military advantage through its implementation, thus insuring equally the security of all concerned. 4. The future of Europe should rest upon the right of all its people to self-determination. 5. The Four Powers would retain their special responsibilities in Germany until a European peace treaty is signed. 6. In the interests of a lasting peace and an effective system of European security, the Four Powers would consult with all European states in the process of developing a program for peace in Europe. 138. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 2571. Confidential. No drafting information is on the source text, which was cleared in S on January 10, 1966. The meeting was held in the Under Secretary’s Conference Room. The source text is marked “Part III of V.” Chancellor Erhard visited Washington December 19–21. Washington, December 20, 1965, 10:30 a.m. SUBJECT Viet-Nam PARTICIPANTS Chancellor Erhard Foreign Minister Schroeder Minister of Defense Von Hassel Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein State Secretary Karl Guenther von Hase State Secretary Dr. Karl Carstens Assistant Secretary Franz Krapf Assistant Secretary Karl Hohmann Minister Georg von Lilienfeld Counselor Berndt von Staden Mr. Jorg Kastl, Press Spokesman, Ministry of Foreign Affairs General Werner Boie, Air Attache Captain Herbert Trebesch, Aide to Minister of Defense Secretary Rusk Secretary McNamara Under Secretary Ball Ambassador McGhee Ambassador Thompson Assistant Secretary Leddy Ambassador Hand Assistant Secretary McNaughton Mr. Alfred Puhan—GER Mr. Ronald Spiers—RPM Mr. Richard B. Finn—GER The Chancellor said that what the US is doing in Viet-Nam and other parts of the world in turmoil affects the FRG as well. The FRG has given the US moral support and also material help, although its help has been small in comparison with the US effort. The FRG will also give consideration to what more it can do. The Secretary said he would call on Secretary McNamara to comment but first he would like to make a brief remark about the political atmosphere in the US during the next few weeks. Our friends around the world pay us the supreme compliment of never worrying about the morale of the American people. The US has suffered over 160,000 casualties in combat since the end of World War II. We have spent $800 billion in defense budgets since 1947. In January the President will present to Congress the dimensions of our requirements for Viet-Nam in terms of manpower and money. This will lead to questions as to what others are doing in view of the scale of the US effort. The President will have to defer many domestic requirements, including those involved in the Great Society, because of our relations with the rest of the world. Secretary McNamara briefly described the scope of the US efforts in Viet-Nam. The US now has about 185,000 personnel there and this will be increased by the end of the year to about 200,000. These numbers will rise continuously next year. Viet-Nam is costing about $10 billion a year and this figure will probably rise. These are matters the President will be discussing in January. Secretary McNamara said that US defense spending is much higher than that of any other nation in the Free World. The increased effort in Viet-Nam would have an effect on the US internal economic situation. The US has proportionately twice as many men in uniform as the nations of Western Europe. Questions will be asked at home regarding this heavy burden in men, money and blood. 139. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CF 2571. Secret. Drafted by Obst and approved in the White House on December 30. The meeting was held at the White House. The source text is marked “Part II of III.” A memorandum of conversation of the discussion of the Great Society and Space, “Part I of III,” is ibid. The portion of the conversation on the offset agreement is Document 140. Documentation on discussions of nuclear sharing is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Documents 119 and 120. Washington, December 20, 1965, 11:30 a.m. SUBJECT Viet-Nam PARTICIPANTS US The President Ambassador Hand Mr. Jack Valenti Harry Obst, State Department interpreter German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard Heinz Weber, FRG interpreter The President said de Gaulle and the Soviets knew quite well that the US had an unwavering commitment to defend Europe. We nevertheless do have to honor our commitment in Viet-Nam. We had not, however, worked out how we were going to do that. If we withdraw, we would be breaking a commitment and our word would no longer be any good. We cannot accept a defeat. The Viet-Nam conflict is beginning to put a strain on our budget which will have to expand to accommodate the necessary expenditures. All of this does not help us in our effort to cure our balance of payments. 140. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CF 2571. Secret. Drafted by Obst and approved in the White House on December 30. The meeting was held at the White House. The source text is marked “Part III of III.” A memorandum of conversation of the discussion of the Great Society and Space, “Part I of III,” is ibid. The portion of the conversation on Vietnam is Document 139. Washington, December 20, 1965, 11:30 a.m. SUBJECT Offset PARTICIPANTS US The President Ambassador Hand Mr. Jack Valenti Harry Obst, State Department interpreter German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard Heinz Weber, FRG interpreter The President said he expected the FRG to make another payment under the offset agreement this month so as not to upset the quarterly balance of US finances and not to weaken the international confidence in the dollar. The Chancellor explained that after the election he was forced to pare his budget by 10%. He had to resort to such extreme measures as the repeal of some laws already on the books. This was not to say that the FRG did not want to keep its commitments. The FRG would be willing to talk about this matter but at present it had considerable difficulties. 141. Memorandum of ConversationSource: National Archives and Records Administration, Gift Collection (Record Group 200), Papers of Robert S. McNamara, Memoranda of Conversation, Germany, vol. 2, sec 1, tab 103. Secret. Drafted by McNamara. Washington, December 20, 1965. MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION BETWEEN PRESIDENT JOHNSON AND CHANCELLOR ERHARD, AFTER THE WHITE HOUSE DINNER, 20 DECEMBER 1965 The President asked the Chancellor for: 1. Instructions to his Finance and Defense Ministers to meet fully the terms of the Offset Agreement. 2. The deployment of a German medical company and construction battalion to South Vietnam. The President went on to say “we favored the FRG’s proposal for a nuclear forceMemoranda of conversation regarding German nuclear sharing proposals are in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Documents 119 and 120. and would so state to the UK.” Erhard replied: 1. The FRG will stand by the Offset Agreement but needs to discuss the terms and methods by which to accomplish this. He is not prepared to say that at such and such a date they would pay such and such an amount. 2. He is thinking of the possibility of sending medical personnel to South Vietnam through the Red Cross. He is not certain whether it would be possible under their existing legislation to send military units to Vietnam. “Perhaps it could be done on a voluntary basis—it can perhaps be undertaken—I think something can be done.” 3. He would not object to a reference in the communiquéFor text, see Department of State Bulletin, January 10, 1966, pp. 50–51. to the Federal Republic’s support of U.S. efforts in support of freedom throughout the world. RMcN 142. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 2571. Confidential. Drafted by Finn and cleared in S on December 29. The meeting was held in the Under Secretary’s Conference Room. The source text is marked “Part I of II.” Washington, December 21, 1965, 10 a.m. SUBJECT Kennedy Round PARTICIPANTS Chancellor Erhard Prime Minister Schroeder State Secretary Dr. Carstens Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein State Secretary Karl von Hase Minister Georg von Lilienfeld Assistant Secretary Franz Krapf Assistant Secretary Karl Hohmann Press Spokesman Jorg Kastl Secretary Rusk Secretary Fowler Under Secretary Ball Governor Herter, President’s Representative Mr. Donald Hornig, Presidential Science Adviser Under Secretary Mann Ambassador McGhee Ambassador Thompson Assistant Secretary Leddy Assistant Secretary Solomon Ambassador Hand Mr. William S. Gaud, Deputy Director—AID Ambassador Roth Mr. Bator—White House Mr. Puhan—GER Mr. Finn—GER Secretary Rusk opened by asking whether there were any points the Chancellor wished particularly to discuss. Chancellor Erhard asked about US views on the Kennedy Round. He said the FRG was working for the full success of the KR and felt that there would be a great loss in cooperation between North America and Europe if the KR failed. Governor Herter said he was delighted to hear this. Since May 1963 there had not been much progress at Geneva and things were now completely stalled. Governor Herter said that he did not see that the United States could do anything to disentangle the Common Market impasse and that, although there was talk of various possible alternatives to the KR, he could not see that they were equally viable. The United States hopes for a resolution of the current difficulties so that we can all move ahead. Regarding the timetable, Governor Herter said that we have a year and a half ahead of us. Substantial or complete agreement on the KR must be obtained four or five months before this time elapses. Therefore by mid-March 1966 at the latest, the resolution of the Common Market nations to move ahead must be in evidence. Regular meetings must be under way by May 1966. To get moving, Governor Herter said that it would be necessary for the Six to reach a commitment for the successful conclusion of the KR and especially that a flexible mandate should be given to the Common Market negotiators rather than faits accomplis. The US has made its position clear and reciprocal agreements on both sides are needed. Furthermore, progress must be made regarding agriculture, either by direct negotiations or by international agreements. On agriculture we recognize that the Common Market has an internal problem. Governor Herter said that the Trade Expansion Act (TEA) expires in June 1967 but an agreement on the Kennedy Round must be signed before that time since a number of matters will have to be worked out before the Act expires. The Governor noted that protectionist forces may grow in strength. Under Secretary Ball said he wished to emphasize that there would be enormous difficulties in obtaining any extension of time from Congress, even though we might be well down the road to agreement when the TEA expires. Under Secretary Ball said that the Congress would very carefully examine the results of the KR negotiations. Secretary Rusk described the political background of President Kennedy’s decision to ask Congress for the TEA. The Secretary said that President Kennedy had decided to press for far-reaching legislative authority to expand trade rather than asking for a one or two-year extension of the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act. President Kennedy had also asked Governor Herter to take charge of the program. The Secretary noted that the spirit of Atlantic partnership had been strong at the time President Kennedy made this decision. Strong support for the TEA had been obtained. If we are still having major problems by June 1967, the idea of trade expansion will be in very serious straits. The United States therefore appreciates the efforts of Chancellor Erhard and the FRG to move ahead. Chancellor Erhard said that he was fully aware of the great economic and political significance of the KR, noting that he had personally been involved when he was Economics Minister. The Chancellor said that the EEC has a mandate to continue negotiations on industrial items but that a Common Market decision is needed on agriculture. The Chancellor said that the FRG would be encouraged to take up new initiatives as a result of his visit to Washington. The Chancellor noted that French views on agriculture are different from those of the FRG. The FRG is the largest importer of agricultural products in the EEC. The other members are not so interested in agricultural imports. The Chancellor stressed the economic and political importance of the KR and the significance he attached to it. Foreign Minister Schroeder said that the EEC problem is linked directly to the present state of relations among the Six. He thought that it might be possible in January to get the French back to the negotiating table by a roundabout way—in Luxembourg. He noted that there are extremely difficult questions involved requiring major decisions. The Foreign Minister said that a further mandate must be given on the basis of unanimity for KR negotiations. This will not be easy to obtain but the Foreign Minister was not pessimistic. He thought that problems with France would come to some resolution and that a mandate would be given. The Foreign Minister said the problem is up to the Six but he thought the US could give useful encouragement as regards speeding up the KR. 143. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 2571. Secret. Drafted by Obst. Washington, December 21, 1965, 11:15 a.m. SUBJECT General PARTICIPANTS President Johnson Chancellor Erhard Ambassador Hand Mr. Jack Valenti Heinz Weber, FRG interpreter Harry Obst, US interpreter The President asked Chancellor Erhard if he was happy with the communiqué as just agreed upon.For text, see Department of State Bulletin, January 10, 1966, pp. 50–51. The Chancellor replied he was happy and thought it had been a good idea to include the passage on the Great Society and the Formierte Gesellschaft. He thanked the President for agreeing to the last minute changes suggested by his representatives and expressed his gratitude for the wonderful reception he and his staff had received, in particular the splendid dinner the night before. The President remarked that he had read carefully the paper on nuclear sharing that the Chancellor had submittedSee Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 119, footnote 3. and that he was in basic agreement with the ideas contained therein. He would talk to Mr. Wilson about it.For text of President Johnson’s December 23 letter to Wilson, see ibid., Document 121. Erhard should also mention this issue to Wilson separately. After that they could look at it again in more detail. They should keep in close touch on the matter. The Chancellor agreed to discuss the matter with Prime Minister Wilson and did not pursue the subject further. The President again brought up the matter of offset payments. He pressed the Chancellor hard for a German payment of $100 million before the first of the year reiterating that only $50 million had been received from Germany since July while up to $300 million had flowed from the U.S. to Germany during the same period. The President said the payment was needed because of the balance of payments situation and in order to retain confidence in the dollar. The Chancellor replied the Germans were honoring their agreements. The military were in the process of inventory and were not in a position to know what to order at this time. He did not think the President should look at this issue like an accountant from a short-term viewpoint, rather it should be looked at from a broader perspective. He again explained his own financial problems and said he would talk to his Finance Minister and the military to see what could be done. Mr. Von Hassel and Mr. McNamara were also discussing this and the matter was not being neglected. The President said he was aware of the Chancellor’s problems. He asked the Chancellor if he understood correctly that the FRG would honor the (offset) agreement. The Chancellor nodded agreement. The President brought forth a letter from Prime Minister Wilson in which the latter confirmed a higher British contribution to the Asian Development Bank.A copy of Wilson’s December 17 letter is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, UK, vol. 2. He inquired if it was correct that the Federal Republic would contribute $50 million to the Bank. The Chancellor answered that he had been able to get only $30 million from his parliament at this time, but he repeated his private promise to the President to have this increased to $50 million at an opportune time. Right now he could not do more. The President asked if this was $50 million total over 10 years. The Chancellor verified this. The President explained again his tremendous budget problems. He might have to ask for as much as $125 billion to keep the effort in Viet-Nam and the other programs going. He reiterated his request for 200 medical personnel and a construction battalion of about a thousand men as a German contribution to Viet-Nam. The Chancellor repeated his remarks of the day before on this subject. He had no constitutional power to do this on his own. It would have to be done on a voluntary basis. He could therefore not make a firm promise, but he would throw his influence behind the matter and study it after his return. He would find some way of assisting. The President asked the Chancellor what he could do for him, what he would like to take home with him for his people? The Chancellor replied he would like to repeat his invitation to have the President come to Germany for a visit in 1966. The President replied he was pleased by the invitation, but that he would be a very busy man in 1966 and did not know if he would be able to come. The Chancellor asked the President what exactly he could tell his people and the press on this subject. The President said the Chancellor could tell them he had invited him, that the President was delighted over the invitation, that he would very much like to go, that however at this time he could not definitely commit himself. Mrs. Johnson had expressed great interest in going to Germany in 1966. She would like to go with Interior Secretary Udall to study city planning and beautification programs in Germany. Chancellor Erhard replied that Mrs. Johnson would be most welcome in the Federal Republic. 144. Special Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency Washington, February 11, 1966. SC No. 00756/66B [Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 10. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. 7 pages of source text not declassified.] 145. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–4 GER. Confidential. Drafted by Puhan on April 14 and approved in S on April 25. The source text is marked “Part IV of IV.” Washington, April 13, 1966. SUBJECT German Question PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Alfred Puhan, Director, Office of German Affairs Dr. Rainer Barzel, German Parliament Majority Leader Heinrich Knappstein, FRG Ambassador to US Minister Von Lilienfeld Counselor Kusterer, Interpreter Dr. Barzel said the Secretary must be aware of recent German efforts to get some movement on the German question, the question of reunification. He thought it was very important for the Germans to do something about this at this time where there is considerable dismay over the Franco-German relationship. He cited the German peace note of March 25, 1966,For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 914–918. referred to the German proposals of February 1962 and September 1963,For texts of the February 21, 1962, German memorandum and the September 14, 1963, statement by Barzel, see Meissner, Die deutsche Ostpolitik, pp. 28–33, 55–56. and asked if they could not be dusted off for another try at resolving the German question. In this connection, he said he appreciated the advice we had given Parliament President Gerstenmaier regarding the holding of a Bundestag meeting in Berlin,The U.S. position was conveyed in an April 7, 1965, message to the Soviet Union. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 483–484. but he thought it was important to reexamine this question. He said some little progress had been made in the matter of passes, prisoner releases, etc. More was needed. The Secretary replied with three observations: (1) He would urge Dr. Barzel not to believe Viet-Nam diverted us from Europe. (2) We feel a policy of movement with respect to Eastern Europe has had a constructive influence and has reawakened in the states of Eastern Europe a nostalgic interest in Western Europe. (3) If we embark on a new approach to settle the German question we must be prepared to look down the long trail and make sure everybody will continue on it once we embark on it. He reminded Dr. Barzel that the problem of central Europe is virtually the only problem over which we and the Soviets could wage a nuclear war. It represented a tremendous outlay for us in terms of money and effort, over 5 hundred billion dollars since 1947. It represented an equally great expense to the USSR. In the main, we have carried the principal burden in the free world. France did not participate in the crisis of Berlin in 1961. The Secretary added he was not for giving away East Germany but he thought the time would come when what happens to 17 million Germans will not be the important question to a billion people that it is today. He said we were serious in resolving the question on the basis of what the 17 million East Germans wanted. It was futile and nerve-wracking, however, to stir up these questions without being able to solve them. Dr. Barzel agreed that we must know in advance the steps which will be taken. He felt however the dynamics of the situation required some new attention. He thought the German peace note had been useful. He said if the Soviet Union asked what the reunified Germany will look like, we must be able to say what a reunified Germany will look like. On the other hand, the agreements of 1945 to settle the final borders of Germany were a promise both to the Allies as well as to the Germans. The problem was to get around the table and then we can come to terms on the frontiers. The Secretary thought the question of the Soviet Zone may be more difficult for the Russians because of their fears that by losing it they would surrender all of Eastern Europe. He reiterated his principal point that we were prepared to work seriously with our Allies on the German question. We are most anxious to rid ourselves of this most dangerous and expensive question. He reminded Dr. Barzel that when he saw Gromyko, the latter warned him that even though the German situation appeared to be quiet, the German question remained for the Soviets also the most important outstanding unresolved question. Dr. Barzel thanked the Secretary for his candid views. The Secretary asked Dr. Barzel to convey his kindest regards to Chancellor Erhard and Foreign Minister Schroeder. In parting, he emphasized again that the Germans must not exaggerate Viet-Nam and decide that it is the only thing we are talking or thinking about. We will keep our eyes on Europe. 146. Special Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency Washington, April 22, 1966. SC No. 00766/66A [Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 10. Secret. 7 pages of source text not declassified.] 147. Telegram From the Mission in Berlin to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–USSR. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Moscow, London, Paris, and Bonn. Berlin, May 9, 1966, 1850Z. 1044. Subject: Meeting between GovMayor Brandt and Soviet Ambassador to GDR Abrasimov. Reference: Berlintel 1033 to Dept., 883 to Bonn.Not found. 1. Spangenberg has given us the following account of Brandt’s conversation with Abrasimov at noon on May 8 in the home of Swedish Consul General Backlund. He spoke from a memorandum of conversation drafted by the Governing Mayor before his departure for Bonn. The discussion lasted two and a half hours. 2. Abrasimov opened the conversation by asking Brandt about the Congress in Stockholm Brandt had just attended, and subsequently discussed the 23rd Congress of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union which, he said, had mainly considered internal problems and was “unsensational.” Abrasimov then contrasted the German and Soviet quests for peace. He described German policy as “hostile,” especially as based upon the restoration of the 1937 borders. The FRG peace note, he said, does not serve the cause of peace. Brandt “energetically rebutted” this view and then brought up the subject of German unity. 3. Abrasimov said there are two German states that must strive to understand each other even though differences in their social systems make the degree of understanding necessarily limited. Brandt replied that there are not only differences in social systems but there are also differing views among the Great Powers (i.e., the West and the Soviets) on the question of German unity. 4. Abrasimov argued that it must be possible nonetheless for both Germanys to agree upon certain practical questions. He mentioned in this connection the prospects for an exchange of speakers between the SPD and SED, although he did not discuss this subject in detail. Abrasimov stressed “very pointedly” that the GDR is not a Soviet state. He said of himself that he could not dictate policy in East Germany. If he had attempted to do this, his removal would have been sought a long time ago. 5. Abrasimov described FRG/Soviet relations as unsatisfactory and said that in the field of trade the FRG must either improve its relations with the Soviets or find other trade partners to fill the gap now filled by the Soviets. At the party level, Abrasimov said that relations between the Soviets and the SPD are poor; Soviet relations with Socialist parties in other countries are far better. He regretted that the Communist Party is outlawed in the FRG. 6. Berlin was the theme of the final portion of this discussion. Abrasimov objected to the presence of Bundestag representatives and other FRG officials in West Berlin. He thanked Brandt warmly for the latter’s remarks in recent biweekly broadcast about the valor of the two Soviet pilots who lost their lives in the Stossensee plane crash. Brandt seized this opportunity to complain about the sonic booms caused by Soviet jets. Abrasimov said these flights would be kept to a minimum. 7. Abrasimov deplored the poor state of relations between West Berlin and the Soviet Union in the field of trade. Without mentioning Starchinov by name, he asked why it has not been possible for the Soviets to open a small trade office in West Berlin. This office, he said, would deal not only with West Berlin firms but also with firms in the FRG. Brandt made no direct reply. He discussed the common ground on which the German currency and economic system is based as between West Berlin and the FRG, emphasizing that Berlin itself is not an area narrowly controlled in this respect by the protective powers. Brandt said that he would reflect upon how Berlin’s portion of the whole of FRG/Soviet trade might be increased in the future. 8. Abrasimov said there should be more cultural exchanges between Berlin and the Soviet Union, suggesting that there be scheduled every three months a major Soviet cultural event in Berlin. He quoted each of the Allied Ambassadors as having told him that they had no objection in principle to this. Brandt asked whether it was not easier to increase such exchanges in a setting that is not government-to-government, to which Abrasimov agreed, saying these matters are more easily arranged through private agencies. He suggested that in cultural and sport exchanges, a city-to-city arrangement, such as Moscow to Berlin, would be desirable. Brandt said he would discuss these thoughts with those in Berlin responsible for such matters. 9. At the close of the conversation, Abrasimov asked whether a meeting such as this could be held again under the same circumstances. Brandt said he could not answer the question, but volunteered the statement that he could not accept an invitation from Abrasimov to come to East Berlin. Brandt then made it clear that he was talking to Abrasimov in the latter’s capacity as a representative of one of the Four Powers responsible for Berlin and not as the Soviet Ambassador to East Germany. 10. Asked about the atmosphere of the talks, Spangenberg said Brandt had been very pleased. Abrasimov, he felt, was not talking as a diplomat but as a party man. It was possible for both of them to talk openly and in tough terms. Jokes had been exchanged. While this was not an atmosphere of confidence, it was not cool either. The mood was that of two political opponents having a frank talk. 11. Spangenberg said both participants agreed that it would be desirable to keep their meeting confidential and out of the press. He said that on the Senat side, only Senator Schuetz aside from himself knew of these developments. 12. Comment: The meeting went about as expected. Abrasimov sought to develop the anticipated themes and he endeavored to move toward a continuing contact with Brandt. 13. The account given us by Spangenberg leaves the impression of sparring and of feeling out mutual positions. It is hard to see how either Brandt or Abrasimov can expect much from the contact unless it is pursued, either in the same or in some other channel. Brandt’s equivocal reply to Abrasimov’s proposal for another meeting seems to suggest he would not be averse to continuing the contact himself. 14. It would appear that the next move is up to Brandt, either to approach the Allies regarding a further meeting or to let the matter rest. Spangenberg stated Brandt would elaborate on his personal reactions in a direct talk with the Allies.The Mission reported Brandt’s impressions of the talks in telegram 1089 from Berlin, May 24. (Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–USSR) We should then have a clearer idea of how he envisions the future of the relationship with Abrasimov, and hence what problems it may hold for us. Day 148. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, NATO 3 BEL (BR). Secret. Drafted by Finn and approved in S on July 23. The meeting was held at the residence of the British Ambassador. Brussels, June 6, 1966, 8 p.m. US/MC/3 UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE THIRTY-SEVENTH MINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL Brussels, Belgium—June 7–8, 1966 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary of State France Foreign Minister Couve de Murville United Kingdom Foreign Secretary Michael Stewart FRG Foreign Minister Schroeder (Other participants listed separately.)Not printed. SUBJECT East/West Relations—German Question SPD/SED Debates Foreign Secretary Stewart as host opened the meeting by asking Foreign Minister Schroeder about the forthcoming debates in Germany between the West German Socialists (SPD) and East German Communists (SED). Schroeder said there would be two debates—on July 14 in Chemnitz and on July 21 in Hanover. There will be full press-radio-T.V. coverage. The safety of the participants will be guaranteed. The idea for the debates was initiated by the SED in February, obviously in an effort to win over the SPD and split it from the other West German parties. Schroeder said that the SPD has no desire to establish common ground with the East German Communists. The hope of the SPD is to bring about greater freedom in the Soviet zone, to promote more exchanges of people, and possibly to win relaxing of the Communist order to shoot people at the Berlin Wall. The goal of the SED is to increase its prestige and promote the idea of two Germanys. Schroeder thought that the debates would stir great interest in East Germany. He thought the humanitarian aspects are particularly important, as they have been in the case of the Berlin passes agreement. Schroeder was therefore inclined on balance to see positive aspects. In summary, Schroeder thought there were three main aspects: the moral and psychological effect in East Germany; the advantage to West Germany in maintaining contacts with East Germany; and the international effect in obtaining political support for the FRG. The Foreign Minister said that the CDU, the ruling party in the FRG, had first doubted the advantage of these debates, but the government had given support from the outset, feeling that the socialists should receive its support. Secretary Rusk asked whether there would be only two debates or would they be continued. Schroeder said that it is his impression they should be restricted to two meetings. He doubted that the exchange should be continued indefinitely or that useful results would be obtained from continuation. Foreign Secretary Stewart thought that people outside of Germany would believe the FRG is taking advantage of an opportunity in these debates. He asked what other opportunities Schroeder saw at this time. Schroeder said that there would be some negative aspects to these debates, which would result in a certain upgrading of the East German Communists. He noted that there had apparently been close contact between the East German Communists and Polish Communists; he thought therefore there might be a certain side-advantage in Eastern Europe resulting from these debates. There might also be a lessening of rigidity in East Germany. Secretary Rusk said that these debates would be watched with great interest and that their potential effect might be considerable. Couve thought the debates would have a useful impact in the FRG and in the so-called GDR. There might also be a connection, he thought, with developments in Poland. Eastern Europe Secretary Rusk asked Couve about his recent visits to Eastern Europe. Couve visited Romania and Bulgaria April 25–30 and Poland May 18–21. Couve said he had not got the impression of anything very new. The situation differs in the various countries he had visited—Poland, Rumania, and Bulgaria. He said there is little in common between these three countries. The Rumanians are not Slavs and do not particularly like the Russians; they have territorial problems with the Russians. Bulgaria is in a different position; it gets along well with the Russians and does not like Greece and Turkey, with whom it has a common border. Poland relies on the Soviet Union, as it must because of its geographical position. Couve said that changes are currently taking place in all of these countries by contrast with the situation 10 to 15 years ago. They are more relaxed politically. They are better off economically except for Poland, which has an agricultural problem. Couve thought there was a drive in all of these countries to improve their relations with other countries. He thought that Poland in particular wanted to improve its relations with the U.S. Secretary Rusk said he believed there is a sentiment in Eastern Europe for closer relations with the nations of Western Europe. He noted that minority groups in the United States also have a keen interest in Eastern Europe, particularly the Polish and Serbo-Croatian minorities. de Gaulle Trip to Soviet Union de Gaulle visited the Soviet Union June 20–July 1. Foreign Secretary Stewart asked Couve about his next journey. Couve replied that he would accompany President de Gaulle to Russia for ten days, where they would visit Moscow and a number of cities including what is presently called Volgagrad. Couve said that as he had previously indicated to Foreign Secretary Stewart and as he would say at the NATO Ministerial Meeting, this visit is a stage in the French policy of developing more relations with the East in all fields. Couve said he was sure that nothing dramatic would happen on this trip. The French would expect to discuss the German question as well as other questions with the Soviets. The French would stress the need to develop relations between Eastern and Western Europe, thus creating a climate of détente. Couve did not think that an atmosphere of understanding could be created at this stage with the Soviets. The French would expect to discuss various problems and possible solutions that might eventually be reached. Secretary Rusk asked whether the Soviet Union had said anything about the topics it would like to discuss. Couve said the Soviets had given no particular indication of this. He added that France would probably sign a consular agreement and possibly a space agreement with the Soviets. In response to the Secretary’s question as to whether France would sign a communications satellite agreement with the Soviets, Couve said he did not think things would go this far. European Security and Tension Between East and West Stewart said that he thought it was good to make large and small scale approaches at these various questions outstanding between East and West but he wondered whether this approach got us any nearer to solving what the Soviets call the European security question. Couve said this is a real question. If however we desire settlements by peaceful means, then we must seek a climate for discussions where the understanding of the Soviet Government can become possible. Foreign Secretary Stewart agreed and said that it is more difficult for the Germans in this area than for the rest of us. Couve agreed that the problem of Germany is the real problem. Foreign Minister Schroeder said the problem which confronts us is to determine in whose favor these various approaches to the East work. Each side seeks its own advantage. The Communists seek to consolidate the status quo. The question therefore is whether these approaches help to overcome the division of Germany and Europe or do they perpetuate the division of Germany and the status quo. This is the reason why the FRG is reserved on the question of Europe security. Schroeder continued that it would be bad if the European security situation were abused to prevent solution of various outstanding problems. It would be useful if security considerations could progress in such a way as to help these other matters. The FRG feels that in public discussions of the security issue, it must be careful because of these various factors. He noted that the Soviets have put forth security proposals again and again since 1955 but not for the purpose of overcoming the division of Europe. The question now is whether a new beginning can usefully be undertaken or whether the same old controversies will continue. Couve indicated that he did not think the Soviet suggestion for a European security conferenceFor text of the May 17 Soviet proposal, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 395–402. was a serious proposal at this time. He said that a cautious development of relations could be useful and could lead to progress toward ending the division of Europe. France believes that ending the division of Europe is the only way to end the division of Germany. Couve then asked whether there is any alternative to this method. Foreign Minister Schroeder said that we are all agreed that we should try to have good relations with Eastern Europe and that this is useful. He said that the FRG has, despite its particular difficulties, established trade missions in Eastern Europe. He noted that the Rumanian Trade Minister had recently visited Bonn and been introduced to the Bundestag. Couve said that the French had not gone this far with a Communist Minister. Schroeder went on to say that the crucial question is to keep alive in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union an interest in overcoming the division of Germany under suitable conditions. We do not want to arouse Communist hopes that tension will be removed without any effort on their part; then they would have no incentive. The difficulty is to work for good relations on the one hand but nevertheless to show the Communists that they have an interest in improving the status quo. Schroeder emphasized that the main problem is the Soviet Union. Couve said he would like to make several points. First, tension has been characteristic of the past 20 years but France does not believe this is the way to bring about solutions. Second, we must be cautious and should not be led to believe that things can develop very fast even if we hope for rapid change. Third, developments now in progress mean that things will not stay where they are. We do not know where all this will bring us in relation to Germany. We do not know, for example, what will happen after the debates in Germany. Perhaps there will be a deadlock. Secretary Rusk said that perhaps there are two elements of faith on which we can rely. First, in free competition between institutions our free institutions have nothing to fear. Our tendency should be to break down barriers. Second, the 17 million people in Eastern Germany will want to be associated with other Germans and under free institutions. The Secretary said he agreed that the existence of tension has not advanced German reunification. The Secretary commented that although there is a formal appearance of status quo, the real situation can be changing rapidly. Changes are going on in Eastern Europe—in attitudes toward Germany, toward the economic institutions of Western Europe, and toward the institutions of the Communist countries themselves. The Secretary said that, for one example, he found it hard to believe that the Soviets could again resort to repression by armed force as they had done in Hungary. The Secretary added that no one is prepared to use force to change the situation. He said that tension has not helped German reunification and that we should give other things a chance. The Secretary cautioned that he was not talking about immediate changes or progress but at the same time he did not feel that we had to think in terms of decades. The Secretary said that he was not always sure what was meant by “division of Europe” although he clearly understood the division of Germany. Schroeder said that in effect they are the same thing since Germany is in the middle of Europe. He said he doubted the validity of the argument that tension has not helped. In the past conditions have not been such as to bring about changes; problems between West and East Europe have been very difficult. Nor will basic problems be solved simply by creating better relations between Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and the rest. The decisive fact, according to Foreign Minister Schroeder, is that Soviet divisions are on the Elbe. It may not be pleasant for the Soviets to keep them there, nor is it pleasant for the West to have to maintain its defensive military efforts. Schroeder said that Soviet interests will change and the Soviets may become interested in other arrangements acceptable to all concerned. He commented that the Soviets remain disturbed about the problem of Communist China. The Soviets have troubles in Europe and elsewhere. Schroeder felt that these problems had to be borne in mind when we talk about reducing tension. The Secretary recalled Soviet threats over Berlin in 1961 and the Cuban missile crisis in 1962. He said there had been no Soviet change of heart toward the West. Tension had been created by the other side. The Secretary commented that there are those who say that if the Vietnam effort were abandoned, there would be better relations between the United States and the Soviet Union. We could do the same in Berlin; then we might have a temporary honeymoon with the Soviets. Secretary Rusk said that we pursue actions to our own advantage. He referred to the moon treaty now under discussion; this falls in the pattern of the Antarctica Treaty. The Secretary also commented on the attitude in Congress toward East/West trade. Couve said that discussions with the other side do not imply accept-ance of their conditions. For agreement to be reached it must be acceptable to all concerned, and all have to make concessions. The Secretary added he was sure the Soviets are concerned about the problem of nearly a billion Chinese along their Asian border. Schroeder said that Khrushchev had been greatly concerned about this. Couve said the present Soviet leaders are also concerned. East German UN Application Schroeder said that an application for UN membership has been submitted in New York on behalf of East Germany and that we should give intensive thought to our strategy. Schroeder thought that Gromyko might also introduce a proposal on European security to the UNGA in its fall session. Secretary Rusk agreed that our representatives in New York should discuss this. The Secretary thought this did not present as much difficulty as the proposal for a world disarmament conference. He noted that the Communist Chinese had said they were not interested in taking part in a world disarmament conference, but a number of other Communist regimes might be involved including East Germany. Dr. Carstens said that East Germany may be aiming at observer status in the UN. The Secretary said that he did not think there was much interest in the UN in letting in East Germany. The meeting ended at 11 p.m. 149. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by McGhee and approved in S on August 12. The source text is marked “Part I of II.” Secretary Rusk visited Germany June 8–9 at the conclusion of the North Atlantic Council Ministerial Meeting in Brussels. Bonn, June 9, 1966, 10:25 a.m. SUBJECT Offset PARTICIPANTS U.S. The Secretary Ambassador McGhee FRG President Luebke Karl Carstens, First State Secretary, Foreign Office State Secretary Berger President Luebke opened by stating that in his judgment no great differences existed between Germany and the U.S. Germany had no issue to raise with respect to U.S. actions. He was, however, concerned about the offset payments. Was there some way this could be cut down? He had raised one question concerning the offset with Amb. McGhee (i.e. on June 7 concerning the overall U.S. favorable trade balance with Germany which he had been told was $800–900,000,000 a year. Embtel 4040).Telegram 4040 from Bonn, June 7, outlined discussions during the Ambassador’s meeting with President Luebke. (Ibid.) This had been answered the previous day in a letter from AmbassadorNot found. showing a trade balance on the order of $200,000,000 in the U.S. favor. Secretary Rusk said that he would be discussing the question of the offset later with the Chancellor. He did want the President to know, however, that our efforts in Viet-Nam had resulted in an important worsening of our balance of payments. It was for the general good that the stability of the dollar be maintained, and this required us to improve our balance of payments. President Luebke replied that Germany would continue to have “trade problems” which limit its overall foreign exchange earnings. Perhaps part of the offset could go to financing assist-ance to developing countries in which the U.S. has an interest. (Luebke is believed to have been confused on this point. His proposal would not protect Germany’s balance since we would expect payment for any assistance rendered.) Otherwise Germany must earn an additional 7 billion DM a year. (It is assumed that Luebke was referring to the approximate DM 4.0 billion estimated as the German current account deficit, plus the DM 2.6 billion offset, which would have to be compensated for by increased trade earnings if an overall balance is to be achieved.) The Secretary said in response that he hoped to be able to talk about how we could both deal with this problem in longer terms. The U.S. appreciates the prepayments which Germany has made on the offset. Both of our countries have balance of payments problems. We must roll up our sleeves and see what we can do about it. President Luebke assured the Secretary that the Germans would seek for all possible solutions. He had one idea, for example, in the form of a new anti-tank weapon—which could perhaps be developed in the U.S. on a cheap, mass produced basis for the defense of Germany. Since the Soviets have 40,000 tanks, the alliance would have a very considerable problem in stopping them in the event of attack. At the moment there is little to counter them. The President suggested a new type of mine might be developed which could be sown to stop tanks. The Secretary replied that as a former infantryman he had an equal interest in stopping tanks. He would talk with Secretary McNamara about the possibilities that might be afforded. He referred to the light-weight rockets and missiles which had been developed in connection with our Vietnamese operations. This may open up new developments which could be applicable in Germany. Perhaps helicopters could be used for spotting tanks. 150. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 30. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by McGhee and approved in S on August 12. The source text is marked “Part 5 of 11.” Parts 6 and 8 are printed as Documents 151 and 152. Part 2, a discussion of French and NATO issues, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 176. Bonn, June 9, 1966, 11:30 a.m. SUBJECT Loan Prepayment PARTICIPANTS U.S. The Secretary of State Ambassador George C. McGhee Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, Ambassador-at-Large J. Robert Schaetzel, Deputy Assistant Secretary, European Affairs FRG Chancellor Ludwig Erhard Gerhard Schroeder, Federal Minister of Foreign Affairs Ludger Westrick, Minister for Special Tasks Von Hase, Press Chief Karl Carstens, First State Secretary, Foreign Office Horst Osterheld, Foreign Affairs Adviser The Secretary made some humorous introductory remarks to the effect that the U.S. was often in the position of asking its friends for help. Now, because of our balance of payments difficulties, we are asking the Germans to prepay 214 million dollars on the GARIOA (Government and Relief in Occupied Areas) and Marshall Plan Loans. Our balance of payments had been bad for the first quarter. He realized that the Germans had balance of payments problems of their own; however, he hoped that they would give careful consideration to this request. The Chancellor replied that the Germans, of course, had balance of payments problems of their own—more serious, he considered, than those of the U.S. Their deficit would, over the next three years, average a billion dollars a year. It was, however, in keeping with our friendship that the Germans consider any proposal we make. 151. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 30. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by McGhee and approved in S on August 12. The source text is marked “Part 6 of 11.” Parts 5 and 8 are printed as Documents 150 and 152. Part 2, a discussion of French and NATO issues, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, pp. 412–414. Bonn, June 9, 1966, 11:30 a.m. SUBJECT U.S.-German Relations PARTICIPANTS [Here follows the same list of participants as Document 150.] The Chancellor would like to ask one thing—that we not talk about acute issues between us in public. He referred specifically to the question of whether there would be a reduction of American forces in the absence of full offset payments. The German press is unfortunately not yet mature. It tends to distort such issues. In fact, he would prefer no public discussion at all of such matters. The Secretary replied that he would report what the Chancellor had said to the President. To be quite frank, we have not yet discovered ourselves how to keep Government officials from talking. The President greatly values the friendship of the Chancellor, and would not wish to do anything that disturbed him. Secretary Rusk thought it would be desirable for the Chancellor and the President to correspond with each other more often—particularly if they are troubled by important matters. He knows this to be the President’s wish. 152. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 30. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by McGhee and approved in S on August 12. The source text is marked “Part 8 of 11.” Parts 5 and 6 are printed as Documents 150 and 151. Part 2, a discussion of French and NATO issues, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, pp. 412–414. Bonn, June 9, 1966, 11:30 a.m. SUBJECT Viet-Nam PARTICIPANTS [Here follows the same list of participants as Document 150.] The Chancellor assured the Secretary of continued German support of American policy in Viet-Nam. Secretary Rusk replied that the President greatly appreciates the Chancellor’s support on South Viet-Nam. He could tell the Chancellor that opposition is growing in America to U.S. policy in South Viet-Nam—however, not for a weaker but for a strong line. The Chancellor asked whether China is likely to come into the conflict. Secretary Rusk replied that he was unable to give a direct answer to this question. He did, however, want to point out that it was a question not applicable only to one side. All the Secretary could say is that we are committed to doing what is required in South Viet-Nam. The Chancellor asked whether South Viet-Nam will eventually be able to organize itself politically to carry on the conflict. The Secretary replied that there are many divisive and conflicting interests within South Viet-Nam. They are, however, united in the determination not to be defeated by the Viet Cong. There is every prospect now for elections in September which will result in the creation of a body which could represent all the various elements in South Viet-Nam seeking the defeat of the Viet Cong. 153. Telegram From the Mission in Berlin to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. No time of transmission is on the source text; the telegram was received at 3:06 p.m. Berlin, June 14, 1966. 1160. Department pass Bonn 991 immediate from Berlin.A note at the end of the source text indicates that the telegram was not sent to Bonn. Reference: Department telegram 3392.Telegram 3392 to Berlin, June 12, expressed concern with press misreporting of pledges allegedly made by Secretary Rusk to Erhard. (Ibid.) Department eyes only Secretary; Bonn eyes only Sutterlin from Ambassador McGhee. 1. I can understand your surprise and concern that Chancellor Erhard would attribute to you a statement in your meeting with him held on June 9th which you did not in fact make. The almost verbatim minutes of this meeting which I sent you clearly indicate that you made no statement on the level of US forces or the relationship between this level and German offset payments. Despite this the official transcript of Chancellor Erhard’s press conference June 10 states as follows: “I specifically received yesterday in my talk with the American Secretary of State the assurance that the presence of the American troops in Europe, and particularly in Germany, is in itself an obligation and task which cannot be directly linked to German purchases of weapons in America—no matter how desirable such purchases naturally are, particularly in light of the burdens which the US must bear because of the war in Viet-Nam.” 2. The substance of this statement was reported to the Department on June 10 (Embtel 4095)Not found. and it is this statement which was quoted by the New York Times article of June 11. This article was carried by the European Saturday-Sunday edition under a Reuters byline rather than Tom Hamilton’s. In my own background briefing after your meeting I made it clear to the American press, particularly in response to questions by Hamilton, that the troop level issue had not arisen; no one raised the question of linkage and I did not volunteer it. Hamilton’s story of the 9th was well within the guidance and did not attribute to you the remarks referred to by Erhard. 3. I can offer no explanation for Erhard’s action except that he and his government have consistently sought to put the best face possible on the question of troop levels and any possible linkage with the offset. Since you have consistently been quoted as denying that there would be any substantial reduction in US forces (your press conference of May 27)For text, see Department of State Bulletin, June 13, 1966, pp. 918–925. and have not confirmed the offset linkage either when approached by Amb Knappstein in Washington or when the question was raised by the Chancellor in your meeting of June 9, the Chancellor apparently felt that he was at least expressing your views in quoting what you in fact did not say at that time. This is of course not cricket, however, I don't believe it results from any Machiavellian type of gamesmanship on the Chancellor’s part. He values his relationship with the US and particularly with Pres. Johnson and with you too highly for this. He does, however, have a problem which arises from the constant spate of news stories emanating from Washington threatening troop withdrawal of various counts including a proportional withdrawal if the offset is not made. It has become generally known that Sec McNamara made such a statement to Von Hassel during their recent meeting, though this has never been confirmed by any other high US official or publicly by McNamara even in his statement of June 11th.For text, see Public Statements of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, 1966, vol. 7, p. 2363. The closest thing to an official denial is that reported by Under SecDef Vance in his background press conference June 9. (USCINCEUR 092105Z)Not found. 4. Quite frankly, I don't think that anything can be done about this issue until we can come up with one US policy on the offset. It is not credible that there be a separate McNamara policy on such an important issue. On the other hand, the fact that McNamara has such an attitude continues to boil up in the German press, creating embarrassment for the German Government and handicapping us in the excution of our overall policy here. In fact, the McNamara statement of June 11 is precisely what the Chancellor asked that we not do, i.e. continue to air the question in public—which assures that it will be reverberating in the press here just as the Germans start their critical bilateral talks with the French on the troop issue. 5. It is one thing to put strong pressure on the German Government to meet the offset privately, which in the past has been reasonably effective. The President should of course do this when he sees the Chancellor in July or August, although I would hope that he would, as in the past, stop short of threats of proportionate reduction if the offset is not met. It is quite a separate thing, however, to make threatening or critical public statements focusing on what is, from the German standpoint, such a vital issue. McNamara’s statement of June 11, although it does not contain the direct threat of proportional withdrawal, certainly falls into this category—particularly the statement “I never consider the termination clause until we are ready to invoke it.” You can be assured that this statement, which has no relevance to the offset issue as I understand it, will be with us for some time. The lead article in Die Welt today, which is being reported separately is “McNamara’s heavy hand.” 6. As regards the level of US forces here, I believe that we should all stick with your statement of May 27 to the effect that “Our forces will remain there as long as they are needed and wanted” and that—“We do not anticipate withdrawing any major units from NATO.” We should not, I believe, elaborate on this or give any impression of impending change—unless or until a final decision for such change is made. Calhoun 154. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 10. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Puhan. The meeting was held at the White House. Washington, June 16, 1966, 1 p.m. SUBJECT President’s Conversation with Dr. Barzel PARTICIPANTS The President Mr. Walt W. Rostow, Special Assistant to the President Mr. Francis M. Bator, Deputy Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Mr. Alfred Puhan, Director, Office of German Affairs, State Department Dr. Rainer Barzel, First Deputy Chairman, CDU/CSU Party, Germany Heinrich Knappstein, FRG Ambassador Mrs. Geithner, Interpreter, German Embassy The President welcomed Dr. Barzel and hoped he would enjoy his stay here. Barzel expressed his gratification to the President for seeing him a second time.See Document 97. He explained the purpose of his current trip, namely to give some lectures at the German Embassy today and in New York tomorrow. He said he had good meetings also with Jewish organizations. The President referred to the observations Dr. Barzel intended to make on German reunification and said he had asked his staff to give them careful study. The President assured Barzel of his deep concern for the continued security of Europe and the success of the German people. On NATO, he wanted Dr. Barzel to know that we are concerned, but that we are not picking a fight with de Gaulle; we viewed de Gaulle’s actions more in sorrow than in anger. The President said he looked forward with great pleasure to seeing Chancellor Erhard again. Dr. Barzel said he had received a telegram from Chancellor Erhard asking him to convey warm greetings to the President. The Chancellor said in his telegram that he too looked forward to the meeting with the President. The Chancellor wished especially to discuss with the President the offset problem and would be bringing with him some definite proposals of his own. The Chancellor also hoped that discussion of this subject could be kept out of the public domain. The President said he agreed, that it was not right to try one’s case in the newspapers. He would do his part to see that such matters not leak and hoped that Chancellor Erhard would do the same. Barzel referred to his comments regarding the Great Society, made when he saw the President in 1965. He noted with approval the trip of the FRG Minister of Health, Dr. Schwarzhaupt, to the United States and Secretary Udall to Germany. He said we should undertake more cooperative efforts like this. The President expressed his appreciation for what the Germans had done in the domestic field, commenting on the Peace Corps and the achievements in the material resources field. He said he would like to see some of the fine German virtues transplanted to other countries. Their contribution to the shaping of our society had been great. The President referred in this connection to his own grandmother of German stock from whom he had learned the virtues of prudence and thrift. He said he didn't want to tell Secretary McNamara this, but if he succeeded in balancing the federal budget, he would attribute this success to his own grandmother. Barzel said the Germans recognized and understood fully the big job the United States was doing. Germans valued the U.S. keeping its commitments. Barzel said Berliners appreciated this in particular and would like to tell the President so personally in Berlin. Mr. Rostow commented that Dr. Barzel had earlier attributed the growing moderation in Asia and Latin America to what we did in Viet-Nam. The President said we thought the fruits of our efforts in Viet-Nam have been, are and will be reflected in the attitudes and conduct of other nations. He referred to what an ambassador of a powerful country had said to him recently after seeing Castro. The Cuban dictator saw no point in exhausting his treasury to undermine the rest of the Americas if the Russians run out on him as they did over missiles, while the Americans do what they did in the Dominican Republic. The President hoped other aggressors or would-be aggressors get the message. The President said we would have been guilty of deceit and hypocrisy if we had allowed North Viet-Nam to swallow South Viet-Nam and Thailand and Malaysia. We have served notice that we intend to stop aggression. We would like the Germans and Britons to take note of that and say so. We would like moral encouragement from our friends. The President said he thinks others ought to stand up to be counted. Barzel said he was greatly impressed with the President’s remarks. He said Germans did want to make a greater contribution in the humanitarian field. The President assured Barzel that we would keep our commitments. He stated that while he did not share the Chancellor’s and the general German view that, for the common defense, we need all the troops we now have in Germany, he appreciates the psychological factors involved in cutting back. He thought, moreover, that Erhard was tough enough to convince him to leave them there, but added that the Germans must reimburse us for our military foreign exchange expenditures. We have an agreement—we will keep it; the Chancellor has an agreement—we have no doubt he will keep it. And we should not waste too much time talking about it. Barzel promised to carry the President’s view to Erhard and to help Erhard in Parliament so he could cope with this problem. The President reiterated his great confidence in the Germans, in their understanding of financial matters and of U.S. problems. He asked Barzel to tell Erhard it was easier for him to get a boy back home than a dollar. The President concluded by saying that he wanted Barzel to reassure Erhard that Erhard would always be kept well informed about any U.S. plans which touched German interests. The President said he would continue to share his confidence with Erhard as long as he represented the U.S. government. 155. Letter From Chancellor Erhard to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, Germany, Chancellor Erhard, vol. 3. Confidential. The source text is marked “Translation.” Bonn, July 5, 1966. Dear Mr. President, Recently we had the visit of Secretary of State Dean Rusk.See Documents 149–152. I had a long talk with him and found to my great pleasure that full agreement was discernible concerning the big political issues. Herr Schroder also told me about the very good co-operation that existed between him and Mr. Rusk at the Brussels NATO Conference.See Document 148. A summary of the Rusk-Schroeder discussions was transmitted to the Department of State in telegram Secto 48 from Brussels, June 6. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 GER W–US) In this difficult phase I feel that it is of decisive importance for the fourteen NATO partners who want to continue the alliance in its present integrated form to take a clear and firm position. Only then we do have a chance, as I hope, to come to satisfactory results with France although I do by no means underestimate the difficulties of the forthcoming negotiations. The decisive point is—and this, I believe, is the view of all NATO partners—that France should undertake clear commitments for an emergency regarding her troops stationed in Germany. In respect of the question of the future development of East-West relations the German and the United States Governments also hold the same views—which, incidentally, appear to be shared by the French Government as well as far as we are able to gather from reports available so far on the talks conducted by the French President in the Soviet Union. We should seize every reasonable opportunity to improve relations with the east European countries. In this connexion, however, I wish to assure you that any European talk without the decisive co-operation of the United States will be neither conceivable nor acceptable to the Federal Government. Our peace note of 25 March 1966 is an attempt to prepare the ground for an understanding. We are happy to note that our NATO partners and many other Governments have shown a very positive attitude towards it. The reaction of the east European countries is, as could be expected, predominantly a negative one, although there are indications that some of them, including the Soviet Union itself, are interested in our proposal to make declarations on the non-use of force. The disarmament negotiations in Geneva which have been resumed meet with our interest and full attention. We believe that the efforts to achieve a non-proliferation agreement should be continued, but that—as is provided in the American draft—the possibility must not be excluded of building up in the future a joint integrated nuclear force among those partners of the NATO alliance who are prepared to do so. Finally I talked with Mr. Rusk about the Kennedy Round and the foreign exchange offset for the U.S. troops stationed in Germany. I am pleased to note that the preparations for the Kennedy Round have made good progress at the latest Council meeting in Brussels. The Council of Ministers of the European Economic Community has now issued mandates to the Commission concerning all hitherto open sectors of the industrial field. The offset problem undoubtedly confronts us with difficult questions. We shall, however, do what is possible for us to find a solution acceptable also to the United States. In this connexion, however, consideration should also be given to payments and services other than the mere purchase of weapons and military equipment. In my view, which I hope is shared by you, this set of problems should, however, not be linked up with the question of the future presence in Germany of U.S. troops. This would all too easily give rise to an approach that would not do justice to the friendship between our two countries and to our common task. I also spoke with Mr. Rusk about a meeting with youA memorandum of the portion of their conversation dealing with this question is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 30. and told him that I shall be happy to see you again. In view of my own plans a date around 8 September would be most convenient to me, but, needless to say, I shall accept any other date which you may suggest. I know only too well—and I feel with you—what heavy responsibility rests on your shoulders just at the present time. m.p. With best friendly regards, Yours very sincerely, Ludwig Erhard Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature and an indication that Erhard signed the original. 156. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Limdis. Bonn, July 7, 1966, 1835Z. 286. For the Secretary, Under Secretary, and Asst Sec Leddy. Subject: The German agenda. In preparation for the forthcoming meetings between Sec McNamara and DefMin Von Hassel scheduled for July 23–24, and between Chancellor Erhard and President Johnson probably on August 24–25, I believe it would be helpful to review the principal outstanding issues between the Germans and ourselves—in order to establish how they might best be dealt with. 1. Offset. The present single greatest source of friction between ourselves and the Germans, which could be even greater in the future, is the offset agreement. Although the Germans have a year remaining to complete their agreed payments for the current two-year period (i. e., ending July 1, 1967) they are behind on pro-rata payments, even including the promised DM 1 billion pre-payment, and badly behind on orders. This has led to a natural apprehension on the part of responsible officials in the US Govt, whose consequent actions have been construed by the Germans as casting doubt on their commitment to meet their current obligations and as attempts to force them to buy weapons which they consider unnecessary. Strong German press attacks have been made against Sec McNamara and strong political attacks against Von Hassel and even Chancellor Erhard. The current issue of Stern has an article entitled “Why don't you retire, Mr. Minister?” CDU Deputy Birrenbach told Amb Foster on July 2 that this issue could bring down the Chancellor’s government.For McGhee’s comments on William C. Foster’s visit, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 183. Our immediate objective in this circumstance should, I believe, be to utilize the two meetings in such a way as to: A) Reestablish an easy working basis of confidence and rapport between us such as existed at the time of the McNamara/Von Hassel Washington meeting of June 1964. For our part we should, I believe, be willing to make it clear that we have confidence that the Germans will meet the current payments offset. We should urge the Germans to include provision for the offset in their 1967 budget and continue our efforts to find weapons that the Germans will be willing to purchase without undue pressure. We should in public statements on this subject concentrate on the harmony and constructive aspects of our defense relationship, which are indeed very great. B) We should, at the same time, lay the groundwork for the negotiation of a new offset agreement, since the beginning of a new orders period is only some six months away. We know that the Germans will attempt to better the present agreement, certainly through the inclusion of other than military items and possibly through a scaledown of the total. Under the assumption that the US has postponed action on a multilateral offset approach we should, I believe, determine as a matter of policy how far we are willing to go to meet the German desires and initiate negotiations. These should, however, be conducted at least at the Ministerial level since they will involve matters of great political sensitivity—considerations going beyond those which have in the past been discussed at the Sullivan/Kuss level. My more complete views of the future of the offset are fully set forth in Embtel 4160,Not found. which I consider still relevant. 2. US troop levels. We should, I believe, during the forthcoming meetings, make very clear US policy on the level of our forces in Germany and Europe, both with regard to any possible US unilateral withdrawal or as a complement to some future Soviet withdrawal. German doubts on the former have always been with us. Uncertainties concerning the latter have lingered since Sec McNamara’s testimony before the Senate Committee on June 21.See U.S. Senate, Subcommittee on National Security and International Operations, Committee on Government Operations, The Atlantic Alliance, Part VI (Washington, 1966), pp. 186–219. My full views on this question are set forth in Embtel 165.Telegram 165 from Bonn, July 5, commented on reciprocal troop withdrawals from Europe. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 US) In short, since there is to the best of my knowledge no present plan to reduce the level of US forces, we should continue to state this clearly. We should also point out that, although we hope that some day we will be able to reduce US force levels in Europe, complementary withdrawals are at present a moot question. Any Soviet withdrawal would have to be analyzed carefully by NATO itself, both in its political and military context, before we could determine what complementary action if any could be taken. 3. ANF-MLF-non-proliferation. We should, I believe, also take advantage of these meetings to make it clear to the Germans that we do not wish to remove forever the possibility of a “hardware solution” to their nuclear sharing problem. The discussions we have had with other governments, however, since Chancellor Erhard’s meeting last December with the President,See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 119. together with the development of Congressional attidues in our own country, make the prospects for such a solution look very dim. We hope, therefore, that the Germans will be content for the foreseeable future with participation in a successor organization to the McNamara Committee. My own views with respect to how this issue can best be handled are fully developed in Embtel 083.Dated July 2. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 12 NATO) In essence, I believe that a new committee of limited membership should be formed—with broad powers in planning and decision—recommending, including not only NATO nuclear forces but our strategic forces. If this change of emphasis can be accomplished there is, I believe, some chance that a non-proliferation agreement, which I consider a very important objective, can eventually be achieved. Otherwise, the Germans may some day find themselves in the embarrassing position of being the principal “hold-out” to a non-proliferation agreement. 4. US financial demands on Germany. My views in this regard are fully set forth in Embtel 221.In telegram 221 from Bonn, July 6, McGhee expressed concern about U.S. demands for financial support. (Ibid., FN 12 GER W–US) In short, I believe that we should set a strict and co-ordinated priority on the demands we make on the German Govt with respect to the use of their funds. Our priorities should, I believe, be as follows: a) offset agreement; b) pre-payment of US loans; c) suitable overall level of aid budget and new obligational authorities; d) only in rare cases should we press for specific changes in German aid allocations to particular countries or international institutions. These priorities should, I believe, guide our discussions on related issues during the upcoming meetings. 5. NATO crisis. There is at this time little if any difference between the Germans and ourselves as to the actions which will have to be taken by the NATO as a result of the recent French initiatives. At some stage, however, there could well be a difference as to how to deal with French troops in Germany. When this negotiation comes to its “crunch,” which will presumably occur in Paris between the 14 and the French, Erhard will be under strong pressure from within the CDU/CSU to keep the French troops here under almost any conditions. One key issue in the negotiation will hinge around the question of the “automaticity” of French troops coming under NATO command. We should, I believe, in both upcoming meetings, stiffen the Germans against this eventuality. We should point out the danger to the integrity of NATO and its integrated command—in the event the French are able to retain their privileges without assuming clear obligations. We should point out that if there were to occur a disintegration of integrated planning and command, we would have to re-examine our NATO commitment to station troops in Europe. We will amplify our views on this question in a subsequent telegram.Not further identified. 6. German reunification. I do not believe that there is any chance that a reunification initiative would have any hope for success at this time. Our views as to how to handle the situation should the Germans raise the question are still as stated in our memorandum of September 27, 1965.Attachment to Document 130. We should, I believe, in the upcoming meeting between the Chancellor and the President, make clear to the Germans our continued interest in reunification and our willingness to consider at any time any proposal they might wish to make. We will be glad to see Four-Power (Western) discussion of the subject initiated—perhaps in a new forum created for this purpose. We will be glad to consider the possibility of a Four-Power commission of experts (including Soviets) plus German observers, which could be used as an umbrella for mixed (GDR-FRG) commissions. We can, however, offer the Germans no hope that this or any other proposal would be accepted by the Soviets. 7. Eastern Europe. The German peace note of last March was symptomatic of their perceptible movement to the formulation of a more positive policy toward Eastern Europe. There are hopeful signs that the FRG intends to follow up this initiative: it plans to raise again the proposal for an exchange of declarations with the USSR on renunciation of force, and, according to Carstens (Embtel 4302),Not found. is seeking a way further to soften its position on the Munich Pact. In order to keep up the momentum, we should encourage action on these two points during the Chancellor’s visit to Washington. In particular we should urge the Germans, without being too specific, to soften their present facade on the Oder-Neisse and Heimatrecht-self determination issues. We will amplify our views on this question in a subsequent telegram. McGhee 157. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Confidential. Repeated to Berlin, Moscow, Paris, and London. Bonn, July 13, 1966, 1815Z. 549. Subj: Berlin clause. Refs: (A) Bonn 3978; (B) Bonn 3865.Telegram 3978 from Bonn, June 1, reported further on the German desire to reopen the Berlin claims discussion. (Ibid.) Telegram 3865 from Bonn, May 23, reported German officials' desire to open this issue. (Ibid.) 1. The FonOff (Deputy Assistant Secretary Ruete) yesterday called in the DCM’s of the three Embassies to present a memorandumTransmitted to the Department of State in airgram A–58, July 15. (Ibid.) revising last year’s German proposal for a negative Berlin clause. Ruete said that the proposal should not be considered sacrosanct as it now stands. He hoped that the three powers would study it carefully and present their views on it to the FonOff within a reasonable period of time. 2. Ruete explained that the same reasons which had led FonMin Schroeder to present the negative Berlin clause proposal at the Quadripartite NATO dinner on May 10, 1965See Document 111. still applied. The unfortunate leak of the proposal to the press had caused the FonOff to delay a year before pursuing it. However, the Germans had had indications from various East European Communist countries that, while a specific Berlin clause was unacceptable, Berlin could de facto be included in trade agreements and possibly other agreements as well. In view of these indications, the FonOff thought it worthwhile to attempt to bridge the gap between the German requirement of a specific Berlin clause and the Communist inability to accept one by the device of the negative Berlin clause. 3. The German proposal as redrafted makes the following recommendations. (A) The govts of the Three Powers and the Allied Kommandatura (AK) Berlin would agree by amending BKC/L (52) 6 of May 21, 1952For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 372–374. so that, even without a special Berlin clause or an appropriate declaration, Berlin is in principle considered to be included in any international agreement concluded by the FRG with another state. (B) This would not affect the right of the AK Berlin to object in individual cases to the inclusion of Berlin in international agreements. In order to safeguard this AK right in theory and practice, the Germans suggest: (1) Where time permits, each agreement be submitted through the Senat to the AK in the same way as has hitherto been done under the provisions of BKC/L (52) 6. If the AK objected to the inclusion of Berlin, the Fed Govt would make a statement to the Contracting Party (the depository power in the case of multilateral agreements) to the effect that Berlin was not included. (2) When time does not permit the use of normal procedure, the Fed Govt would, upon conclusion of an agreement, make a special declaration reserving the right to declare later that the agreement should not apply to Berlin. (3) Obviously the normal procedure is preferable in the case of Communist states. However, if the Fed Govt should need to conclude an agreement on short notice, the govt would send the text of the proposed agreement to the three Embassies in Bonn whose concurrence, if obtained, would be binding on the AK. 4. Elsewhere, the memorandum rejects the idea of a German declaration, negative or positive, to be made upon the conclusion of an agreement stating that it shall apply to Berlin. However worded, this procedure would in all likelihood be resisted by a Communist Contracting Party with the result that the dissent would come to light. 5. Full text of the memorandum follows by priority airgram. Comment 6. Obviously, the German proposal will require careful study before a decision on it can be reached. In our view, an overriding consideration in any such examination should be to attempt to find a way to accommodate the German desire to move ahead in its Eastern policy which is now stalled over the Berlin clause issue. We feel we should defer to the German estimate that this procedure may be implicitly acceptable to the European Communist countries who, by letting it pass unchallenged, could hope to reap the benefits of trade and other agreements with the FRG which are now denied to them. 7. On first heading, it appears to us that the German proposal meets the requirements of Allied sovereignty in Berlin except possibly in respect to para 3 B (3) above. We are dubious about this proposal which will require the AK to accept, without examination, decisions made by the three Embassies under extreme time pressure. 8. It is apparent that if the Communist countries take issue with this procedure, it will have to be dropped as a false start. However, even if the Communist countries let it pass, the British in particular are likely to question whether the procedure really reflects the intention of both Contracting Parties to allow an agreement to apply to Berlin. We know from previous conversations with the British that they are opposed in principle to any procedure for applying treaties to Berlin which smacks of automaticity. Nevertheless, it seems to us that the Communist countries will always have the option open to them of declaring that they do not intend an agreement to apply to Berlin. If they fail to exercise this option, we can reasonably argue that in fact they do not object to the application of an agreement to Berlin, particularly if in informal soundings during the course of negotiations the Germans have determined that a specific Communist country is willing to accept the de facto application of the agreement in Berlin. 9. We agreed with the reps of the other Embassies that Bonn was the most suitable locale for discussion of the proposal. We suggest, therefore, that Berlin comment on the proposal upon receipt of the full text while we shall await the Dept’s views before commencing tripartite discussions here.In telegram 13901 to Berlin, July 22, the Department of State replied that it concurred with the Embassy recommendation, adding: “German memorandum sufficiently sensitive to Allied requirements to serve as basis for tripartite discussions.” The telegram gave a positive evaluation of the “negative Berlin clause.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B) McGhee 158. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 10. Secret. A note on the source text reads: “Fr. Secy of Defense. Recd Pres. ofc 7–27–66, 7 p.m.” A handwritten “L” on the source text indicates that the President saw the memorandum. Washington, July 27, 1966. Here are some of the points of special interest that emerged from my conversations with Defense Minister Von Hassel in Paris on Monday and Tuesday:July 25 and 26. McNamara was in Paris for the Ministerial Meeting of the NATO Nuclear Planning Working Group. A report on the meeting is in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 189. 1. German budget. The German cabinet on Monday apparently decided on a 1967 defense budget of 18.5 billion DM, an amount almost 2 billion below the Ministry’s original estimates of requirements. The austerity of this figure results from the combination of an apparent inability to increase revenues and political pressures to devote more expenditures to social welfare. (This 18.5 billion is totally inadequate to finance the qualitative improvements in the German forces which are required if they are to be relied on to fight alongside us; it follows, too, that the 18.5 billion is totally inadequate to cover the German-US offset for 1967. Germany—which spends about 5 per cent of her GNP on defense as compared with our more than 8.5 per cent—made an almost 50 per cent increase in military expenditures between 1961 and 1963, but has leveled off since then. Taking account of inflation, military expenditures for 1966 will be one-eighth lower than in 1963; and expenditures in 1967 may not be much more.) 2. German-UK offset. The British are trying to get a full offset of their roughly 1 billion DM foreign exchange drain attributable to their forces in Germany. The Germans now cover 300 million, 100 million of which is in non-military purchases. The Germans do not propose to accede to the British request. They are proposing that a UK-German team find ways to cut the fat out of the British deployments (perhaps 10–15,000 men). Among the measures to be considered is basing of UK aircraft in Britain instead of in Germany. The Germans think that by such savings, the British can cut the 1 billion DM drain to perhaps 660 million. The Germans offer to cover half of that remainder—i.e., roughly what they are covering now. 3. German-US offset. The Germans state flatly that they cannot agree to a full US offset for 1967–68. Von Hassel was talking in terms that sounded very much like their proposal to the UK (above)—of an undertaking to offset 50 per cent with best efforts made to buy more than that. It was clear that Von Hassel was under instructions from the Chancellor and that he was expecting the Chancellor, with his small military budget already in concrete, to settle the offset matter with you in September. Until the “French problem” in NATO is over, the Germans will not be ready to propose to us one thing they proposed to the UK—the establishment of a US-German team to see how US forces in Germany can be cut without affecting combat capability. (I made clear that the United States does not want Germany to buy anything from us that they do not need or that they can buy better or cheaper elsewhere, but that it was perfectly clear that Germany needs a good deal of equipment to bring their forces up to proper standards. I also said we would be ready when they are to join in joint efforts to trim our forces in Germany.) 4. “Hardware.” The Germans want to keep on talking about hardware, but specifically suggested, in connection with hardware as an item on the agenda of the “McNamara Committee,” that discussion of that subject come “later.” 5. “McNamara Committee.” The Germans support making permanent the small “McNamara Committee” of Defense Ministers to discuss nuclear planning matters. They want to avoid getting crosswise with their allies with respect to limiting membership on the Group however, and they want to avoid a “constitutional” clash with the French when the North Atlantic Council must act on the proposal. They obviously favor continuation of such a Group. 6. “Unprovoked attack.” Von Hassel reported a conversation with French Defense Minister Messmer which took place during General de Gaulle’s visit to Bonn. According to Messmer, the French would be “with us” in the event of trouble in Berlin. In the event of “escalation of the war in Vietnam,” Messmer thought the Soviets would be deterred by NATO power from attacking in the West; but, if the Soviets did attack in such circumstances, the French would decide at the time whether to participate. 7. French troops in Germany. The Germans believe that the first problem is to find a mission for the French forces in Germany and that this should not be difficult “since five of the six brigades are in reserve status anyway.” Despite the fact that it has been made clear to them that France will not join in the “presumption” that she will be with the Alliance in case of war (see above), the Germans want the French forces to remain in Germany. Von Hassel said it would be “a great shock to both countries if the French troops left.” He concluded that his own view was that the French forces would remain in Germany. Robert S. McNamara 159. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 9. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. A notation on the source text indicates the memorandum was received at 11:45 a.m. and that the President saw it. Washington, July 28, 1966, 10:30 a.m. Mr. President: These two [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]reports on German politics give a pretty clear picture of what Erhard is up against.Attached but not printed are two July 12 reports. 1. Both Strauss and Barzel are out to remove him, soon or late. 2. Strauss is trying to push Erhard and Schroeder into a Moscow trip in which they will fail. He then would like to see Germany look to “Europe”—which means France, essentially—for greater nuclear status. 3. Barzel, on the other hand, looks to inflaming the German unity issue and using Erhard’s inability to make progress as a way of forcing him out. He, too, looks to a reduction in U.S.-German relations and an intensification of Germany’s relations with the French. All such reports tend to present a somewhat unbalanced view of a politician’s position. In my view, neither Strauss nor Barzel would, in fact, radically reduce the U.S.-German connection. But they do suggest the rise of assertive nationalism in Germany already evident in the way they are handling the offset issue. These reports should also be read against the background of rising strength in the Social Democratic opposition to the Erhard coalition. We shall, of course, take readings on Erhard’s political position closer to the time of his visit. These reports are an interim picture of the kind of trouble he has in his own political family. Walt 160. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Nodis. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Passed to the White House. Bonn, August 12, 1966, 1821Z. 1834. For Under Secretary from Hillenbrand. Ref: State 26106.Telegram 26106 to Bonn, August 12, requested “your latest personal estimate of the problems of the 1967 German defense budget and offset.” (Ibid.) 1. In terms of any realistic assessment, I must judge the offset prospects to be bleak. The base statistics available at this time indicate an estimated German need for funds in the amount of $705 million during the first six months of 1967 if the payments part of the current offset agreement is to be met. This is on the assumption that the Federal Government, with the assistance of the Bundesbank, will be able to borrow $250 million on a short or medium term basis, to make the special payment before the end of 1966 to which the Germans are committed. Present German thinking is that the defense budget for fiscal year 1967 will be between 18.0 and 18.5 billion DM, although there will be heavy pressure on Erhard to pare this down further in the process of squeezing the overall budget down to the DM 74 billion which the Cabinet has fixed as the maximum permissible (the squeeze will be even more intense if the Federal Government loses a further billion DM or so in the tussle with the Laender over the percentage of income tax revenue to be retained by Bonn). 2. Our best guess is that, given a DM 19 billion defense budget for 1967, the Federal Government could probably not raise more than DM 1.6 billion ($400 million) for offset payments in 1967. (This would essentially represent re-payment against anticipated orders. The recorded total of orders through June 30, 1966 for the two-year orders period ending December 31, 1966 is only $630 million.) Even after such a payment the Germans would be some $300 million short of the offset total of $1350 for the two-year payments period ending June 30, 1967. There would be nothing left for payments on any new offset agreement during the last six months of 1967. Although there are clearly political and financial limits to borrowing from the market through the Bundesbank, this source might be used to raise further amounts on a short or medium term loan basis during 1967 (Bundesbank approval would have to be obtained), to meet the $300 million shortfall and possibly to provide some funds for a new agreement. 3. The essential problem, as I see it, is not the general state of the German economy which appears to be taking a turn for the better (Bonn 1812)Dated August 11. (Department of State, Central Files, E 2 GER W) but the built-in rigidities of the German revenue and budgetary systems. It is, of course, of great political importance to Chancellor Erhard that he successfully steer through the legislature his economic stabilization bill, and concern about the overheated German economy and pockets of distress such as the Ruhr is strongly influencing the general atmosphere within which the budget is being discussed. The fact remains that even without this concern the budgetary possibilities of the government would be severely limited. The only immediate real solution would lie in a tax increase (including income tax), but Erhard’s weakened political position makes this seem impracticable. Over a longer period a reduction of subsidies and strict control over increases in social programs would permit rising revenues again to provide more for defense. 4. It is clear that even a vigorous Presidential message plus follow-through would not change this basic situation. It might however help protect the defense budget from further cuts—perhaps on a scale of $100 million. What we had in mind in Bonn 1600Dated August 5. (Ibid., FN 15 GER W) was the desirability of getting something on the record before the late-August Cabinet discussions at which the Defense Ministry share of the overall budget total will be fixed. The language which we suggested seemed calculated to make our point while causing minimum irritation and expressing confidence in German good intentions about the offset. 5. There is no doubt that the offset issue, in the context of prevailing confusion here about U.S. intentions on troop presence, has become politically highly sensitive. The Chancellor will find it difficult to be accommodating to us without laying himself open to the charge of his enemies that he is proving intolerably weak in the face of U.S. pressure. Public and private discussion of U.S. policy towards Germany has become heated, with Secretary McNamara the prime object of attack. For the first time in my recollection, we are hearing irrational reactions from some important politicians to the effect that if the Americans are going to be so penny-pinching and unreasonable in their demands, ignoring their own security interests in Europe, than let them take their troops out. Needless to say, this is a line of argument which plays directly into de Gaulle’s hands. Fortunately, it is not by any means a prevailing sentiment, but the climate of discussion is not healthy and is greatly complicated by the daily rash of stories in the press reporting alleged Washington plans for unilateral troop reductions, denuclearization of the Bundeswehr, and a general turning of our back on Europe. There is some evidence that the Chancellor himself feels bruised, and is nursing a certain sense of grievance because of what he considers to have been a series of disappointments with the U.S. 6. I would conclude, therefore, that a major effort which would inevitably become public [toward?] the Germans on the offset would, at this point, be likely to backfire. It would further weaken Erhard’s position and seriously and negatively affect U.S.-German relations. It would certainly strengthen the position of those who feel that de Gaulle is basically right about the future of Europe. Our desire to avoid these results would not be incompatible with a private reminder to the Chancellor, of the kind we had suggested, that he should try to avoid coming to Washington with a completely frozen position. I definitely do not believe however that we should clobber the Germans, publicly or in private, at this point, or make threats. We should also try to refrain from public statements or backgrounding of a type which does not persuade the Germans but merely hardens their resistance. The general posture suggested in Bonn 286 Document 156. still appears relevant. 7. We are obviously going to have to move soon towards some fairly basic decisions which will affect our future relations with the Federal Republic. We will need to establish some priorities among the various objectives we seek to achieve in Europe, not all of which may be completely compatible with each other. This will require some hard thinking about the kind of offset we can realistically expect to achieve for the period after June 30, 1967, and above all how much pressure we can apply to achieve our objectives both within the present and projected new offset agreements without jeopardizing other major policy goals. Hillenbrand 161. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Limdis. Bonn, August 17, 1966, 1740Z. 2012. Subject: The state of German-American relations seen from Bonn. 1. A calm has descended over Bonn. The captains, kings, and just plain politicians have departed on their summer holidays, and most items in the press are likely to be a regurgitation of the old rather than a revelation of the new. Against this setting, it may be useful to attempt some assessment of where we now stand in our relations with the Germans and what we may expect when political activity resumes in September. 2. It is realistic, I believe, to describe the present German state of mind with respect to the United States as clearly unhealthy. We are not experiencing one of those sharp crises of confidence in which there was always an element of the synthetic. The old Chancellor himself helped to generate and stimulate these periodic eruptions by leaks, statements to the press and public maneuvering, until at last some point of resolution was reached and the whole thing subsided. The present difficulties, I would judge, run somewhat deeper, are more widespread than in the past, and reflect in part the general sense of change Europe caused by limited détente with the Soviets and de Gaulle’s challenge to the post-war institutional structure. What we now have in Germany is a nagging concern about the United States and a fading confidence in the clarity of our purposes in Europe, added to a feeling that the Germans are being victimized and are being treated by us in a way not consonant with their primary role as loyal allies or their future importance to a realization of U.S. policy objectives in Europe. 3. The term “Pruegelknabe” (whipping boy) is frequently heard when Germans describe their current international position. They believe that their behavior in recent years has been good, both comparatively and absolutely. They see themselves as having fought the good fight in the EEC and for the Kennedy Round, even in the face of strong pressures from German agricultural interests. In NATO they believe that they have done well militarily and have generally been at our side on Alliance issues, despite the divisive internal effects which too strong a line against the French inevitably brings with it. They feel they have done more than any other country officially to support our position in Viet Nam. Yet they see themselves singled out and criticized for anticipated, though not yet actual, failure to meet an offset which we obtain from no other country; they believe their security to be threatened by alleged plans for large-scale American troop withdrawals, and are only confused when a denial one day is followed the next day by a new and to them more horrendous press report from Washington. At the same time their primary national objective of reunification remains as much of a will-o-the-wisp as ever, and they see little enthusiasm anywhere to do anything about it. However, exaggerated these views may be, this is the way the Germans, with their capacity for self-pity, size up the situation. 4. It is problematical how widespread such sentiments are. The average German has other preoccupations, but we would guess that most politicians, journalists and other molders of opinion share them to a greater or lesser degree. The SPD is in a relatively confident mood at present. The CDU and the government, on the other hand, are uncertain, fearful of their political future, and therefore extremely sensitive to anything, such as U.S. words or actions, which can become the basis of further internal criticism. There is fairly reliable evidence that Chancellor Erhard himself, harassed as he is on a number of fronts and struggling to maintain control over a fluid political situation, is feeling abused and nursing a certain sense of grievance over “disappointing” U.S. conduct. Stories reach us that certain of his advisers openly express anti-U.S. sentiments, and a general querulousness seems to prevail in evaluating U.S. policies. 5. Such a psychological atmosphere encourages a number of reactions, all of them unfavorable to our interests. It enables the Gaullists to argue that, since the U.S. is proving unreliable in Europe, the Germans should come to terms with France at any cost. The Chancellor is criticized as a stooge of the United States, who not only does not get anything for Germany, but has his own political position undermined by U.S. threats and actions. Hence he must lean over backwards to avoid the charge that he is being subservient to the U.S. A few politicians are now beginning to go so far as to react irrationally, exclaiming that if the United States is going to be so unreasonable, to insist on its offset pound of flesh and to make threats of troop withdrawals, despite its own clear security interests in Europe, then let the United States get out and let the Europeans look to their own interests. 6. There is an essential state of confusion about American intentions during this transitional era in Europe, which has been fed in recent months by almost daily and frequently conflicting press reports from Washington. During 1966 the Germans have received a heavy dose of rumors and reports about American plans for massive troop withdrawals, complicated by misunderstandings about the temporary shortfall of 15,000 troops in the 7th Army, frequent U.S. Senatorial statements about the need to pull our troops back from Europe, and the whole complicated issue of the offset which has now achieved the dubious role of being the single most upsetting factor in German-American relations. This has coincided with American attacks on the quality of the Bundeswehr; American criticism of German transactions with the Red Chinese, including a Senate resolution; German fears about U.S. intentions on non-proliferation; continuing differences over Allied defense strategy which have received much publicity in the Federal Republic; the NATO crisis precipitated by France which has put the German Government under heavy strain; and finally the growing conviction that the U.S. is being drawn more and more away from Europe into Asia or into a form of neo-isolationism. 7. The U.S. is on the receiving end of most uniformly unfavorable press and TV coverage of Viet Nam—chiefly from American news sources—which, despite continuing official German gestures of support, is bound to damage our reputation. Viet Nam is not, however, an essential factor in the present malaise, except in the sense that it is considered to have distracted us from our responsibilities in Europe. 8. As good a friend of the United States and of our post-war policies as Bundestag Deputy Kurt Birrenbach recently called on me to air his concerns. He said that he and those who stood for the same things were very discouraged. They simply could not understand what the United States was up to. If the present trend continued, this group would have no choice but to remain silent in the face of the opposition to American policies which would dominate in the Federal Republic. 9. I do not wish to dramatize a situation which is in no sense out of control. Psychological moods in Germany are mercurial, and given a few good breaks this fall, Erhard’s confidence could be restored and much that now seems black would quickly become gray. However, I do think we have reached the point where we have to be conscious that statements which we make and actions which we take will have magnified causal effects within a very troubled atmosphere. 10. If this analysis is correct, then a major U.S. objective in the months to come should be to restore that feeling of trust and confidence which is basic to the achievement of our own policy interests in relations with Germany. The forthcoming Erhard visit to Washington could play a crucial role in this process. The agenda outlined in Bonn 286 Document 156. continues to be pertinent. A conscious effort will be required on our part to right the situation, for we have little to gain and much to lose if we allow the present drift to continue. With such an effort, it should be possible to restore German-American relations to a healthier condition without which we can scarcely face confidently those developments in Europe which the next few years are likely to bring.Ambassador McGhee endorsed the analysis in this message in telegram 2478 from Bonn, August 29. (Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US) Hillenbrand 162. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. The text of the telegram was received from the White House. Washington, August 25, 1966, 3:48 p.m. 34931. Please deliver following Presidential message, dated August 25, to Chancellor Erhard: “Dear Mr. Chancellor: This is just a note to thank you for your full account of your conversation with General de Gaulle in Bonn.See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 194. I am most grateful to have your personal impressions. I am looking forward to our meeting in September. We can then discuss in full the problems raised for us both by the General, as well as the other questions of joint concern, some of which were touched on in your letter of July 5. Document 155. In the meanwhile, I should like to make only one point—about the difficult question of offset. I know that you and I are agreed that the current offset agreement will be fully met and provided for in your new budget and legislative program. The problem of forces, deployments—and the sharing of the foreign exchange burden—after the middle of next year, raises more difficult questions. We shall have to work hard to find a solution that will be both equitable and fully meet the defense requirements of the Alliance. To this end, I would propose that the United States join the Federal Republic and the United Kingdom in an initial exploration of these matters during the next several weeks. I would hope that the discussions could involve our ministers of finance, as well as of foreign affairs and defense. Such triprartite exploration could then be followed by thorough consultation with all our allies in NATO. I very much hope that this proposal will be agreeable to you and to Prime Minister Wilson—and that, until we have come to a joint conclusion, we can all avoid any budgetary or other decisions which would unduly narrow our choices. Ambassador McGhee will be in touch with you about this proposal in the near future. In the meanwhile, Mr. Chancellor, let me say that I think of you often. Your friendship is a source of strength and comfort to me in these difficult times.In a September 9 reply, Erhard suggested that the President’s proposals be discussed during his visit to the United States. (Telegram 44219 to Bonn, September 9; Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US) With warm personal regards, Sincerely, Lyndon B. Johnson” Rusk 163. Letter From the Ambassador to Germany (McGhee) to Secretary of State Rusk Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 1 EUR E–GER W. Confidential; Personal. Bonn, August 25, 1966. Dear Mr. Secretary: You will recall our conversation during my recent visit in Washington,August 19; no record of the meeting was found. in which I mentioned the possibility of our suggesting quite informally to the Germans a course of action which might serve to better their international standing and, in particular, their relations with the Eastern European countries and the Soviet Union. Since my return to Bonn, I have concluded that the present would not be a propitious time to suggest this to the Germans. The Government already feels that a number of things it believes we are doing puts it under inordinate pressure or threatens its interests, and I see little to be gained now by further loading the scale. You will have noted the reference to the Oder-Neisse in the CIA report cited in Bonn 2281.Dated August 24. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 FR) We can, however, be thinking about how we would formulate an approach when a more favorable time comes. There are in my judgment four major issues which create problems for the Germans beyond any corresponding advantages. These are: A. Their official positon on the Oder-Neisse as the ultimate eastern boundary of Germany; B. The apparent German desire to increase their influence in NATO nuclear matters; C. Their rather ambiguous claims to Heimatrecht; D. Their reluctance to declare the Munich Agreement void ab initio. In each case the German position is basically a tactical one—i.e., that a concession should be made only when it will provide bargaining power toward the attainment of reunification. In all four cases the Germans really have little hope of realizing any tangible gain, since in each case they seek to bargain something they do not have and which the Bloc states consider a fait accompli. In my judgment there is in fact no bargaining power inherent in the German position on these questions; however, the view is almost universally held in Germany, particularly by political leaders, that they must not “give up something for nothing.” There is a tendency also to fall back on the sterile position of the Potsdam Agreement, to the effect that a determination of the ultimate boundaries of Germany cannot be made except in connection with a peace treaty following reunification. In my judgment the Germans would not be giving up anything in stating unilaterally that they would, if and when reunification comes about: A. Accept the Oder-Neisse boundary, with minor modifications, as their eastern frontier; B. Renounce not only the manufacturing, as they have, but also the national possession of nuclear weapons; C. State that any exercise of Heimatrecht would be only in full agreement with the governments concerned, and D. State that the Munich Agreement was void ab initio. Such an action, accompanied by a repetition of their offer made in their Peace Note of March 25, 1966 to exchange declarations with the Eastern European countries renouncing the use of force and perhaps even an offer to initiate diplomatic relations would, I believe, without any loss to themselves, greatly enhance their image in the world and make possible an era of better relations with the states of Eastern Europe. German failure to clarify these issues in the past has had the effect of sowing distrust in Eastern Europe, as well as in the Soviet Union, as to their ultimate intentions. They are, in pursuing their present policy, really forcing the Eastern European states into a continuing reliance on the Soviet Union to protect them from a “revanchist and militaristic” Germany. There are no Germans east of the Oder-Neisse line. Germany does not need Lebensraum—it has a deficit in workers. There is no ally of Germany who would back her in obtaining territory beyond the Oder-Neisse line through threats or use of force. Indeed, de Gaulle has already given it up publicly and we have made it clear privately that we could not back the Germans in any extensive demands. A renunciation by Germany would produce an immediate improvement in their relations with Poland, which because of this issue are worse than those with any other Eastern European country. Germany stands little hope of being a part of a multilaterally-owned nuclear force and, in my judgment, no hope at all of ever obtaining a national force. This is not because, over a period of time and with sufficient expenditure of funds Germany could not do it from a technical standpoint, but because neither the Soviets—or her allies including us, would permit her to do it. By the nature of the problem Germany would face in attempting to acquire a national nuclear capability, her course of action would be fully revealed to the world over the years required for its accomplishment. We could not permit it—i.e., we would withdraw our forces and support for Germany first. The other NATO allies would not tolterate it—i.e., they would probably move to dissociate themselves from Germany in the NATO. The Soviet Union would be quite likely to make such efforts the subject of a preemptive attack. Heimatrecht is a very vague right, not clearly established under international law. From a practical standpoint it is unlikely that many Germans, all of whom are now well settled, would ever care to return to a hostile communist country. This could in any event not be accomplished except through agreement of the countries concerned—i.e., nobody would support Germany in accomplishing it otherwise. Heimatrecht when associated as it often is by Germans with self-determination is, moreover, patently unacceptable to everyone, since it amounts in essence to creeping aggression. The disadvantages to the Germans of total renunciation of the Munich Pact are more theoretical than real and could be compensated for by corresponding assurances on the part of Czechoslovakia that they would not take any of the actions feared by the Germans against former Sudeten-German residents should they ever re-enter Czechoslovakia. Without really giving up anything, Germany could through such a declaration drastically improve her posture vis-à-vis the international community. The German “policy of movement” with respect to Eastern Europe would be greatly facilitated as well as her relations with her European neighbors, who still harbor fears and suspicions of a nationalist revival in Germany. The way could be cleared for a non-proliferation agreement and perhaps even for a broader détente or thin-out in Central Europe. The Erhard Government could perhaps overcome criticism within Germany from such an action by pointing out the much greater gains to Germany. We could help by assuring the Chancellor that we would applaud such an action in the strongest terms, and would seek to assure that Great Britain and others would follow suit. These would be the possible elements of an eventual approach to Schroeder and Carstens. If we pick the right moment, I do not believe we would run any great risks in making such suggestions informally. There will have to be some clearing up of the present malaise, however, before that right moment arrives.In a September 7 letter to McGhee, Rusk wrote: “I agree with you that this is not the time to put pressure on the Germans to make various gestures of reunification if they are not inclined to move on their own.” (Ibid., POL 1 GER E–GER W) Sincerely, George C. McGhee 164. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 32–4 GER. Secret. Drafted by Crowley, cleared in EUR and S/P, and approved by Stoessel. Repeated to London and Paris. Washington, August 29, 1966, 4:06 p.m. 37036. NATUS. Subject: U.S. Submission on Reunification to POLAD Meeting on East/West Relations. 1. Before formulating U.S. submission to POLAD meeting, we believe it essential to discuss approach to reunification question with FRG for German reactions and ideas on how matter should be handled. 2. Embassy Bonn is requested, therefore, to raise this matter with FonOff. Embassy should say that we believe that major Western initiatives on reunification at this time do not offer any more hope of moving Soviet Union than in the past. This notwithstanding, we remain firmly committed to reunification as major goal of our policy and we are prepared to consider any initiatives that Germans themselves believe might have useful results. Furthermore, we support Western initiatives in fields other than German reunification in hope and belief that these may eventually create climate in which prospects for reunification might be improved. In that connection we believe the German policy of seeking improvement in relations between FRG and Eastern Europe makes a significant contribution to the gradual change we seek. We are prepared to support the German effort and would welcome suggestions from FRG on ways in whch we can assist. 3. In light of above, we would appreciate German views on best approach to be taken in the NATO context. Depending on German reaction, we are not inclined to include specific initiatives on reunification during POLAD meeting but would be prepared to consider other German proposals and support those which offer possibilities of furthering our policy objectives. 4. In view of time element involved, we would appreciate early report on German views concerning how reunification should be approached at Paris meeting.The Embassy replied in telegram 2856 from Bonn, September 7. (Ibid.) Rusk 165. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Senator Russell Long Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Long, September 1, 1966, 10:07 a.m., Tape F66.22, Side A, PNO 1. Secret. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume. Washington, September 1, 1966, 10:07 a.m. [Here follows a discussion of tax legislation.] LBJ: This thing y'all did yesterday really murdered us on NATO.On August 31, Senator Mike Mansfield (D.-Wyo.) together with 12 other Senators offered a non-binding resolution (S. Res. 300) based on Senate Democratic Policy Committee recommendations that included unspecified cuts in the size of U.S. forces in Europe. For text of the resolution, see The New York Times, September 4, 1966. President Johnson commented on the resolution at his September 8 press conference; see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1966, Book II, pp. 998–999. The resolution did not come to a vote. I want to give you the views. I don't want to change your views because I know how you felt since you were born about this thing, but this playing President up there with these statements wthout my knowing it really gets me in a hell of a shape. And let me tell you the facts. I hadn't finished analyzing Fulbright’s program in Thailand and Mansfield’s suggestions on de Gaulle as commander in chief until this damn thing hit me in the face and nobody had ever even mentioned it to me. You've got to call me and let me know sometime that they are getting ready to be commander in chief for an hour or so. Now here is what we've done now. I've just had a war with the British for two weeks now asking them, “Please don't open your mouth until you can sit down and talk to us,” because they have got to make reductions with their problems there. But I want to put them to where we make reductions when they do, and we take it into account what the French are doing, and that we satisfy the Germans that we are just not pulling out completely so they don't either start a complete rearmament or blow up. And that poor devil that is supporting us and is buying enough here to permit me to keep my people there, he’s down in the polls now to 30 percent because he’s just having every—Bobby Kennedy and the world after him over there. They're just chewing him to pieces and saying that he’s a satellite of Lyndon Johnson’s and he’s giving these Dutchmen money over here and that they don't need to do it, and so on and so forth. And I've said to him, “Now you come over here and don't you do anything—you've got to keep your commitment to me to reimburse me for every dime I spend.” Now, all at that time, I had Rusk notify the Russians that, “Would you be interested in reducing some of your 22 divisions if we would make a corresponding reduction in NATO?” And they came back with a little indication—no commitment—emphasize, no commitment. But we got a response, a little feeler, that we thought was good. So we set up to send a special mission to see the British and to try to have John McCloy—he’s out of town, but he was Commissioner in Germany and he has the confidence of all the German factions. And he’s on vacation in Canada. So I sent a special messenger to him to get him to talk to the Germans, to try to get him back from vacation, preparatory to Rusk saying to Gromyko, when he comes to the United Nations, that if you consider removing some of your 22 divisions, we'll consider removing some of ours. And by God, right in the middle of it, so far as I can see without doing a bit of good to anybody, we've got every Democratic leader in the Senate, all 13 of them, to serve notice on the President that, by God, they ought to reduce. Now, I'm just an old Johnson City boy, but when I'm playing bridge and I show the other fellow my whole hand, I can't make a very good deal with him. And I wish that on these international things that have such terrible consequences, where you are committing me to meet with de Gaulle it puts me in a hell of an embarrassing position—I know you can't do anything about it. I'm just illustrating to you, though, my position—and where we are using Thailand bases The New York Times reported in its September 1 editions that Senator Fulbright would call hearings on September 19 to study the presence of thousands of U.S. soldiers in Thailand. In making his announcement, Fulbright had described base locations and operational activities of these forces. or if we don't, we're going to have to send them from Okinawa or Guam or something. And they are exposing those, with the committee wanting to have hearings there. And John Stennis is running a sideshow over there saying to the world that we are so goddamned weak, we can't do anything and making them all think that if they just hold out a little longer, these goddamned vultures will eat me up here in this country and won't let me stand. He’s got Rusk on television. And then, by God, the fourth thing, for the Policy Committee to hit me. I don't know what kind of organization we got in our party. I don't know if we can ever get anybody elected. Do you see my point? RL: Well, Mr. President, let me just talk for 20 seconds. These boys had Rusk up here. They had McNamara up here. They had McGhee up here and they talked to them at great length. And frankly, those fellows just made a pitiful case. Now, we boys down here have no business hauling the President before our Policy Committee to cross-examine him. If you want to talk to us, why, of course, any time you want to send for us, we'll come down there, but— LBJ: I never heard of the Policy … I never heard of this. This is the first time I ever heard of the Democratic Policy Committee, by God, getting in to being commander in chief. I thought it was a scheduling committee, and I never looked upon it, and I served on it a long time. Now, Mansfield wrote me this letter. Now I get these proposals from him. Now I wish he could be Secretary of State for a while. But I've read 800 suggestions and I've never found eight of them worth a—very much. But I read them and I study them and I look at them every damn day. I've had three this week. I've got Thailand on the cooker with Fulbright. I've got the de Gaulle big meeting. I wish he would let me run my own schedule. But, and then I've got this one here. But the moment I got his letter, I picked up the phone and called Rusk and McNamara and got them in and said, “Now, Mansfield is playing Secretary of State. Will y'all get up there right quick and will you tell him two or three things. First, this is desperately unwise. So let’s just let him know it’s unwise. It doesn't contribute a thing to the United States. It’s almost a shot in the back of some goddamned boy because it divides us. That’s the first thing. It’s unwise. The second thing is that whatever we do, we've got to do collectively. We want to talk to these other people. And we've got to let them know if they pull out, we're going to pull out. And we've also got to let the enemy know that if we pull down, he ought to pull down. So let them know that, number two. Then, number three, finally, let them know that we have these things underway now working feverishly. We're trying to see how many of these folks we can bring home. We're trying to see how many we can get the Germans to add to it. And we're trying to see what the French are ultimately going to do. We're trying to see whether the British have really got to pull down 15,000 or whether they can move them across the line into Britain and still do the same thing. And let them know that this is not going to be handled in The New York Times! And a goddamned sense of Congress resolution ain't worth a shit unless this President has some respect for the sense of it. And all it can do is notify every enemy that we're just a bunch of un-unified folks running off like Bert Wheeler, and Jeanette Rankin, in every goddamned direction!” So they went and did that, and they came back and reported to me. I don't know if you were at the meeting or not. But they reported to me that the committee understood that, and that they said that no action was going to be taken. They'd just hold it, in the light of what they told them, where it was. So yesterday morning when I got word from a Republican—I'm sorry to say that there wasn't one Democratic Senator of the 13 that would tell their own President what to do—they called me and said, “We think this is disastrous here, and what are you going to do about it?” I said, “I've never heard of it.” So they said, “Well, they're getting ready to file it at 10:30.” I immediately called Rusk and said, “Rusk, will you get a hold of Mansfield? Tell him not that you want to talk to him on the phone. Tell him you want to come see him. And you get up there and tell him that you've got conferences scheduled this month with the Russians on a trade-out deal where they will remove some of their 22 divisions so let’s don't say what we ought to do until we can kind of trade with them. That’s one. Show him the cables I sent to Wilson from the Ranch last Friday.See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 198. Tell him not to leak it, but show it to him,” and so forth. Then I called McNamara and I said, “I know Dick Russell’s got too much sense for this. I just know he’s always wanting to be out of there and he’s really an isolationist at heart, just 100 percent so far as this group is concerned. Always has been. Was when I was the Leader. But I know he’s got too much sense when this is going on to take the ball. So McNamara, you go see Russell. And then Symington’s gone crazy on balance of payments. He’s just a nut on the question and get a hold of him.” So Rusk called me back and said, “Mansfield said he doesn't want to see me. He’s already made up his mind.They're already going to do it. No reason. I told him that I'd understood that he told me he wasn't. Why, he told me, ‘That wouldn't make any difference, we have.’” McNamara called me back and said, “Russell agrees that we oughtn't to be taking it up in the light of these things, but he says they got to file it but he'll try to do what he can to keep them from acting on it.” Then Symington called back and said, no, he wants to be Secretary of the Treasury for a day or two and play with it and, under this theory of balance of payments, this is really going to save us a hell of a lot of money. Now it may next year, could affect the balance of payments. This year we got a firm sign-on from them, and unless they weasel out of it, which we are afraid the Germans might make Erhard do, we are going to get every damn dollar we spend. But we're going to have to modify it by letting them buy a little space equipment and something besides strictly military— RL: Mr. President, assuming you are right about this, I just hate to say it, but assuming you are right, your Cabinet boys and your executive boys just did a very poor job in getting your side of the argument— LBJ: May do it … RL:—across. LBJ: May do it. But I think that Rusk and McNamara are both reasonably articulate. But it may be that and just, in this instance—but hell, I can't help it. But you see the problem one man has got in trying to run it. And I think we ought to really understand that if they've lost confidence in me and they don't want me to handle Thailand—and I think it’s just awful for us to be going through the excruciating experiences on television, talking about the weaknesses of our forces and the strengths. And Strom Thurmond and John Stennis, and then Bill Fulbright handing them down the other day, trying to browbeat them on Thailand. And then the Democratic committee hitting us here on what we are doing on NATO. I just think they ought to get their views [Sanitized—Donor’s Deed of Gift] come down here and talk to me but, by God, don't do it in the papers! Don't, don't shoot me in the back. It’s worse than old Acheson going over in a conference to the Foreign Relations CommitteeFor text of Acheson’s April 26 statement, see U.S. Senate, Committee on Governmental Operations, Atlantic Alliance, Part 1, 89th Congress, 2d Session. (Washington, 1966) meeting before, because it sure don't help the country. And I just got to have you or somebody to kind of give a little leadership. The first place, if I wanted to reform things and get some action, I'd start in the United States Senate, instead of working on the Executive. Because I think that I'm ready to receive their views, to listen to them, to evaluate them, to carefully consider them and so forth. But I don't see that they did a bit of good by these damn—introducing the resolutions and speech. I don't believe it will be. And anyway, if they do do it, it ought to be after we both understand it. And then I can tell Wilson I can't control my folks. They want to go out and make this pitch. I'm not going to pay a damn bit of attention to it. But you go on. And I can tell the Russians that I'm not in the position to make any agreements and I'm helpless. But I want you to really give a little thought to it and try to put yourself in … The Constitution, I think, makes one thing clear, that the Commander in Chief is the President, and these things, he can't fight a war from Thailand bases and explain to the Soviet Union every day why he’s doing it. RL: Well, as far as the Thailand thing is concerned, I'm 100 percent with you. And with regard to this part of it, Mr. President, to be fair to us, McNamara told this group down here that in his judgment that the fact that the______was raising hell about the fact that these other guys had not delivered on their commitment, that not a single country over there has done what they had promised to do, would in some respects help him to get better cooperation from those people. And frankly, that’s one point that they discussed several times. Now, as far as coming to you about the thing, their thought was, “Well, should we go tell the President,” and the reaction of every man there except one was to say “Well gee, if you go tell the President, he’s going to say don't do it, And then if you do it, he’s going to feel that you just went out and just deliberately kicked him and—” LBJ: What do you think I think now? RL:—[inaudible] here’s what we think about matters and— LBJ: They told me what they thought in that damn, long-winded letter, three or four pages. I know what they thought. And what do you think I thought about it when everybody in the world says that the Committee unanimously—anyway you see my viewpoint, you see my problem, and I know you love me and I know your views and I know we differ. If we didn't, we'd want the same wife and we'd all want to live in the same place. Of course, we're going to have opinions. I just want you to be my floor leader and kind of understand that I've got to have a little bit of help up there, and I went out and picked Mansfield a good many years ago to be Whip to try to balance the party problems there. And I know that he feels that he can't really be very … Well, anyway, you saw your daddy Governor and you saw his floor leaders and you know what a President’s got to have. And I don't know who my leaders are. I don't know how in the hell I can get any help. I don't know who is defending me. I know that I like every man in the Senate, and I want to work with them and I want to help them. But these sense resolutions, I don't believe are going to change the course of things very much and I'm more anxious than any man on that goddamn committee on balance of payments to get troops out. But I sure as hell don't want to get them out with 22 divisions there and kick off World War III. And every damn man on that resolution will run and hide, by God, when you say “You kicked this thing off, you pulled a goddamned Chamberlain and you ran out and said you were going to pull out, you're not interested in it anymore. You refused to fortify Guam or you refused to do this.” And I know what is happening. I'm not one of these folks that’s just sucked in by the Russians. I don't believe in the Fulbright, Mansfield, Symington whole goddamned theory, that it’s all over over there. I don't think so at all. I think those sons of bitches want to eat us any day they can. And I think the biggest notice you can do is just say “Uncle Sam is tired and wants to come home. We're going to follow John Stennis and Fulbright.” And I think those sons of bitches will do worse than what Hitler did. I may be wrong … RL: Mr. President, what I'd suggest you do, and I think it would be best not to do it today or tomorrow, but sometime during the next week or so, I think it would be good, if not the whole bunch, get about six or eight of those fellows who are on that group down there, and give them your views on it and I think that will quiet things down. LBJ: All right, I'll do that. And you kind of give me quietly, without telling another human, because you know the envies and jealousies in this city. If anybody sees I'm even speaking to you, why they think I'm undermining them or affecting their prestige or running under the Pope or something. But you give me the group that you think it would be wise to talk to, whether it would be, who would speak up, whether it would be Pastore, or whether it would be Muskie, or whether it would be Russell— RL: I don't think it would serve much point to talk to Dick Russell. His views are so, have been fixed for so long. And he, incidentally, had no interest in taking the leadership in this matter either. LBJ: He told McNamara that he agreed it wasn't going to do any good, that he wanted them out and he believed they ought to come out. But he didn't think we ought to be doing this while we're trying to negotiate ourselves out. See, we all agree with the general purpose. There is no argument about that. We would like ourselves to get as many as we could out. I tried to get them out of Korea. First thing I did when I came to be President, I said two things I'm going to do: to bring some folks home from NATO and bring some home from Korea or make them put up. Well, when I started looking, suppose I pulled them out of Korea, I couldn't have the Korean divisions over there and that would be an invitation to show we're weaker there. And if I pulled them from NATO, I might let the Russians start. Kennedy, by God, showed a little weakness in Vienna. And Khrushchev said “Well, we'll just move on you this year.” So then he had to send me to Germany and he had to march his troops through the gates. He had to cross the Wall and he had to call up all of the reserves. I don't want to have to do that. Because, show a little weakness, and if those sons of bitches think you're weak, they're like a country dog—you stand still, they'll chew you to death, if you run, they'll eat your ass out. And I'm dealing with them every day. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] And I just don't believe that John Stennis' staff and Stu Symington, I just, I don't want … Well anyway, they haven't got the job. Now, if they want me to turn it over to Humphrey or they want Bobby Kennedy to run it, why that’s something else in '68. But I sure as hell, during this period, don't want to get us in World War III. And I can't think of a better way in the world to get us in it right now than to let the Chinese think we won't fight in Asia, and let the Russians think we won't fight in Europe, and that they can do what Hitler thought he could do. We just can't let them think that. And that’s why I had to say yesterday that this is not United States Government policy at all. And I said to every goddamned Embassy, I just said, now Woodrow Wilson had his Senators, Roosevelt had his Wheeler’s, and I've got some talking, too. But don't you think for a goddamned minute I'm moving one man. Now they can cut off the appropriations and they can do anything they want to do. But I goddamn sure am not going to say to the Russians at this stage of the game, when the North Vietnamese are sitting there talking to them now, at this minute, trying to make up their plans what they are going to do in Asia, that, by God, I'm going to cede them Europe by default and come home. So you think about what I've said, you consider it and then you kind of give me a little advice, even if you have to oppose me. RL: I guess I'll do that. LBJ: God bless you. RL: Thank you. 166. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential. Repeated to London and Paris. Bonn, September 1, 1966, 1754Z. 2698. Subj: Conversation with Adenauer. 1. I had a meeting with Chancellor Adenauer today which he expressed at length his views on world affairs along familiar lines. I raised certain points which emerged in some of his recent interviews and invited his comments on the domestic situation. 2. Adenauer immediately launched into an exposition of the Soviet threat and what the West should do about it. His starting point was the proposed Senate resolution of the Democratic Policy Committee. I drew his attention to the comments by the White House spokesman on this resolution and assured him that we had no intention to withdraw major combat units.See footnotes 2 and 3, Document 165. The substance of Adenauer’s exposition was that the Soviet military threat toward West Europe had not diminished. It was imperative for the West to maintain an effective military posture in Western Europe. Although he felt that de Gaulle was generally correct in his criticism of the NATO organization, he regretted that de Gaulle had taken France out of that organization. The Soviets were confronted with three major tasks: to build up their military forces in competition with the US, to tackle major problems of domestic economic development, and to ready themselves for the Chinese threat. The Soviets could not accomplish all these tasks simultaneously, but would have to choose. It was in the interest of the West to steer the Soviets in a direction whereby they would concentrate on domestic development and the Chinese threat in order to do so, the West must not lower its guard in Europe. A major US troop withdrawal would lead the Soviets to believe that Western defenses are crumbling and encourage them to adopt an offensive posture in Europe. The West, on the other hand, should not itself adopt a threatening posture vis-à-vis the Soviets as this, in turn, would lead the Soviets to concentrate their efforts in Europe. The proper Western posture in Europe was one of patient waiting while maintaining current defense levels. This would offer the best chance that the Soviets would divert their attention from Europe to their own domestic problems and to the threat posed by Communist China and the Far East. They would realize that Europe offered no threat to them but that Communist China did. 3. I pointed out that our govt fully shared the view that a Soviet threat remained serious. It seemed, however, that de Gaulle held a different view. Adenauer said that he would gladly talk to de Gaulle about this. He was confident that de Gaulle would be in basic agreement with his analysis. He said de Gaulle shared his belief that the fates of Germany and France were closely interwoven. If Germany fell prey to the Soviets, France would be next. French interest rather than a desire to be kind to Germany was the reason for de Gaulle’s defense of the German case during his recent Moscow visit. Adenauer recalled a meeting with Eisenhower, Macmillan and de Gaulle during which there had been a frank discussion of the German problem. While Eisenhower and Macmillan had been somewhat cautious, de Gaulle had taken the position that he desired reunification because he did not wish to see Soviet troops on the Rhine. 4. I mentioned the interview which Adenauer had given to Sulzberger on August 10 in which he had said that we should withdraw from Viet Nam.The interview took place on August 2. For Sulzberger’s account, see Age of Mediocrity, pp. 278–282. I pointed out that in our opinion such a withdrawal under present conditions would have extremely dangerous consequences and that it might also be interpreted by the Soviets as softness and in Europe and elsewhere as unwillingness on our part to adhere to our commitments. I also said that we appreciated his views on this as well as on any other problem but that we hoped he would give them to us directly rather than through the press. Adenauer said he wanted to explain his position to me very frankly. He had not asked for the interview but he had welcomed it as an opportunity to draw attention to a situation which he felt was very serious. What he really feared was that the question of US obligations and commitments might become a serious issue in the US Presidential campaign. He had given the interview in the hope of provoking a statement from us reiterating the firmness of our commitment in Europe. 5. Commenting on the current crisis in the Defense Ministry Adenauer said that in his opinion Von Hassel must go. He thought this would happen fairly soon. A structural reform of the Defense Ministry was also necessary—the tasks were too vast for one man to handle. He said no decision had as yet been reached whether to appoint an additional Minister or Political State Secretary to the Defense Ministry, or whether to transfer some of the Defense Ministry’s responsibilities to another Ministry. 6. I asked Adenauer for his views on the current prospects of the CDU. He said the situation was very bad. The voters were clearly dissatisfied with the present govt. The problem was that under the German Constitution a Chancellor was practically irremovable. Also, CDU leaders had been dispersed during the summer months and had made separate uncoordinated statements. Nevertheless, unless the direction and style of operation of the govt underwent a rapid change, the CDU would surely lose the next Federal elections. He said that he was greatly concerned about the declining health of SPD leaders Erler and Wehner. If they disappeared, the left wing—those who had, among other things, advocated the speakers exchange with the SED which he continued to regard as a serious mistake—would take over. A dangerous situation would arise in Europe if France, after de Gaulle, had a popular front govt and Germany an SPD govt under left-wing leadership. I asked Adenauer what kind of a change of direction he considered necessary. He said “The government must resume the course which I pursued as Chancellor. Coming from me, this may sound vain; but it is not immodest if I consider myself a bit more intelligent than certain others who are very stupid.” Comment: Adenauer looked pallid on the eve of his departure for a vacation at Caddenabia. However he was alert and in good spirits. I have reported his views on global problems in some detail even though they represent little that is new. I was told today by Kingsbury Smith of Hearst that the Chancellor expressed similar views in an interview with him which he will be reporting. Adenauer’s comments on domestic matters reflect his undiminished disdain for Erhard as Chancellor, also Von Hassel as Def Min. Adenauer has recently been heard recommending Gerstenmaier as Erhard’s successor. It is obvious that he hopes that a combination of CDU leaders can soon be put together which could tackle the problem of Erhard’s succession. McGhee 167. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Erhard Visit September 1966. No classification marking. Washington, September 16, 1966, 5:15 p.m. Mr. President: This is a probably reliable report of an Erhard backgrounder. From all evidence, Erhard is a man with a dilemma and no plan to get out of it. We must lead him out. We are working hard—State, Treasury, Francis—to have a plan ready. Walt Attachment Secret. The following is the text of a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] report on off-the-record comments made by Chancellor Erhard at a press conference. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] Begin report: In an off-the-record press conference held in Bonn on September 8, Chancellor Ludwig Erhard told a small group of selected West German and West Berlin journalists that he does not anticipate that the agenda for his forthcoming visit to Washington will “provide enough time” for a discussion of German involvement in a possible future MLF. In any event, said the Chancellor, the West Germans would be willing to discuss such a force only if the concept were completely different from any that has thus far been advanced. In the meantime, Bonn will press its case for a fight to defend German soil against atomic attacks by an appeal to “international public opinion.” When a further discussion of West German involvement in the Western defense strategy centered upon the matter of offset payments, Erhard evinced a degree of firmness bordering on the belligerent. He conceded that it behooves the Germans to appreciate the balance of payments problems with which the U.S. is confronted. Nonetheless, he said, U.S. Defense Secretary McNamara’s “demands” in the area of offset payments are “completely arbitrary” and must be categorically rejected. Asked whether he would display this attitude during his forthcoming visit to Washington, the Chancellor replied emphatically—“You can bet on that.” (Source comment: Although it was clearly understood by all the participants that the Chancellor was not to be quoted, Erhard went to great pains to re-emphasize this point on several occasions during the course of the press conference.) 168. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 15–1 GER W. Secret; Limdis. Bonn, September 19, 1966, 1835Z. 3362. Subject: General Klein on Erhard’s current mood. 1. General Julius Klein, who is currently visiting in Germany and apparently still has close contacts with the Chancellor and his personal assistant Hohmann (he says he has seen Erhard three times in the past week), has provided us with an account of his various conversations. 2. Klein reported that never before had he seen the Chancellor in such a shaken condition. He is fighting for his political life, and knows that many of his party colleagues are sharpening their knives to take advantage of the first opportunity to finish him off. During his initial meeting with Klein, Erhard seemed scared stiff at the prospect of his impending visit to the United States. He asked Klein what the reaction would be in the United States if he were suddenly to develop a diplomatic illness causing cancellation of the trip. Klein said he responded that no one would believe this, and that he would be finished both in the United States and in Germany. The Chancellor commented this was exactly the way he felt. Klein said the Chancellor had undoubtedly been receiving advice that he should call off the trip from a number of CDU politicians, and probably also from Westrick. McGhee discussed the background to the Erhard visit in At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 188–189. 3. Klein observed that the Chancellor had asked him a number of questions of a kind which he had never raised before. For example, he could not believe that the Mansfield resolutionSee footnote 2, Document 165. had not been put forward without the Executive’s secret blessing. Despite his difficulties with Barzel, the Chancellor went on, he could not imagine the CDU majority leader putting forward a resolution of this kind contrary to his own policies. Klein said he tried to explain to Erhard how our legislative system works in relation to the Executive, and he had hoped he had made some impression on the Chancellor. 4. In their two subsequent conversations, according to Klein, the Chancellor had seemed slightly more relaxed about the prospects for his Washington visit but was still very much a harassed and anxious man. The majority of his advisers are still counselling calling the trip off, and if that is not possible, are telling him that he must come back with some success or he will be politically finished. Since the prospects for a success on the offset are considered dim, the only idea which the Chancellor has so far had would be to obtain the consent of the President for a visit here to show his interest in Europe. 5. Klein said that the Chancellor was suspicious of most of the CDU politicians who were giving him advice. He was afraid that they would gang up against him even during his short absence in the United States, and was trying to gain assurance from party leaders such as Barzel that they would sit on the lid during his trip. Pressure was developing to have the Chancellor take Westrick along, and Erhard at least today seemed to be moving in this direction since it would enable him to prove publicly that he and Westrick are still friends despite the latter’s resignation. On the other hand, it is quite clear, according to Klein, that Westrick would actually be intended to serve as a watchdog over the Chancellor in order to make sure that he made no concessions to the President. 6. The problem of succession to Westrick continues at fever pitch, according to Klein. Party leaders are pressing strongly for designation of the CDU whip, Will Rasner, as State Secretary, although Erhard’s preference is decidely for Hohmann. If Rasner must enter the Chancellor’s office, then Erhard wants two State Secretaries to be designated, one of whom would be Hohmann, but this has run into strong resistance. 7. In the prevailing atmosphere, Klein believes, the Chancellor tends to interpret everything in the light of the immediate effects it will have on his personal political position. This will certainly be true of his visit to the United States. For this reason, the Chancellor will be in no position to make any concessions on such matters as nuclear non-proliferation. 8. Comment: While the foregoing may seem highly colored, allowing for some possible exaggerations, it probably reflects with reasonable accuracy the Chancellor’s current mood. The ebbing of his political position has been so rapid, and the prospect of restoring it must seem so bleak at this juncture, that he has become highly sensitized to the political maneuvering which is normal in Bonn and interprets it—probably with some justification—as directed against him personally. Whether his supicion of individuals is justified is difficult to say at this point, since the Bonn political scene is overheated with rumors and speculation the order of the day. McGhee 169. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 83. Confidential. No indication of drafting officer is on the source text, which was approved in S on September 23. The meeting was held in the Secretary’s suite at the Waldorf Towers. New York, September 19, 1966, 3:30 p.m. US/MC/#2 SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE TWENTY-FIRST SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York, September–October 1966 SUBJECT All-German Affairs PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Mr. William Krimer Mr. Bertus Wabeke H.E. Dr. Erich Mende, German Vice Chancellor and Minister of All German Affairs H.E. Baron Sigismund von Braun, Permanent Observer to the U.N. Consul General Klaus Curtius, N.Y. Dr. Guido Brunner, First Secretary of German Observer Mission K.F. Brotesser, Personal Aide to Dr. Mende After an exchange of amenities the Secretary opened the substantive part of the conversation by asking what the top questions were in Germany today. In response Dr. Mende consciously limited himself to the area of East-West German relations in order not to anticipate the discussions which Chancellor Erhard is to have in Washington later on in the month. Dr. Mende spoke at length about the shooting along the Berlin Wall, the arrest of West Germans on the Autobahn to Berlin and the failure of West German attempts to improve communications with the East Zone. He fears that worse is still to come and expects that the East Zone will require West Germans to accept East German visas this coming Christmas. Dr. Mende links the increased aggressiveness of the East Zone authorities in part to the war in Viet-Nam. Germany and the U.S. are being attacked together as disturbers of the peace. Under questioning from the Secretary, Dr. Mende conceded, however, that the increase in shooting by East German border guards is related to an increase in the number of flights from East Germany. Furthermore, the Zone authorities are still willing to release prisoners—even those serving life terms—for needed commodities such as chemical products, machines, drugs and coffee. Dr. Mende also acknowledged that West Germany’s difficulties are limited to the East Zone and to a lesser extent to Moscow. Relations with East European Soviet satellites have greatly improved. With Rumania relations are very good. Those with Hungary and Czechoslovakia are also good in many respects. Those with Bulgaria are less satisfactory but still not bad. Poland is more difficult but here too on the people-to-people level things are improving. Dr. Mende related that General de Gaulle had even been very optimistic regarding future German relations with Soviet Russia during his visit to Bonn. But in his own conversations with Tsarapkin, Dr. Mende had not received any such encouragement. In response to a question from the Secretary, Dr. Mende ventured the opinion Gromyko may well raise the question of the continuation of the Spandau prison regime or protest the meetings of Bundestag committees in West Berlin in his conversations with the Secretary. But even if he doesn't raise the Berlin issue, according to Dr. Mende it would be useful if the Secretary were to ask Gromyko what is going on and why there should be so much shooting in Berlin. The Secretary agreed to inform the Germans immediately if Gromyko were to indicate that Moscow intended to divert attention from Viet-Nam by focusing on Germany. Dr. Mende also referred to the efforts of the Ulbricht regime to obtain representation at the U.N. He warned that for the East Germans to get an observer accredited would have an enormously disturbing effect upon public opinion in West Germany and elsewhere, since it would tend to give equal status to East and West Germany. Dr. Mende explained that in order to combat the efforts by Ulbricht to make himself acceptable at the U.N., the West German Government was transmitting individual copies of a documentary report on the violation of human rights in East Germany to the ambassadors of all U.N. member nations. In response to questions from the Secretary, Dr. Mende also spoke at some length about the increase in the number of flights from East Germany over the past few months. According to Dr. Mende, flights have doubled every week since April, and the flight attempts have become more dramatic, more desperate, more courageous. Dr. Mende attributes this phenomenon less to dissatisfaction with physical conditions in the Zone than with the lack of rights and freedoms by comparison with neighboring East European countries. Dr. Mende meets every three months with these escapees and has offered to make available to the Secretary the reports of these meetings. The Secretary stated in reply that he would very much like to see these reports. 170. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Erhard 1966. Secret. Drafted by Rostow. Washington, September 19, 1966, 7:15 p.m. Mr. President: Herewith Bob McNamara’s memorandum to you on how to handle the offset problem with Erhard. State has been working all day on a plan to deal with the offset problem without a radical unilateral troop reduction. Tonight George McGhee has come in with a strong cable, which I am getting typed for you, Document 171. underlining the danger of a substantial troop reduction arrived at unilaterally and making certain proposals for alternative offsets. I suspect this will be the major item for discussion at lunch tomorrow. I will get you George McGhee’s cable and, I trust, the State Department paper before then. The object at lunch should not be to make final decisions but for you to hear from George Ball and Bob McNamara their somewhat different perspective on the problem we face and the options open to us. We shall be coming back to you for final decisions before McNamara leaves for Europe. W.W. Rostow Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. Attachment Washington, September 19, 1966. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson Secret. Copies were sent to Rostow, Rusk, Secretary of the Treasury Dillon, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Chancellor Erhard, in December 1963 and again in December 1965, reaffirmed his intention to fulfill the offset arrangement. In 1963, the CommuniquéFor text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 860–862. stated, “The President expressed appreciation for the cooperative arrangement whereby United States dollar expenditures for American military forces in Germany are offset by German purchases of military equipment in the United States. It was agreed that this arrangement should continue.” Last December 21, the joint Communiqué For text, see ibid., pp. 910–912. said that you and he “discussed the arrangements between the two governments whereby United States military expenditures in Germany entering the balance of payments are offset by the Federal Republic through its purchase of United States military equipment and services. It was agreed that these arrangements were of great value to both governments and should be fully executed and continued.” The current German commitment is to place $1,350,000,000 of military orders in the US in calendar years 1965–1966 and to make payments of that amount in US fiscal years 1966–1967. As of September 1, the orders (with three months to go) have reached only $665 million, or less than half of the commitment, and payments (with nine months to go) have reached only $261 million, or about 20% of the commitment. A September 9 cable from Ambassador McGhee Not found. reported that the German Assist-ant Secretary for Economic Affairs in the Chancellor’s office said “as matters now stand he sees no real alternative to a large shortfall in the present offset payments target next June 30 and a stretchout of the period in which to meet the target.” It is clear that the difficulty arises from the inadequacy of the German military budget. That budget increased annually until 1963. It has leveled off since then. Indeed, in real terms (taking account of inflation), the 1967 German military budget is almost 10% less than in 1963. Germany now devotes 5% of her Gross National Product to defense, compared to 6% in 1963. The UK spends 6.8% and the US 8.8%. While the Gross National Product of Germany is increasing on an average of 5% a year, none of the increase is being devoted to military expenditures. The Chancellor states that the reason for this allocation of resources is domestic political pressures. It should be remembered and understood that the German shortfall in meeting the offset is not because Germany has no military requirements to make purchases in the United States. US policy has been to ask Germany (1) to do only what she promised to do—namely, to meet the offset, (2) to buy only what she needs to bring her forces up to NATO standards, and (3) to buy from us only those items which it is most economical to purchase in the US. With respect to German requirements to meet NATO standards, the German forces are seriously deficient. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and USCINCEUR have concurred in a report which indicated some $4 billion in German requirements for initial equipping, modernizing and training and for reserve stocks. By way of comparison: The US has a division slice of more than 41,000 men in Europe while the Germans have 27,000; the US has been maintaining 90 days of war reserve stocks in Europe while the Germans barely meet 30 days on some items and considerably less than that in the major equipment area; the US is at 100% of equipment levels in all its divisions while the Germans are not only less fully equipped, but equipped with less modern arms. Another comparison: The United States has 230,000 tons of bombs either in or in transit to Southeast Asia; the German Air Force’s total inventory amounts to approximately 4400 tons—an obviously inadequate amount. If Germany were to procure proper conventional ordnance for her aircraft, expenditures on the order of $150 million would be involved for this item alone. German statements to the effect that they do not need the military items involved in the offset are therefore clearly untrue. Our best estimates are that, unless something is done, there will be a very large gap between the foreign exchange costs of US deployments to Germany (an average of approximately $850 million a year over the next five years) and German foreign-exchange expenditures on the military account in the US (predicted by the Germans to average $350 million a year). Therefore, unless changes are made, a gap of $500 million a year should be expected next year and probably every year thereafter. It would not be wise for the United States to accept this gap as a continuing situation. I believe that we should break the problem into two parts. The first part is the current offset referred to above; the second part is the follow-on offset arrangement. With respect to the current offset, the agreement to place $1,350,000,000 of orders by the end of December 1966 cannot be fulfilled. Payment, however, of the $1,350,000,000 by June 1967, in accordance with that part of the offset arrangement, could be made despite the reduced budget by German borrowing for prepayment against future orders. This approach is not fully satisfactory, but is probably the most we can now ask for. The Chancellor almost certainly will object to such an approach, but in my view we should push hard for this form of fulfillment of the current offset. With respect to the follow-on offset arrangement, we should: a. Press the Chancellor for a larger defense budget and consequent offset. In view of the Chancellor’s political problems, the pay-off from this pressure may not be great in the next two years, but it may produce returns in the longer run. (In this connection, the Chancellor may propose the inclusion in the offset of purchases of space items, items destined for foreign military assistance, passenger aircraft for the German airline, and so on. We should accept any items which are truly “additional” and not merely a “giving of credit” to Germany for purchases, such as the passenger aircraft, which Germany would make here anyway. The total of such “additional” items will be very small and therefore almost irrelevant to the basic problem. b. Insist on trilateral (US–UK-Germany) discussions to address the question of how the remaining gap will be closed—including arrangements for US troop reductions. We must face the fact that the United States can deal with any remaining gap only (1) by cutting US military expenditures in Germany or (2) by absorbing the balance of payments drain caused by the excess of US expenditures over German offset. I believe we can cut US military expenditures in Europe by about $200 million ($160 million in Germany) without significantly reducing our military effectiveness. (The JCS do not concur.) This $200 million total is reached by reducing each division slice by 10,000 support personnel (a total of 50,000 men, producing a saving of $125 million); by “dual-basing” approximately half of our 700 reconnaissance and fighter aircraft (saving $60 million); and by other economies ($15 million). But a deficit in the vicinity of $300 million is likely to remain. This $300 million cannot be saved without removing major combat units. Even the $200 million adjustments may have a traumatic psychological impact in Germany, in NATO and in the United States. Adjustments to close all of the remaining $300 million gap, by cutting US combat power, would be even more traumatic and, in my view, dangerous; but I believe some reductions in US combat power will have to be considered if the problem cannot be solved in any other way. The Secretary of State and the Secretary of the Treasury have received copies of this memorandum. The Secretary of the Treasury concurs in it. I believe the Secretary of State does also; however, he is planning to supplement this memorandum with a paper describing the political pressures which today limit the Chancellor’s freedom of action. Robert S. McNamara Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. 171. Text of Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Walt Rostow, vol. 13. According to Rostow’s September 19 memorandum (Document 170), the telegram was received that day. In a memorandum to the President, September 20, attached to the source text, Rostow summarized and endorsed McGhee’s conclusions. Washington, September 20, 1966. TEXT OF CABLE FROM AMBASSADOR McGHEE (Bonn, 3361) SUBJECT The Offset and American Troop Level in Germany The German Position As indicated previously, all indications are that Chancellor Erhard will, during his meeting with the President on September 26–27, seek a “stretch-out” of the existing offset agreement ending on June 30, 1967, and both a reduction and extension to other types of purchases in any future agreement. In effect, what he is seeking is a 50 percent scaledown from June 30, 1966 on. I previously analyzed Erhard’s situation both economically and politically and concluded that he will not be bluffing. Document 163. He has little choice. Erhard, will, I predict, throw himself on the President’s mercy on the basis of his and Germany’s past performances as a good ally—ie, for having met the offset up till now, for the large increases in the German military budget from 1961–1964, for the purchase of Roosa bonds and for support of U.S. policy in Vietnam. U.S. Reaction The U.S. reaction to Erhard’s appeal will, I believe, be one of the most important decisions the U.S. has faced in the post-war period. It can be made only at the highest level in our Government. If we are able to reach agreement with Erhard without significantly reducing U.S. combat forces in Europe, we have an opportunity to stabilize the NATO of the 14 and U.S. relations with Germany at a critical time. If, however, we fail to reach agreement and move to reduce our combat forces in Germany (a division or more) as a direct consequence of German failure to meet the offset, the following adverse consequences can ensue: A. The Erhard Government will fall, or will in any event be irretrievably weakened. Neither he nor his successor, after such a U.S. turndown, would in the future be willing to base German policy on the U.S. with confidence. Germany and America will tend to drift apart. B. The U.S. troop commitment is not to Germany but to NATO. It can be changed only after full discussion with NATO. If it is known that we have presented NATO with a fait accompli on U.S. troop levels as a result of German failure to meet the offset, our position in NATO will be greatly weakened as will the whole future of NATO itself. C. If we reduce our forces under such circumstances the British will, as they even now indicate, certainly do so. There is no reason why others should not follow suit—the unraveling of NATO will begin. D. It would be necessary to review the concept of flexible response which we have promoted, since the remaining NATO forces might have to resort immediately to the use of tactical nuclear weapons in the event of an all-out Soviet attack. Increased European pressure will result for the early use of our strategic forces—inviting Soviet retaliation on our cities. E. The U.S. Seventh Army would be broken up as a fighting unit. The divisions sent home would probably be scattered and dissipated. A reduced 7th Army could not only not hope to stop a conventional Soviet attack but would, in all probability, not even be able to defend itself or retire in order. F. The U.S. would have lost perhaps its only opportunity to bargain for the withdrawal of equivalent Soviet forces. G. It would be clearly not just to Germans but demonstrated to Europeans that we put a low price tag on our military commitment to Europe. In the future Europeans would have little confidence in our assertions that American and European security are indivisible or that we, as we say, consider the Soviet threat to be undiminished. H. Germany, which has until now depended almost entirely on the U. S. for its security, would be forced to reorient its basic security policy. This could take the form of increased dependence on Gaullist France, a “go-it-alone” nationalism or efforts to accommodate itself with the Soviets. I. If Germany increases its forces to make up the gap created by our withdrawal, the status quo with the East would be altered and fears would be engendered in Europe as well as in the East. J. The Soviets could be expected to assume a much stronger position vis-à-vis Germany and Europe. They would be in an increasingly better position to make exorbitant demands and engage in blackmail, particularly in Berlin where we, as principal recipients of such pressures, would have only a weakened 7th Army as backup. K. America would no longer be able to play a decisive role in the great decisions affecting the future of Europe which still lie ahead. Western Europeans would increasingly tend to handle their own affairs independently, possibly including a rapprochement with the East. L. Our ability to influence internal developments in Europe and to obtain support for U.S. efforts in other areas, such as Vietnam, would be greatly decreased. M. Groups in America who are already clamoring for a reduction of U.S. troops in Germany will be encouraged by the example of their own Government. It would be difficult to arrest an increasingly isolationist trend. Result: U.S. force reductions under present circumstances would, because of the cumulative effect of the foregoing, be considered generally as a major shift in U.S. policy. History would record it as the ebb point—the beginning of an American withdrawal from Europe. Proposed Tactics in Dealing with Erhard In order to avert the foregoing consequences, it is recommended that: A. If, as I anticipate, Erhard presents a strong case for relief under the present offset, that we accept debt pre-payments of $214 million and the purchase of Roosa bonds for $136 million in substitution for $350 million in the present target (that amount not already budgeted or planned for including $170 million from the 1966 budget, a $250 million pre-payment in 1966 and $350 from the 1967 budget). B. That for the future, we agree with the Germans: 1. In order to effect a saving to Germany under the offset we will reduce our offset costs, beginning July 1, 1967, to a maximum figure to be subsequently agreed, through attrition of backup and logistical personnel (perhaps to $600 million through loss of between 25 and 35,000); the timing of the announcement of this move would be left open for agreement with the Germans in the light of their domestic situation. 2. German public purchases in the field of space, foreign aid and other areas where additionality can be established will be counted toward the offset where specifically approved (the annual amount in these categories will probably not exceed $25–50 million); and that, 3. The remainder will be met through additional training and arms purchases to the maximum extent possible (even the Germans would agree to $350 million as a level of recurrent purchases), and where this is not possible by suitable financial arrangements (probably by the purchase of Roosa bonds). C. That a joint U.S.-German Commission will be appointed to give effect to these recommendations which, in cooperation with the U. K. and NATO, would initiate studies as to: 1. German ability to meet the offset; and, 2. The optimum level of U.S. and other NATO forces in Europe. Mr. McCloy would be appointed as our representative to this commission heading a U.S. negotiating team composed of representatives of State, Defense and Treasury. The joint commission would meet as soon as possible and, as appropriate, with their U.K. opposite numbers, looking toward a final report, to be followed by review of their findings in NATO insofar as troop levels are concerned, before the end of the year. 172. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Erhard 1966. Secret. Washington, September 21, 1966, 9:30 p.m. SUBJECT Your 10:00 AM Meeting on the Erhard Visit At Tab A is a one-page agenda Tabs A–C are not printed. suggesting how you might structure the meeting. (I will have a copy on your blotter in the Cabinet Room.) At Tab B is an intensively negotiated position paper on the major issues. It was produced by the Bowie-Leddy/McNaughton/Deming/Bator working group, after a lengthy discussion with Ball, McNamara, and Fowler. I think that the principals will approve the paper as an accurate reflection of their views, but, because it wasn't finished until late this afternoon, they have not had a chance personally to review it. Nor has Walt. At Tab C is George Ball’s vivid analysis of the German politics of this group of issues. At Tab D is a copy of Bob McNamara’s memorandum of a few days ago.Attachment to Document 170. Strictly speaking, there are only two points of disagreement among your advisors. They are marked in the margin of the Tab B paper, which you should read first. Very briefly: 1. On the current offset (the agreement ending last June), your advis-ors agree that we must try to hold the Germans to the original payments schedule, but that we should let them meet that schedule in part through purchases of long-term bonds. McNamara and Fowler believe that we should also offer to stretch out by 6–12 months the present requirement that the Germans place weapons orders in the full amount ($1.4 billion) by the end of this calendar year. However, they would insist that the FRG come through with all of these weapons orders by the end of the stretch-out period. Ball believes that we should agree to reduce the commitment to place weapons orders by the amount of the bond purchases. (My vote is with Ball, for reasons spelled out in his paper at Tab C.) 2. On dealing with the British, it is agreed that we should try to get them to delay announcement of BAOR cuts until the end of the trilateral talks (mid-January). McNamara and Fowler believe that we should try to do this by diplomatic pressure alone, and that, if that fails, we should grin and bear it. Ball believes that, if diplomatic pressure fails, we should offer to divert enough of our own defense orders to Britain to offset the foreign exchange cost of delaying the troop cuts (about $18 million for a three-month delay). (Again, my vote is with Ball. British troop cuts announced in mid-October and justified in balance-of-payments terms could undermine the entire trilateral exercise.) FB 173. Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Fowler to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 12. Secret. Fowler reiterated these points in a 4:15 p.m., September 26 telephone conversation with the President. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation between President Johnson and Secretary of the Treasury Fowler, September 26, 1966, 4:15 p.m., Tape 66.26, PNO 1 and 2) Washington, September 25, 1966. SUBJECT Visit of Chancellor Erhard—the Current Military Offset Agreement It may become necessary to stretch out the military orders requirements of the current offset agreement, but we do not want to stretch out the payments requirements. To meet the payments requirements, it probably will be necessary to work out arrangements between Finance Minister Dahlgruen and Bundesbank President Blessing and me. We need to have Erhard on the line that the financial requirement will be met on time—that only the techniques need be worked out. I do not feel that there would be any reasonable chance of success in making such arrangements unless Dahlgruen and Blessing were given firm instructions by Erhard to do so. Thus, if we are to employ this technique, it is important that you obtain a firm commitment from Erhard that a financial arrangement which meets our requirements both in amount and time schedule will be concluded. There are two possibilities: a. If Erhard is prepared to place orders for military equipment sufficient to fulfill his existing offset commitment but cannot obtain funds from the budget to meet the payments commitment, the shortfall should be made up by purchase of a non-negotiable U.S. Government security which could, in substance, be redeemed only for the purpose of making payments for military equipment. b. If Erhard is unable to fulfill his commitments on the magnitude of military orders and on payments directly related to them, he should be asked to agree to the purchase of long-term United States securities equivalent to the shortfall in payments. Such securities should be of extended duration (12 to 15 years), since they would be a substitute for the sale of military equipment. Redemption prior to maturity could be permitted after the first few years, in the event that Germany encountered serious balance of payments difficulties. The debt instrument could not, however, be readily negotiable. The criteria of extended duration and limited negotiabilty are essential elements which should be included in any understanding you reach with the Chancellor. The financial transaction would need to be in effect by June 30, 1967. Henry H. Fowler 174. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Obst. A note on the source text reads: “Uncleared interpreter’s notes.” The meeting was held at Blair House. Washington, September 25, 1966, 4:30 p.m. AMERICAN PARTICIPANTS Secretary Rusk Under Secretary Ball Ambassador McGhee Harry Obst (Interpreter) GERMAN PARTICIPANTS Chancellor Erhard Foreign Minister Schroder Defense Minister Von Hassel Minister Westrick State Secretary Carstens State Secretary Von Hase Ambassador Knappstein Hermann Kusterer (Interpreter) Secretary Rusk opened the conversation by telling the Chancellor about the meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko the night before in New York.A memorandum of conversation is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 84. He said the actual conversation had taken place after dinner and Gromyko who had spoken English at a preceding meeting had reverted to the use of an interpreter. Most of the discussion had centered around bilateral matters, like the release of certain individuals in Soviet custody and proposed changes in the mutual civil air agreement. Another topic had been the Space Treaty, originally proposed in Geneva. Much time was spent talking about Vietnam. The atmosphere was calm, no threats and violent adjectives were used, as opposed to what happened in the UNGA.Although Vietnam was not an item on the General Assembly agenda, the Soviet Union used the time allotted to it in debate to charge that the United States and its South Vietnamese allies were waging a war of “aggression” and to call for U.S. military withdrawal and a negotiated settlement of the conflict. Soviet charges were set out in a letter to the Secretary-General, July 11. (U.N. doc. S/7401) Hanoi had instructed Moscow they would not begin any negotiations before the U.S. had unilaterally stopped the bombings in North Vietnam. On the other had they had not promised to be ready to talk if the bombings would stop. Equally on the subject of non-proliferation no new lines had developed. The Soviets continued to resist a treaty proposal that would not bar the NATO countries (non-nuclear) from getting access to nuclear weapons in one form or another. No new conclusions were reached, no progress made on this subject. Mr. Foster and his delegation were present in New York and would try to follow up the subject. The conversation had ended about 11 p.m. He was expecting to have another meeting with Mr. Gromyko in the near future. Chancellor Erhard stated it was very hard to come up with satisfactory answers on some of these questions. As regarded the questions of Offset, a common strategy of defense, cooperation between the European partners, non-proliferation etc.—all these were intertwined and could hardly be discussed as separate entities. How could one provide for a reasonable policy, make proper provisions for European Defense without knowing the exact concept of contemplated nuclear strategy. Old projects need not necessarily be revived (MLF/ANF) but the question was how to find a common solution for all concerned. If the two blocs agreed not to give nuclear weapons to their allies (NATO-Warsaw Pact), there was still the question what would the “neutral” countries do. If the book was once closed, how could the cooperation continue, how could one still find a common solution? The question was how to obtain a total nuclear strategy for the Alliance as a believable deterrent. This was a question that could not be evaded in the talks he (Erhard) had had with his delegation earlier that morning. If the proposed tripartite talks would concentrate only on Offset, they would not be very useful. There should be talks first between the US and the FRG on the aspects of their mutual security. In this direction German government policy needed some support. There were many influential people, if not in the administration then certainly in Parliament, that are unhappy with the current state of affairs and are looking for more or less strong alternatives or changes in the status quo. Sure, in the same breath they will declare they needed the U.S., would remain loyal to the U.S., etc., but in reality they were also looking in new directions. Some solid arguments were needed before the German people in order to reassure them. The government was under much pressure. Just to get the 1967 Budget through Congress would be a gigantic task. Some 30 existing laws would have to be changed in order to reduce expenditures. This would have psychological consequences. Add to this the Offset burden and other political problems and you can see how difficult our situation is. Secretary Rusk assured the Chancellor the U.S. government was aware of these difficulties and shared the concern. The President would meet him with an open mind and sympathetic attitude. The Chancellor added, he did not want to be misunderstood. There was no question of not keeping existing treaties and fulfilling obligations to the full amount. But under the circumstances an appropriate form would have to be found to allow the FRG to keep its commitments in a way consistent with realistic possibilities. The Central Bank was trying not to jeopardize the dollar, the FRG was buying no gold, the FRG was helping to support the Pound Sterling. Along similar lines, to be discussed in detail later, solutions may be found. This should be possible among close friends and allies. Among business partners too there was such a thing as a “prolongation”. A follow-up agreement could be worked out on June 1. An amicable solution of this matter among friends would be to the benefit of the President also, not just for the German government. It was important to successfully resolve this matter. Secretary Rusk asked Mr. Ball to comment on some of these questions, as he (Ball) had been in touch with the President and Cabinet while he (Rusk) was away in New York. Under Secretary Ball assured the Chancellor that the President had deep respect for the policy the FRG had followed domestically, with regard to NATO, its European policy, its Atlantic policy, its policy towards the underdeveloped nations and its support of the US position in Vietnam. The US policy versus NATO had not changed. The US would keep its commitments. The US was paying a toll of a hundred lives a week to support a people of 14 million in SEA. The major question was how all the NATO nations could find a way to act together. de Gaulle had taken a big step away. Belgium was contemplating reduction of troops. Britain was thinking about reducing their troop strength. This erosion process was a matter of deep concern. If there was going to be a double standard it would be hard for the US Administration to defend itself against domestic pressures for reduction. The problem should be approached from the angle of not jeopardizing the security of anybody. He (Erhard) was right in saying certain things could not be looked at separately. There should be a way of finding an arrangement without disturbing your (FRG) problems further and without having to go to a postponement (of offset payments). More flexible long-term agreements on balance of payment could be worked out that would include Britain. Britain had similar problems (Wilson Cabinet plans, reduction of BAOR) and domestic pressures that would have to be considered. Unilateral actions could further unravel the Alliance. One could have tripartite talks on these matters and still carry on bilateral talks. A solution would have to be found in terms of everybody’s security. Some aspects would have to be checked with all the NATO countries. This approach would take the focus away from the balance of payments in the direction of common security. The Chancellor stated he was not in principle against tripartite talks. It seemed more important, however, for the US and the FRG to talk bilaterally about their mutual problems (Offset, nuclear sharing). Some solution should first be found between the two, be it anywhere along the spectrum from a “hardware” solution to “Any kind of a voice” with regard to the nuclear question. Then one could also talk to the British. We are in touch with the British on foreign exchange matters already. A committee of top experts is to present proposals to the two governments by Oct. 13/14. This might provide a basis. Of course, he was attaching the necessary attention and importance to the British position on NATO (transport large units quickly once depots are available) troop strategy. Nor did he want to say that US troops should remain on German soil in all eternity. But at present their presence was very important. He needed to have a clear picture for himself and for the German people of their security within the Alliance. He must have a clear picture on nuclear matters. This was no longer avoidable. Also the EEC countries may soon grow into a political union which would have to be considered as a factor. (From this point in this memorandum comments from the American side are not included, as simultaneous interpretation allowed no note-taking. Ambassador McGhee was taking notes that might be available.)Not found. Chancellor Erhard said he could not only look at the non-proliferation question from the standpoint of German security, but would also have to consider the problem of reunification. The Germans knew reunification could only be achieved peacefully, but a number of peace-loving Germans that were trusting the US were very much concerned about an agreement that could perpetuate the status quo. Secretary Rusk asked the Chancellor’s opinion on the German public attitude towards tripartite talks. The Chancellor replied there was no unfavorable public opinion other than the simple fear that the US wanted money of the FRG and Britain wanted money of the FRG, and now they wanted to gang up together to put Germany in a 2:1 minority. (Laughter) Foreign Minister Schroder commented what was needed was a clarification of the common objectives. Sitting at the point of confrontation the German public was very sensitive about certain simple aspects of security. People ask what would happen in the first minutes of a confrontation. Would the little region of the FRG really be defended? What would it take to release a nuclear counter attack? Any reduction of troops by allies, any talk in this direction from the Pentagon was making them more insecure and nervous. Some say why should we bother to maintain a high level of conventional troops, if others do not even maintain their low levels? What was needed were some long-term assurances (like no reductions by 1970 or so) about maintaining levels. Any necessary reduction should be proposed within a general clear security strategy and be counterbalanced somehow, not done unilaterally or out of context. The US, Germany and Britain should have some long-term consolidation, though not at the expense of other partners. A clear picture on this was necessary for any German government, even an SPD government, if such government was to meet its responsibility to its people. Chancellor Erhard followed this up by pointing out the relative security felt by the people during the period of “massive retaliation”, when nobody ever criticized extra expenses in the defense sector, as opposed to the insecurity felt since the introduction of the “flexible response” strategy with its “thresholds” and “pauses”. Should the Russians for example want to take Hamburg, the FRG might reply with tactical nuclear weapons. The Soviets might answer with tactical nuclear weapons first also and might attack at another point. Would at this point, or a little later, the decision to employ a full response be made any easier for the US President with the fires of war already on the world’s horizons? To us, you and the Russians a big nuclear war is unthinkable as a solution. But then how believable is our strategy of deterrent to the man in the street in Germany. As long as there was the strategy of full response and sure retaliation it sounded believable. Foreign Minister Schroder suggested a military briefing of 45 minutes or so might be included during this visit (or if not now possibly at a later date). This briefing to be in the presence of the President, maybe by Mr. McNamara, similar to a briefing Chancellor Adenauer received in 1961. Chancellor Erhard supported this idea. He once again conjured up the image of a small-scale Soviet attack on German territory. Somewhere along the line of escalation, the Soviets would have to be told: one more step will unleash the full nuclear force. With all our trust in the US and our allies will we and the man in the street be sure the rest of the world would be ready to die for the sake of saving Germany? These are very realistic fears disturbing the German people. Mr. Schroder added, it was exactly because of this why the presence of US troops was so important as a symbol of US involvment and a token and pledge of commitment. To him, frankly, the thesis of “massive retaliation” never made any military sense but sounded just like a political argument that was convenient. Chancellor Erhard stated that for the reasons cited by Schroder the US stand in Vietnam was so important and encouraging to the Germans. Secretary Rusk emphasized that the US had never abandoned any of the territory of its Allies and taken enormous casualties to honor their commitments. They had 7,000 warheads in Europe they would certainly not abandon to the Russians, and the only way the Russians could get them is “to have them stuffed down their throat”. Chancellor Erhard said he fully trusted the US but had to consider the theoretical possibility of an agreement between the US and the Soviets never to attack each other to which the FRG could fall victim not having even a voice in nuclear defense. Such arguments could be heard in the Bundestag. Secretary Rusk assured the Chancellor he could understand his concern. He hoped the forthcoming talks would clarify many points. He had noted with curiosity that during the talks with East European foreign ministers at the UN in New York the usual invective against the FRG was missing. There was a noticeable response to Mr. Schroder’s policy of rapprochement. This was an encouraging sign. (The meeting broke up about 6:30 p.m.) 175. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Erhard Visit September 1966. Secret. Washington, September 26, 1966, 11 a.m. Mr. President: I have been in touch this morning with Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, and George Ball. On the critical issue of the current offset agreement, they recommend the following for your talk with Erhard at 11:30.See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 207. 1. You recognize that his budgetary position does not permit him fully to offset, as promised, in military equipment. 2. It is, of course, impossible for the U.S. to carry the balance of payments effects of this situation. 3. Therefore, you are prepared to have his monetary experts and ours get to work immediately to find other means of offsetting U.S. balance of payments costs for the rest of the fiscal year. 4. The longer term solution must emerge from the tripartite military and financial review which you hope he will join. In this connection you hope he will appoint a man of the stature of John McCloy capable of dealing with both the military and financial aspects of the longer term problem in the spirit of the Alliance. Walt P.S. If he agrees, you can then come back to the Cabinet Room and instruct your experts to work hard this afternoon to establish: (a) an agreed formula for the communiqué; (b) an agreed arrangement for working out the details on the short-term agreement in the days ahead, in which Joe Fowler might be our negotiator. 176. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 11. Confidential. Drafted by Puhan and approved in the White House by Bromley Smith on December 2. The meeting was held at the White House. McGhee discussed Erhard’s visit in At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 190–193, 199–200. President Johnson discussed the visit and its background in The Vantage Point, pp. 306–308. Washington, September 26, 1966, 12:30 p.m. SUBJECT Offset PARTICIPANTS German Chancellor Erhard Foreign Minister Schroeder Defense Minister Von Hassel Minister Westrick Ambassador Knappstein State Secretary Carstens State Secretary Von Hase Dr. Ruete Interpreter American President Johnson Secretary Rusk Secretary McNamara Secretary Fowler Under Secretary Ball Ambassador McGhee Mr. Bowie Mr. Bator Mr. Stoessel Mr. Puhan The President stated that the Chancellor had explained to him his budgetary difficulties.At their 11 a.m. meeting; see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 207. While intending to fulfill his commitments, the Chancellor had expressed the wish to find some other formula which would make it possible for the Germans to stretch out their payments beyond the due date of July 1, 1967. The President reported that he had told the Chancellor of our difficulties. He said even if the Germans had encountered no problem in meeting their current obligation to us, we still faced great problems. The President said he had suggested that his and the Chancellor’s advisers get together to consider solutions to the current problem. The President said he had assured the Chancellor he understood his problems and didn't want to add to them. He remarked that neither of us wants to win an argument and lose a sale. He suggested that we examine the alternatives. Chancellor Erhard reported he had told the President of the great value he placed on his relationship with the President and the talks they were having. He wanted to assure everyone that the Germans had stood faithfully by the United States, ready to support it, to support the U.S. dollar. Now the Germans found themselves in a situation where they found it difficult to meet their obligations within the time frame set. The Chancellor referred to his efforts to come up with as much of the offset as he could. He spoke of his conversation with the President of the Bundesbank. He asked that there be no misinterpretation placed upon German inability to fulfill its contract in time. The President asked the Chancellor whom he wished to designate to meet with our experts to discuss the problem of the current offset. He thought that Mr. Ball and Secretaries Fowler and McNamara should form our team. Mr. Ball suggested that the Germans include Dr. Blessing of the Bundesbank since obviously there would have to be financial discussions. The Chancellor reviewed some figures regarding funds available to the Germans. He said they could get $250 million from the Bundesbank to which they could add prepayment of the post-World War II debt of approximately $214 million. This would bring their total resources to $470 million. At this point the President urged again that the experts meet to find a solution. Chancellor Erhard said he wished to add that the German Defense Budget would have to be increased to cover the present offset as well as the future one. It was agreed that Mr. Ball, along with Messrs. McNamara and Fowler, would meet with their German counterparts later. 177. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 GER W. Secret. Drafted by Obst on September 29. The meeting was held at the Department of State. The source text is marked “Part I of I.” Washington, September 26, 1966, 1 p.m. SUBJECT Secretary’s Talks with Gromyko PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Chancellor Ludwig Erhard—Federal Republic of Germany The Chancellor thought it important that the search for solutions to the problems common to the two countries should in no way impair their traditional friendly relations and solidarity. This solidarity should be emphasized to the public and not just an account given of the matters that were currently pressing. On the other hand one should avoid creating the impression that there were no problems. These should be talked about, but above all it should be made clear that friendship and solidarity remained unshaken. The Secretary nodded his approval. He said he had been surprised by the atmosphere during his recent conversation with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko in New York. He had expected the usual harsh language and threats. However Gromyko had abstained from the usual invective against the FRG and from accusing the US on Vietnam. Not one angry word had fallen. This contrasted sharply with previous occasions when no opportunity had been missed to denounce the FRG. The Secretary did not attach any particular importance to this but it seemed that Gromyko had been under instructions from Moscow to abstain from violent adjectives. The Chancellor asked the Secretary how he appraised the outlook for a non-proliferation treaty after his talk with Gromyko. The Secretary answered that matters stood where they had been before. A treaty that would allow the NATO countries access to nuclear weapons was unacceptable to the Soviets. Because of their insistence on this point, there was no narrowing of the gap between the views of the two sides. He did not know if any importance could be attached to Gromyko’s remark, when the latter’s attention was directed to the Warsaw Pact nations, that we should not try to get involved in political relations between individual countries but rather concentrate on the real issue—the transfer of atomic weapons to non-nuclear nations. In the past, in similar discussions, the Soviets had always brought forward an array of political arguments, especially about individual NATO nations. The Secretary had once told Gromyko the latter sounded as if he was trying to obtain a 16th seat on the NATO Council with veto power. The Chancellor inquired if the Secretary was worried about any “nuclear power” ever getting involved in the Vietnam conflict. Seen from the perspective of Bonn it seemed that the Soviet Union was paying only lip service to the cause of Hanoi but did not really want to get involved. The Secretary replied he had had a meeting with Mr. Rapacki just before the talks with Gromyko.See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 206. The Polish Foreign Minister had threatened that the entire communist bloc might get together to come to the aid of Hanoi if the US would continue the war in Vietnam. He had told Rapacki that the US was prepared to face the consequences of such an action. No such remarks had come from Mr. Gromyko, though the latter and the Polish Foreign Minister, he felt sure, were keeping each other informed. The Chancellor commented the FRG was always hearing the bitterest language from Poland. They had given the harshest reply to the March Peace Note. This was all the more disappointing as there was much desire for reconciliation in the FRG, and the matter of borders would certainly present no problems in the event of German reunification. The Secretary remarked it seemed to some people as if there were two blocs in Eastern Europe: a Northern Bloc, with a more frigid attitude, comprising the Soviet Union, Poland and the DDR, and a Southern Bloc, comprising countries like Rumania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria, with an attitude more relaxed and open to the West. The Chancellor replied there was some truth in that theory. However, those three in the “Northern Bloc” surely did not look like natural allies. Poland’s resentments applied to East Germans just about as much as to the West Germans. The relations between Poland and the Soviet Union had historically always been unfriendly. Maybe it was only the power of the Soviet Union that was keeping the three together. He asserted that there was hardly a German left to whom the revision of the Oder-Neisse Line was sacred. Reasonable borders could be arranged. Some arguments were only retained as a political bargaining position, not out of conviction. 178. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Secretary of Defense McNamara Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and McNamara, September 26, 1966, 7:40 p.m., Tape F66.26, Side B, PNO 1. Secret. The transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume. Washington, September 26, 1966, 7:40 p.m. LBJ: Bob? RSM: Yes, Mr. President. LBJ: How did things go this afternoon? RSM: Well, we didn't have any meetings. They kept postponing all afternoon and, obviously, didn't know what they wanted to do. Finally—so we cancelled our meetings with them. And we weren't much better off than they were. Every one of us has got a different idea of what ought to be done. Then about 6 O'clock, Von Hassel called and asked if he could come over. I just arrived home from talking to him and he said that the Chancellor hasn't decided yet what to do but Von Hassel said he wanted to give me his ideas. Now, I think he was sent in— LBJ: Sure, sure. RSM: … to float this. But the net of it all is that it’s a terribly complicated thing. And the net of it is that they would fulfill the present offset agreement, but it would lag along awhile. They would use various means that I'm sure Joe [Fowler] wouldn't like but which, on balance, I think you could say fulfill the present offset agreement. And I think that one of our objections must be to put ourselves in a position to say to Mansfield they did fulfill it, even though it’s by hocus-pocus. But, in any event, that’s the first part. Secondly, for the future … LBJ: Didn't say how? RSM: Pardon me? LBJ: Didn't say how? RSM: Yes, they … LBJ: Is he talking about prepaying this loan and stuff? RSM: Well, that’s one of the items. I said, well, we couldn't accept that, and so they've got an alternative. But— LBJ: What is it, buying? RSM: Well, they take. … they say that our Federal Reserve is holding—let me see now—there are short-term obligations which they would convert to medium term to the extent of 250 million this year and, depending upon that 214, either 178 next year or 250 next year and then an additional about 112 the following year. In addition, they would increase their defense budget, which, for '67, starting January 1, is presently planned at 18–1/2 billion marks. They'd increase it by one billion marks, which is another 250 million. And out of all of this, they'd get enough to pay off. As far as the orders go, they would slip those six months and fulfill the order commitment by June 30 of next year. So, in a sense, I think there is a lot of negotiating on the details, but I think we can work out a satisfactory arrangement on the present offset, at least that would be satisfactory to me and, I think, Joe would probably accept it grudgingly ultimately. On the future— LBJ: What would it do to our balance of payments this year? RSM: Well— LBJ: We're short 650 now on account of them. RSM: That’s right. LBJ: How much would we be short if their proposal went through, three or four hundred? RSM: Well, yes, about that. We'd get … LBJ: About half of that? RSM: There’s a hundred-odd million that we seem to be in dispute on figures. I've got to straighten that out tonight. But then there is another 250 that we'd get this year, and the rest would come in next year, unless there was a 120 million or so slop-over into the following year. They say the Bundesbank is limited on the amount of conversions of short into mediums that they can take. Then they say they don't want any more 2-year agreements. They'd like a 5-year agreement for the future, and they can only, in effect, offset 350 million. They'd purchase 350 million a year from us and pay for it on a specified schedule. The purchases would start next year—if I understood this correctly—and run for the 5 years through 1971, and the payments would start the following year and run through 1972, 350 a year, which is less than half of what we'll spend because, as their price level rises and as our military salaries rise, our foreign exchange costs go up. They have averaged 725 million a year, we believe, in '65 and '66. We think they'll average for the next 5 years, 850 million, and of the 850 million, they would offset only 350. LBJ: Uh huh. RSM: Now, I think we can reduce that 850 some. LBJ: How much, when you pull all your troops out of there? Just suppose that you decided that we couldn't afford it— RSM: Right. LBJ:—we had to move them back— RSM: Right, right. LBJ:—we could get them back with all your— RSM: Yeah. LBJ:—modern transportation and everything pretty quick, couldn't you? RSM: Well, this is where we get lots of controversy, Mr. President. I believe we could. Of course, if we were going to pull them all out, it would be quite a difficult movement back because we just have—I've forgotten the tonnage—something like a million tons of equipment would be in Germany. We've had 750,000 tons in Germany and 750,000 tons in France, if I recall correctly, and that’s a tremendous quantity of stuff to move. But what we'd do, if we pulled them all out—which I think is such an extreme situation, I can hardly visualize it—but if we did, we'd leave practically all the equipment there, and we'd have to hire some Germans to oil it and maintain it, and then we'd have to run exercises periodically, putting the troops back in so we'd get some skill at it. I think it’s inconceivable to pull them all out, but if we did, it would take a month to get them back, which is far beyond the limits of what others consider reasonable warning time. It might take a month and a half to get them back. If, on the other hand, we pulled, let’s say, 55,000 out, plus half the Air Force, I think we could get those back easily in 2 weeks. And it’s inconceivable to me that the Russians would go from a period of calmness to a full invasion of Germany in less than 2 weeks. I just don't think it could be done. So from a military point of view, Mr. President, I think substantial force adjustments are justified. Unless we handle it right, however, there would be a terrible political cost. And that’s our problem. LBJ: Well, how do we handle that right? RSM: Well, I don't know. I think tonight and tomorrow we ought to— LBJ: Looks like to me, we ought to take advantage of this opportunity to make him tell us that he cannot afford to have our troops there. RSM:—and he wants our troops out. That’s what I think we ought to do, Mr. President. That’s right. That’s exactly right. And I worked on Hassel some in Paris on this exact point.At the July 26 meeting of the NATO Nuclear Planning Working Group; see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 189. And that’s why they've been saying in the press recently that they think, conceivably, we can take some out. But today, they began taking the line that they didn't think we ought to take any out until 1969 or '70. Schroeder asked me if we couldn't get you to make a statement to Erhard to that effect during the meetings, and I said that I was almost certain you wouldn't be willing to make that decision at this time. That you would want the tripartite group to examine that. Then this afternoon— LBJ: Are you coming tonight?President Johnson was hosting a State dinner in honor of Chancellor Erhard. RSM: Pardon me? LBJ: Are you coming tonight? RSM: Yes. LBJ: Maybe I can sit next to you (?). Mrs. Johnson called to remind you that if they arrive on time, it would be 7:50, and it’s now 7:45! RSM: I know it. LBJ: Goodnight. RSM: I haven't even dressed. I just walked in the door— LBJ: You can be as late as you want to, because we're upstairs, you know, [inaudible]— RSM: Yeah, oh, that’s right. 179. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 11. Confidential. Drafted by Obst and approved by Bromley Smith of the White House on December 2. The meeting was held at the White House. The source text is marked “Part 1 of 3.” Part 2, dealing with educational exchanges, is not printed. Part 3 is Document 180. Washington, September 27, 1966, 11 a.m. SUBJECT Discussion of Communiqué PARTICIPANTS Chancellor Ludwig Erhard President Lyndon B. Johnson Walt W. Rostow (intermittently) Hermann Kuesterer (German Interpreter) Harry Obst (American Interpreter) The President presented to the Chancellor a draft proposing the establishment of rapid telecommunications (sort of “hot line”) between Washington and Bonn.In a 9:40 a.m., September 27 memorandum to the President, Rostow reported that “Secretary Rusk believes that it would be constructive for you to raise … the setting up to Bonn of a direct line for quick communication.” (Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Erhard Visit September 1966) The Chancellor agreed to the draft and both initialed it. The President then discussed with the Chancellor the communiqué to be issued.For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 403–406. On most points there was agreement. The Chancellor first objected to the inclusion of reference to certain initiatives of the Italian government in the field of technical cooperation on space and related matters. The President called in Walt W. Rostow who convinced the Chancellor that inclusion of this reference was no longer avoidable as the Chancellor’s Cabinet Ministers had already agreed to it and the Italian government had been informed. The Chancellor then agreed to the inclusion. Another item the Chancellor objected to was the inclusion of the term “cold war”, used with reference to relations with Eastern Europe. The Communist camp was always employing the term “cold war” in their tirades against the FRG and using the two words (cold war-West Germany) in one breath constantly. After consulting with Mr. Rostow, all sides then agreed to a new version of this paragraph. The Chancellor told the President briefly about the talks held earlier that morning with Secretary Rusk and Governor Herter on the Kennedy Round.Memoranda of conversation of their discussion are in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 587, vol. 12. He assured the President that his views were similar to those of the US and he would do everything possible to further the success of the Kennedy Round. 180. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 11. Confidential. Drafted by Obst and approved by Bromley Smith of the White House on December 2. The meeting was held at the White House. The source text is marked “Part 3 of 3.” Part 1 is Document 179. Part 2, dealing with educational exchanges, is not printed. Washington, September 27, 1966, 11 a.m. SUBJECT Southeast Asia and Viet-Nam PARTICIPANTS Chancellor Ludwig Erhard President Lyndon B. Johnson Walt W. Rostow (intermittently) Hermann Kuesterer (German interpreter) Harry Obst (American interpreter) The President brought up the subject of Indonesia.Reference is to the suppression by the Indonesian army of a Communist-inspired coup. He outlined the situation there and the scope of American assistance and emphasized how much was at stake. What had happened there was a great victory for the West but had not been sufficiently publicized by the news media. One reason why the US government had not emphasized the success too much was that there had been some uncertainty if the improved situation was definitely there to stay. Because of this uncertainty it was extremely important for the Free World to assist in any way possible. This might tip the scale in their favor. The US would aid Indonesia to the tune of several hundred million dollars. He asked the Chancellor if the German government could find a way to help the Indonesian government through such measures as the sale of machine tools on favorable credit terms. The Chancellor said he agreed that this was an important area. The attitude of the FRG toward Indonesia had changed since the disposal of Sukarno. He would see what he could do in this direction. He assured the President of his great admiration for his handling of the crisis in Southeast Asia, that the President had gone to the limit of his possibilities unhesitatingly, which showed his great courage and firmness to support the cause of freedom all over the world and stem the Communist tide. He emphasized that the results of the Vietnamese elections had been a very good thing.The elections were held September 11. It had answered those critics that contended that the United States was defending South Viet-Nam against Communism against the will of the South Vietnamese. The President said there were some hopeful signs in Southeast Asia. He mentioned the Manila Conference which he was going to attend.October 24–25. He said the solution of the Viet-Nam conflict would greatly enhance not only his own image and prestige but also that of the Chancellor who had been giving the American side his warm support. The President then suggested that the talks be continued on the flight to Cape Kennedy and the communiqué issued later in the day. Johnson and Erhard left the White House by helicopter at 2:24 p.m. for Andrews Air Force Base and then flew to the Kennedy Space Center in Florida where they arrived at 3:36 p.m. The President and Chancellor participated in a motorcade and tour of the space facility. They returned to Washington at 8:55 p.m. (Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) For text of Johnson’s remarks at the Space Center, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1966, Book II, pp. 1074–1077. The Chancellor agreed. 181. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 11. No classification marking. A notation on the source text reads: “Rec'd 10/10/66—11 a.m.” Washington, October 10, 1966, 10:15 a.m. Mr. President: In connection with our position on non-proliferation, this [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] report, which I take to be accurate, should be read. It shows clearly both the German commitment to non-proliferation and the problem they would have if we tried to jam down their throats the sort of agreement now proposed to us by the Russians. In particular it shows that we will have problems, which I believe are surmountable, if we make explicit in a treaty our position on the veto. If we go beyond, with the Soviet language, I think we have a better than even chance that the Germans would not go with us. Walt AttachmentNo classification marking. Washington, September 23, 1966. [2 paragraphs (7 lines of source text) not declassified] The following is a position paper on the problem of nuclear non-proliferation prepared by the CDU/CSU Bundestag Fraktion Committee for defense and foreign policy. The draft, which is dated 29 June 1966, was prepared by the Committee after presentations made by the German observer in Geneva, Ambassador Schnippenkoetter, on 15 February and 19 April. The drafting committee consisted of Dr. Kurt Birrenbach, Theodor Baron Von Und Zu Guttenberg and Dr. Werner Marx. The Committee recognizes the decision of the Federal Government to support in principle non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, i.e., not to put these at the disposition of the national authorities of non-nuclear powers. The Committee doubts whether a global agreement, as sought by the nuclear powers, is the most practical method to achieve non-proliferation. The Committee is working on the assumption that none of the powers now in possession of nuclear weapons has any intention of giving such weapons to other states. In view of the special structure of the Warsaw Pact, this hypothesis is considered to be particularly valid for the Soviet Union. The Committee notes that the Federal Republic surrendered the right to manufacture nuclear weapons when it signed the Paris Agreement of 1954.For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 425–434. The Committee therefore expects other states whose status is comparable to that of the Federal Republic to make a similar renunciation before the Federal Republic is asked to offer additional concessions. The Committee views an unqualified ban against proliferation as tantamount to a division of the world into nuclear and non-nuclear powers. Such an arrangement, chartered as it would be in international law, could prejudice the security and the political roles of the non-nuclear powers for an unforeseeable future. It would have a particularly negative effect on a united Europe of the future. It is the opinion of the Committee that a non-proliferation accord must be reached within the wider framework of a disarmament agreement. Such an agreement should provide for a step-by-step reduction of nuclear weapons and carriers currently in the possession of the nuclear powers, make arrangements for appropriate controls, and ensure that the strategic balance of power both on the European continent as well as in the world as a whole is not disturbed. This requirement appears to the Committee all the more necessary because the non-nuclear powers of Europe obviously feel themselves threatened by the more than 700 Soviet medium-range missiles emplaced along the Western frontier of the Soviet Union. The Committee sees a decisive difference between a waiver to the right to possess nuclear weapons which is made to an ally and an agreement involving a third power such as is proposed in the present drafts. The latter would make the Soviet Union the arbiter over the nuclear structure of the Western Alliance. The Committee is firm in the belief that the Federal Republic should participate in a non-proliferation agreement if the following conditions are met: a. That the possibility for an agreement providing for the shared control of nuclear weapons among the powers of the Atlantic or European areas is neither excluded nor prejudiced. b. That an agreement is reached which safeguards the interests of the Federal Republic and of the other free nations of Europe. c. That the international situation of the Federal Republic and especially its objectives in respect to all-German policy should not be prejudiced in either a formal or a substantive sense as a result of its participation in an agreement to which the Soviet Union is also a signatory. d. Within the context of Section V, Item 1 of the German Peace Note of 25 March 1966,For an extract of the note, see ibid., pp. 914–918. the above signifies: 1. That the Federal Republic’s claim to be the only legal representative of Germany is fully recognized in the agreement. 2. That the regulation of the military status of Germany, the implementation of which is reserved for an all-German Peace Treaty, should not be prematurely applied to a divided Germany. End Report [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] 182. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US. Confidential. Drafted by Puhan on October 14 and approved in S on October 19. The meeting was held in the Secretary’s office. The source text is marked “Part 2 of 2.” Washington, October 13, 1966, 6:45 p.m. SUBJECT The President’s Speech PARTICIPANTS Georg von Lilienfeld, Minister, German Embassy Berndt von Staden, Counselor, German Embassy Secretary Rusk Alfred Puhan, Country Director for Germany Von Lilienfeld said Carstens had also asked him to present the following German observations on the President’s speech of October 7 before the editorial writers in New York.For text of the speech, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1966, Book II, pp. 1125–1130. The German Foreign Office had noted the President’s speech with great interest and regarded it as significant. They welcomed the President’s avowal of American responsibilities vis-à-vis Europe and the emphasis he placed on the interdependence of the Atlantic Alliance as well as the affirmation of the partnership between the United States and a united Europe. The Germans also welcomed the desire, expressed by the President, to arrive at an understanding with the East. The Germans noted with satisfaction that President Johnson adhered to the view that peace in Europe was not assured as long as the cruel division of Germany was not removed. The Germans, finally, welcomed the remarks by the President that troop levels in Europe would be determined by the assessment of the threat and that a reduction of Western troops would be made contingent upon a lowering of troop levels on the side of the Soviets. Von Lilienfeld reported that Carstens wished to point out, however, that he had noted in a number of places deviations from formulas used in the past. He did not want to exaggerate the significance of these new formulations, but could not help but express some concern that the Soviets might conclude from these new formulations that we had decided to opt for the status quo in Europe. Carstens referred to three subjects in this connection. The first concerned the German question. While noting with satisfaction that the reunification of Germany remained, as before, the objective of American policy, the Germans had got the impression from the speech that the reunification of Germany was seen by the United States no longer as an issue which would be realized simultaneously with the relaxation of tensions but was viewed rather as the end result of the détente. The Germans noted further in this connection that the President’s speech did not touch upon Four-Power responsibility for German reunification nor the right of self-determination on the part of the Germans. They noted also the absence of the formulation that the Federal Republic was the sole representative of all Germans. In connection with the frontiers, Carstens wished to point out that the American Government until now had consistently repeated the view that the final determination of Germany’s borders would have to await a peace settlement involving all of Germany. Carstens noted that it was not possible to tell from the remarks of the President whether this continued to be the view of the American Government. The third German concern entailed the question of priorities in security matters. The Germans noted that the confrontation between the Warsaw and Atlantic Pacts could only be overcome on the basis of the status quo, if progress in resolving the German question was not made a condition. This gave the Germans concern. In the German view the two were irrevocably linked. The Secretary promised to study the German observations and in due time give them our comments. In the meantime he wished to make the following immediate comments: 1. He thought the President had placed unusual emphasis on German reunification. 2. On the question of the reunification of Germany and the relaxation of tensions between East and West, he noted that we were simply agreeing with our European friends who have been telling us all along that German reunification cannot be obtained until after a détente had been achieved. He noted in this connection that Europeans generally, including the Germans, were out in front of us in seeking relations with the Eastern Europeans. On the subject of what was omitted from the speech, the Secretary simply wished to note that the President had made a short speech which could not be complete in every respect. He reiterated however that he would give a more detailed reply to the Germans in the near future. 183. Telegram From the Mission in Berlin to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–USSR. Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Bonn, London, Moscow, Paris, USAREUR, CINCEUR, and USNMR SHAPE for POLAD. Berlin, October 20, 1966, 1555Z. 528. NATUS. Subj: Brandt-Abrasimov meetingsThe Mission reported on Brandt’s October 12 discussions with Abrasimov in telegram 494 from Berlin, October 14. (Ibid.) Brandt discussed the meetings in My Life in Politics, pp. 159–161. as seen from both sides of the Wall. 1. In seeking to assess the Brandt-Abrasimov meetings one cannot but be impressed with the degree of mutual interest that lies behind them and that suggests their continuation. 2. From Abrasimov’s viewpoint there are important long and short-term advantages which seem to outweigh the disadvantages. An important long-range gain for the Soviets is the establishment of direct contacts and continuing discussions with a potential German government leader at a time when the ruling parties in Bonn appear to be in some disarray. This offers the Soviets both a certain assurance for the future and a shorter-term prospect that the present Bonn government might feel itself compelled to initiate new policies of its own toward the East, from which the Soviets may benefit. Continuance and expansion of the Brandt-Abrasimov relationship therefore offer possibilities for (A) giving further impetus to the SPD inclination, marked since the Dortmund Convention, to undertake new approaches toward the East; and (B) nurturing suspicion and friction between the principal parties on the domestic political scene, between Berlin and Bonn, and between Brandt and the Allies in Berlin. 3. On Berlin matters, Abrasimov will undoubtedly be considering ways in which the Soviets can capitalize on Brandt’s desire to give Berlin a new role in East-West matters. By encouraging Brandt in thinking that certain of his Berlin projects might get Soviet support he may see a means for obtaining Brandt’s backing, or at least tacit acceptance, of an increased Soviet presence and role in West Berlin. Direct dealings with Brandt as GovMayor would give substance to the Eastern thesis that West Berlin is a “special political entity,” they would tend to weaken the link between Berlin and the Federal Republic, and they would promote a de facto Quadripartite status in West Berlin alone. 4. The principal disadvantage for Abrasimov is the effect of his association with Brandt on his relations with Ulbricht. Ulbricht is certainly anything but pleased at the prospect of a continuing—and perhaps expanding—dialogue, since this reinforces the overriding role of the USSR as the most useful party for West Germans to talk with on all-German matters. It makes clear that the Soviets intend to maintain as many channels as possible for dealings on the German and Berlin problems. It undermines somewhat Ulbricht’s own efforts to foster “negotiations” in various channels with the FRG and the West Berlin Senat. Although the dialogue thus raises certain doubts and fears among the East German leaders, they certainly are aware that they cannot effectively prevent it. The Soviets doubtless know this too and will therefore want to press ahead without too much concern for East German anxieties and misgivings. 5. From Brandt’s viewpoint the dialogue with Abrasimov is another step forward in the SPD’s effort to open new avenues of approach to the East, an effort in which Brandt has himself taken the leading role. In domestic political terms he has seen the opportunity to build up his own prestige nationally by demonstrating imagination and initiative on East-West matters shortly before important elections in two West German Laender. In a broader sense he has achieved greater maneuverability for himself vis-à-vis the GDR and has undercut to some extent the latter’s hoped-for role on all-German matters. While the immediate political benefits are important to him, it is our belief that he conceives of his new relationship primarily as offering a hope for eventually breaking through the impasse that has characterized the German problem for many years, and regarding which he and many other Germans have concluded that the Allies are not going to create movement. 6. In West Berlin political terms these meetings mark a new phase in the post-Wall history of the city. Only about a year ago such encounters would have been criticized whereas now they are generally accepted and even widely approved. Brandt not only perceived this trend but helped to create the conditions that made such talks possible. While his primary interests are undoubtedly broader than Berlin, he sees the dialogue also as a step forward in his efforts to improve Berlin’s position in a changing East-West situation. He sees opportunities, moreover, for going around Pankow and establishing a direct line which can be helpful in getting the GDR to agree to improvements in the Berlin situation. Brandt may regard his contact with Abrasimov as being favorable to Allied interests as well, or at the least, he may consider that certain of his Berlin interests can be moved ahead without running into direct conflict with Allied rights and responsibilities. 7. It is in this area that the most difficult problems arise for the Allies. The Soviets, for example, might be led to believe that they can achieve certain objectives in Berlin regardless of Allied objections by dealing directly with Brandt. So long as Brandt sincerely pursues interests which are shared by the Allies and the Senat and so long as he is forthcoming with us about his talks, they may be advantageous to both. If, however, he established arrangements for a continuing dialogue with the Soviets, the contents of which may not be fully revealed to the Allies and which may touch on Allied interests, this could lead ultimately to an undermining of the Allied position in the city. In the past Brandt has been mindful of Allied interests and realistic in his handling of them, but it may be necessary for him to be reminded occasionally that he cannot deal with the Soviets officially and with commitment of matters relating to Berlin which affect Allied rights and responsibilities. In the most recent meeting (October 12) Brandt discussed certain specific Berlin problems which have heretofore been handled by the Allies and suggested continuing Soviet-Senat contact on them. This represents a departure from his earlier comments (September 29) to Abrasimov that such matters were for discussion with the Allies. As indicated in Bonn 4735Dated October 19. (Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–USSR) an Allied approach to Brandt on this aspect of his talks is presently under consideration by the Bonn Embassies.In telegram 70626, the Department of State commented that while it objected to receiving short notice of these meetings, they might be of advantage to the Allies and, in any case, “There is little we can do to keep Brandt from seeing the Soviet Ambassador whenever he wants to.” (Ibid.) Calhoun 184. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 15 GER W. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Brussels, London, Moscow, Paris, Rome, The Hague, and USUN, and passed to the White House. Bonn, November 2, 1966, 1803Z. 5393. Subject: Implications of a new German GovtOn October 27 the FDP members of the Erhard Cabinet resigned. The CDU/CSU agreed on Kurt Georg Kiesinger as their candidate for Chancellor on November 10. Following an accord between the CDU/CSU and SPD on a “grand” coalition on November 27, Erhard handed in his resignation on November 30. for US policy. 1. While the Embassy will continue to report significant day to day developments affecting the current German governmental crisis, it may be useful at this point to attempt some assessment of the overall implications insofar as US interests are concerned. The still fluid situation in Bonn as to the precise contours of the next govt brings with it both opportunities and dangers in our relations with Germany. At this juncture, the latter will probably predominate. 2. There is reason to think that Germany has reached a watershed in its postwar political development. In retrospect, it may well appear that the Erhard govt was the last govt of the postwar era. There are, of course, objective limits within which German policy must develop. However, the postwar era was also marked by many self-imposed limits. Some of these will now disappear, regardless of the composition of the next govt. This will become especially notable if CSU leader Strauss, as appears likely, should occupy an important position in a new govt; however, it is basically not a matter of personalities. A trend toward greater self-assertion and closer attention to specific German interests has, of course, been evident for some time. It has not yet markedly affected German foreign policy, mainly because the Erhard govt tended to respond more to the traditional postwar influences than to the new demands for greater German assertiveness. The next govt will, we believe, cease to operate in this postwar framework, which was characterized inter alia by a disposition on the part of the German Govt to look to us for guidance on almost any given issue. 3. There is a natural German tendency for French influence to fill any vaccum left by a diminution of Germany’s ties with the US. The momentum toward closer relations with France will probably continue for some time. Although it is unlikely to result in basic policy changes, since the French have in the final analysis little to offer the Germans, the new govt will doubtless try to give the public impression of a better “balance” in its relations with the US and France. 4. On the other hand, the impending change in govt will also bring opportunities for us as well as Germany. While the new govt which finally emerges from the transitional period will almost certainly be more difficult to deal with than its predecessor, it will also be a more strongly led govt, more willing to play an active role. It will be better able to fulfill its undertakings. Although the new govt will not proceed from the assumption that there is a virtual identity of US and German interests, it can be expected to recognize that there will remain a large area where our mutual interests are sufficiently close to permit fruitful cooperation. After all, Germany must continue to rely on us for its basic security. 5. During this transitional period, we shall obviously have to proceed with great caution. There is a tendency, although fortunately not expressed widely or forcefully, to put some of the blame on us for the demise of the Erhard govt. President de Gaulle’s press conference statement of Oct. 28For text, see Charles de Gaulle, Discours et Messages, vol. 5, pp. 96–117. was undoubtedly meant, with deliberate intent, to be the coup de grace for Erhard as the man who had spurned cooperation with France in favor of a close tie to the US. Fortunately for us, however, there are so many obvious reasons why Erhard must be replaced, and the view that he must is so universally held here, that we may get off lightly. 6. What should we do in the meantime? Some of the immediate consequences are obvious, and we do not wish to belabor them. We must lean over backward in order to avoid the impression that we are in any way interfering in the present crisis. We can probably live with any govt that emerges—no matter who is Chancellor or what form the coalition takes. There will be a tendency here to look closely for indications of US intervention, and every statement we make will be combed over with this in mind. During the period in which we must wait for the formation of the new govt we should, through our normal foreign policy pronouncements do what we can to create an atmosphere which will work in our favor in its selection and orientation. The following issues appear to be relevant. A. The offset. Any concessions made now to Erhard under the current offset would appear to be an intervention in his behalf. The best we can do is to maintain a neutral stance, and stand ready to enter into discussions with any government that emerges on how the current German undertakings will be fulfilled. It will continue to be difficult for us to grant concessions at this stage, even if we so desired, since it would be hard to explain why we offer to a new Chancellor what we withheld from Erhard. A forum now exists in the Trilateral Committee for discussion of future offset agreements, which obviates the need, for the time being, for us to make any new statements on this issue. When the new government is ready to deal with this problem, it is conceivable that we may be confronted with a firm German proposal, with Parliamentary backing. We do not, at this juncture, believe that such a proposal would seek to renege on the current commitment to pay DM 3.8 billion—or necessarily to seek a moratorium; however, it may affect the mode of payment. Any proposal on a longer range offset in the Trilateral Committee will probably correspond closely to that made by Erhard in Washington. B. Trilateral talks. Little progress can be expected on the broad policy aspects of the Trilateral talks until a new German Govt has had time to determine its policy toward the issues involved. Earlier actions to induce the Germans to accept decisions—especially on troop withdrawals which they will probably oppose strongly—should be avoided. If the Germans get the impression that vital security objectives are being sacrificed because of US–UK financial requirements, they may seek an alternative—such as a closer bilateral understanding with the French—which would be damaging to the Western Alliance. C. Détente. During the last year German opinion on Eastern policy and reunification has been developing quite favorably from our point of view. However, the process has been slow and uneven and these issues remain among the most contentious in German politics. During this transitional period we will, therefore, want to exercise great care in interpreting our own policy on these issues. The central theme of such interpretations should be to emphasize that we have no intention of jettisoning our fundamental postwar policy in Central Europe. Our basic position on Germany’s Eastern frontiers, and of active support of German reunification by whatever peaceful means are available, remain unchanged. On the other hand we would not wish to negate the basic Eastward-looking impact of the President’s speech of Oct 7. D. Presidential visit. Until Erhard’s fate is determined, it would of course be inappropriate to say anything about a possible Presidential visit to Germany, resulting from the invitation Erhard recently extended in Washington. Soon after a new Chancellor takes office, we will undoubtedly wish to invite him to Washington. If on this occasion the new Chancellor should issue a new invitation and if the European situation as a whole is appropriate, I would hope that the President could respond favorably. E. Non-proliferation. We should not, during this period, take any decision to make important substantive changes in our draft non-proliferation treaty, especially if they effect options on a NATO or European nuclear arrangement. After a new government is formed, careful consideration should be given as to how consultations on this issue should be handled. Since there is much apprehension here that we will present the Germans with a fait accompli on this issue, we should take every opportunity to reassure them that they will be fully consulted. 8. The foregoing views must necessarily be only tentative and subject to revision in the light of what is a rapidly changing situation. We should, however, be fully aware that an important turning point has now been reached in Germany, and be ready to take advantage of any opportunities favorably to affect the attitude of a new government. Forbearance may, however, at a given point be just as important in this connection as speedy action. McGhee 185. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL US–USSR. Secret; Exdis. There is no time of transmission on the source text; the telegram was received at 10:45 a.m. Moscow, November 12, 1966. 2207. State 83455.Telegram 83455, November 11, reported on a meeting with Carstens in which the Germans discussed the proposals for troop withdrawals they intended to send to the Soviet Union. (Ibid., POL 28 GER B) 1. During my farewell call on DepFonMin Semenov, Kohler left Moscow on November 14. Llewellyn Thompson presented his credentials on January 23, 1967. I asked him on purely personal basis, and stressing I not making any proposals, whether Sovs still interested in ideas we had considered in our earlier discussions on German question and European security, such as reduction US and Soviet troops in Germany, exchange of observers, etc. 2. Semenov, whose previous comments made it clear Sovs want preserve status quo in Germany, responded in very guarded manner. He said it was difficult for him to comment as these questions had recently been overshadowed by others and were outside scope Soviet attention. However, he expressed view all those questions were not dead; they had not arisen by accident, and would have to be reverted to at some point if peace in Europe to be strengthened. Citing non-proliferation as example, he also noted that those questions might again arise in somewhat different form. 3. While Semenov’s remarks seem indicate continued Sov interest in some form of limited disengagement in Europe, I do not believe Sovs would be interested at this time in any formal arrangement re mutual troop reductions. For one thing, in view publicity this question in Western press they probably assume that US–UK troop levels in Europe would be reduced in any event. Also, they would not wish to substantiate ChiCom charges re US-Soviet collusion by entering formal agreement which could be interpreted as allowing transfer US forces from Europe to SEA. What concerns me most, however, is that FRG suggestion, apart from its own inherent complications, would inevitably involve us in discussions with Sovs on broader aspects of German problem, including Berlin and Oder-Neisse questions, which at this time could not be profitable and could only disturb present quiet on that front.In telegram 6197 from Bonn, November 22, McGhee commented that while agreeing with Kohler’s view that the Soviets would not agree to force reductions, he believed the United States had nothing to lose in joining Germany in a joint approach on the issue. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6) Dept repeat elsewhere as desired. Kohler 186. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 11. Secret; Exdis. Bonn, November 29, 1966, 1445Z. 6452. Personal for the Secretary from Ambassador McGhee. Subj: Berlin voting rights. I am sending this telegram to you personally because I know of your interest in this matter. Since I consider it very important that our position in the matter be made at the highest level in the Dept., I would appreciate a personal reply. 1. As you know, the issue of voting rights for Berlin Bundestag Deputies has again arisen in connection with the current governmental crisis in Berlin. A so-called mini-coalition between the SPD and FDP which was at one time seriously considered could only have been viable on the basis of the Berlin votes. When the three Allies, according to plans approved in the three capitals, reiterated in response to press queries that the Allied position on voting rights had not changed, Brandt and Mende of the FDP reacted sharply. In fact, it is obvious that if the Allies at this critical point had changed a position dating from 1949, as a favor to one German political party in resolving a political crisis in its favor, it would have been tantamount to Allied intervention in German domestic politics. State Sec Carstens, in a Quadripartite Berlin meeting yesterday, agreed fully that the three had no other choice. 2. The likelihood now is that a grand coalition between the CDU and SPD will be established in the formation of which the Berlin votes will have no importance. The immediate urgency of the issue has, therefore, probably passed. I believe that it is quite possible, however, that after the new government is in office, it may seek a change in the Allied position because of (A) the public discussion that has been renewed on the matter, (B) the SPD long-range interest in having its strength in Berlin accrue to its strength in the Bundestag, and (C) the likelihood that the new government will pursue a more active policy on Berlin and all-German questions. This will be particularly true if Brandt becomes FonMin. 3. I therefore believe that it is necessary to consider now what the US position should be if faced with such a request. Before the Tripartite position was made clear by the three Embassies, Brandt appears to have been acting on the assumption that Washington would not insist on the maintenance of the reservation on voting rights. He still appears to detect a cleavage on this issue between the Embassy and the Department. This matter is of such importance that, in my opinion, an established US position is required which can serve as guidance in our discussions—either locally or in Washington—with representatives of the new government. 4. In formulating our position, I believe that we must have a clear understanding of the political and legal consequences for our presence in Berlin which could result from the voting of Berlin Deputies. First, let us take a look at the legal background. The issue of the voting rights of the Berlin delegates in the Federal legislative bodies lies at the very heart of Quadripartite agreements defining Berlin’s special status. For the purpose of exercising their occupation rights in Germany, the four powers agreed in the London Protocol of September 12, 1944,For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 1–3. to divide Germany into four Occupation Zones and to create a special “Berlin area.” Greater Berlin was not at any time part of any of the four Zones of Occupation. For this reason, the three Allies have repeatedly rejected the Soviet claim that Berlin is “in” or “a part of” the GDR. By the same token, the three Allies have taken the position that Berlin may not form a part of the Federal Republic. 5. In accordance with these principles the Military Governors, in May 1949,For text, see ibid., pp. 260–262. took action to ensure that Berlin was not incorporated into the organization of the Federal Republic as originally contemplated by the framers of the Basic Law. While permitting “greater Berlin” to participate “in the federation,” the Military Governors withheld from Berlin representatives the right to vote in these bodies and also decreed that Berlin may not be governed by the federation. 6. If Berlin Delegates were to exercise full voting rights in the Federal legislative bodies, this would mean that the Berlin population and Land Berlin through their representatives would participate in an essential function of government in the Federal Republic like the rest of the West German population. Voting membership of the Berlin Delegates in the Federal legislative bodies thus would mean de facto membership of Berlin in the Federal system, contrary to the Quadripartite agreements. The membership would likely become increasingly de jure as the Federal Government would probably follow up this step with other measures which would logically flow from the granting of voting rights to the Berliners. While this development would not nullify the right of the three powers to be in military occupation of Berlin, which stems from the defeat of Germany, the exercise of the right could become legally precarious. 7. Viewed from the political point of view, the argument can be made that we can dispense with the legal formalities defining and arising out of Berlin’s special status so long as an Allied military presence is maintained there. It is certainly true that this presence, not international agreements, is the final deterrent against Communist encroachments. However, I believe that the crisis of 1958–62 demonstrated the great value of maintaining the integrity of our legal position. In their November 1958 “free city” proposal, the Soviets took pains to attempt to demonstrate to world opinion that they were promoting a reasonable solution to West Berlin’s anomalous situation, based on allegedly defunct Quadripartitie agreements. Our ability to rebut this latter line helped much to expose the falseness of the Soviet rationalization and the aggressiveness of Moscow’s intentions. 8. The same is true with respect to access by the three Allies and the German population to Berlin. The right of the Allies to unrestricted access to Berlin is an essential corollary to their right of occupation. The Soviets however may contend that the arrangements concluded to enable the Allies to exercise this right were affected by the abolition of the separate status of Berlin. A blurring of the status of Berlin would work to their advantage if they chose again to make access dependent on GDR permission. 9. I would emphasize that such an effort on the part of the Soviets is, in the Embassy’s view, not to be expected as an immediate result of the granting of voting rights. The immediate Soviet response would probably be more in the nature of propaganda than of action. The Soviets show no inclination at present to rock the boat in Berlin and would probably confine their reaction to protests and to the final incorporation of East Berlin into the GDR administration. (They might also further stiffen their opposition to the inclusion of a Berlin clause in international agreements.) Even so, retaliatory harassment of access routes is obviously within Communist capabilities, and so we cannot exclude this possibility from any assessment of consequences. 10. A further consideration which causes me concern pertains as much to the Germans as to the Soviets. If the FRG increasingly assumes de facto governing responsibilities in Berlin, we could find ourselves in the future in the unenviable position of having formal responsibility for the security of Berlin but without having all the control strings firmly in our hands. For example, the FRG quite probably would undertake more frequent Bundestag meetings in Berlin if the Allies were not in a position to exercise restraints. The Bundeswehr logically could be expected to assume a role in Berlin. We would, of course, still be expected to resist Communist countermeasures. Similarly the Berlin Senat would accept a larger and more active Soviet presence in West Berlin if Allied control should weaken. Again the Allies would have to face the consequences. Given the potential dangers of any Berlin confrontation, this is obviously a situation we would want to avoid. 11. Looked at from the Allied point of view in Berlin, the desirability of keeping intact the present status of Berlin’s voting rights is evident from the foregoing. But we must also recognize that a Federal Government in which the Social Democrats participate will be less likely to go along with this position than previous Federal Governments have been. The question therefore will arise whether in the light of our over-all relations with the FRG we can or should maintain a position which the FRG will consider outmoded and (by the Socialists) discriminatory. Given a determined stand by a German Government to alter the status quo, we would probably have to make the best of a bad situation by acquiescing in the move. Continued resistance on the part of the three Allies could seriously strain our relations with the new government and—in the end—might be fruitless. 12. These considerations have guided our contingency planning so far. The three Allies in consultation here agree that their position under present circumstances has been made clear and, consequently, there is no need for further action or statements at this time. If, despite the Allied stand, the Germans proceeded to count the Berlin votes in the nomination of a Chancellor, the three Embassies would not contest the move but would issue a public statement to the effect that our rights in Berlin are unaffected, and make a confidential démarche to the new government pointing to the pitfalls of this course of action. There is some disagreement, however, as to how strong this démarche should be. The British do not agree to a specific caution in this context against allowing the Berlin Delegates to vote on legislation. This is also the sense of the Department’s current instructions to us (State 90602).Telegram 90602, November 23, provided instructions regarding contingency planning for Berlin. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–2 GER W) I believe that such a caution would be highly desirable. Without committing ourselves to any specific course of action we should send a grave warning as to the consequences of this next step, which Carstens told us yesterday would surely follow. 13. This leads to the consideration of the second and—as I have indicated—more likely contingency, namely, that the new government will not count the Berlin votes in naming a new Chancellor but will move at some later date to adopt a law validating the Berlin votes for substantive legislation. The new government would, I believe, approach the Allies before embarking on such a course but might well couch this approach as a decision about to be taken—rather than a request for approval. To cope with this possibility I believe we should seek agreement with the British and French to approach the FonOff—presumably to be headed by Brandt—shortly after the formation of the new government. The three Allies would take note of Brandt’s previously expressed wish for consultations and of statements by SPD spokesmen indicating an intent to initiate new legislation to validate the Berlin votes. Without threatening, we would say that we oppose such a step for reasons which we would outline and that if it is taken unilaterally we would have to have a second look at our Berlin obligations. At the same time, in the spirit of consulting, we would state that we are prepared to consider the views of the German Govt if they wish to present them. 14. Such a démarche might have the effect of checking a German initiative before it became entrenched. Since we would preserve our freedom of action, we would reserve for the time our final decision in the light of the developing circumstances, including the degree of cooperation shown by the new government and the Senat in Berlin affairs and the attitudes of our British and French Allies. McGhee 187. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Berlin Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 14 GER B. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Puhan, cleared by Stoessel, and approved by Katzenbach. Repeated to Bonn. Washington, December 3, 1966, 3:10 p.m. 96238. From the Under Secretary to Ambassador McGhee. Subject: Berlin Voting Rights. This will confirm our telephone conversation regarding Berlin voting rights.No record of the conversation has been found. As I indicated to you, we would like the Germans to take the initiative, if there is to be any change in policy. We would like to have assurances from them that if they plan to make any change in policy they will consult us first. To accomplish this, you are authorized to make a low key approach to Carstens, or someone else of your choice, and convey to him our hope that the FRG would not change its position without prior consultation with the three. You may want to inform the British and French of this low key approach.In telegram 6740 from Bonn, December 6, McGhee reported he had carried out the démarche. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 12) As we discussed, any substantive discussion of this should be done tripartitely. As I said to you on the phone, the above reflects the Secretary’s views and I shall talk to the Secretary earliest at greater length about this issue. You will receive instructions on the substantive position soonest.In telegram 97910, December 6. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 14 GER W) Rusk 188. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 12. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to London, Paris, Berlin, Moscow, Brussels, The Hague, and Rome, and pouched to all other NATO capitals and Consulates. Bonn, December 8, 1966, 1940Z. 6936. Subj: Meeting with Brandt. 1. I called on ForMin Brandt today at his request. This was his first official day at the FonOff and I was his first visitor. He had come into the office only briefly yesterday and had met with the Ambassadors at a reception this morning. Brandt received me cordially and warmly reciprocated my expression of pleasure, personally and on behalf of my govt, in working with him in his new capacity. He appreciated Secretary Rusk’s message and looked forward to seeing him in Paris on Wednesday and Thursday of next week—also at the Quadripartite dinner. He was sorry that he could not meet him on Tuesday, as the Secretary had suggested, however, he was detained in Bonn by the Chancellor’s statement of policy to the Bundestag. 2. Brandt then made a brief statement of the new government’s foreign policy. He hoped that we would take it for granted that they reaffirm Germany’s traditional friendship with and confidence in the U.S. They hope to add to what has been accomplished together in the past. There had been problems, particularly in the area now under discussion by the Trilateral Commission, however, he understands that progress is being made. There are a number of problems now facing the government which they look forward to discussing with us frankly, both in seeking advice and soliciting our ideas. He mentioned three particular objectives to which he attached priority: (A) He was anxious to speed up the progress of the Kennedy Round so that its success could be assured. (B) He was anxious to take up the problem of Eastern Europe, and to discuss it at an early date with the French. (C) He hoped that progress could be made concerning the problem of Britain (presumably Britain’s entry into the Common Market). He did not expect sensational changes to occur as the result of the government’s efforts. However, he did hope to put more energy into the solution of key problems. 3. Brandt admitted that he was not too familiar with the detailed problems facing NATO. However, he hoped to inform himself prior to the forthcoming Paris meeting. In his statement to the Bundestag, Chancellor Kiesinger will express the hope to see President Johnson. He will not, however, make reference to statements the President has made in the past of his intention to come to Europe (presumably because it was related to Erhard’s invitation). The new government will, of course, welcome the President if he does come. 4. I queried the FonMin as to what new impulses the govt might add to German foreign policy. Brandt replied that the discussions on foreign policy between the CDU/CSU and SPD, which had led to the formation of their coalition, revealed a high degree of common conviction on foreign policy, in particular, with respect to its presentation to the German people. The Germans need to be talked to as if they were grown up—as indeed they are. The government should not just say all is going well. The problems which Germany faces with the US and France must be explained to the people. 5. Brandt said that the new govt will attempt to make a new start with France. He did not know how far this would get. In his view the German-French Treaty had been more successful than de Gaulle had been willing to admit. This has been particularly true in the business field. Indeed, the treaty itself is only a skeleton—which must be fleshed out. He was glad that PriMin Wilson was going to Paris first, in connection with his talks on UK entry into the Common Market. This will enable Germany to use the apparatus of the German-French Treaty to precipitate long-range discussions with France on the subject—perhaps not immediately but certainly during the latter part of next year. Brandt commented as an aside that he believed the US and France had the same views with respect to East-West relations. 6. Brandt said that the new government was still considering how to approach the nuclear problem. It is clear that Germany does not want ownership of nuclear weapons. They hope that non-proliferation can be worked out so that the legitimate interests of non-nuclear powers can be taken care of. The new government will not take up the so-called “hardware solution”. 7. Turning to all-German matters, Brandt said that both parties—the CDU/CSU as well as the SPD—were determined not to give up the legitimate aim of Germans to reunify themselves. They hope to develop technical instrumentalities to strengthen ties with the Eastern Zone in the humanitarian, cultural, scientific and economic fields. This would not, however, involve recognition. 8. It is not yet clear what the policy of the new govt will be toward Eastern Europe. He and the Chancellor agree that they should express the hope that the progress already made can be extended. They were prepared to normalize diplomatic relations if a formula could be found in accordance with German interests. They are, however, not yet ready to name particular countries in this connection. The Chancellor will, in his statement to the Bundestag, say something special about Poland and Czechoslovakia, something going beyond the German peace note of March 25. It will, for example, be more specific than the peace note with respect to the Munich Agreement. At the same time, the government would make a gesture to the expellees—including a clear statement that the govt does not approve of their expulsion. The Chancellor’s statement will not mention the Oder-Neisse Line, but will talk of Poland’s future role in Europe. It will show sympathy and understanding for Poland’s suffering as a result of its divisions and its desire for security. The Chancellor will say that, in connection with a peace settlement, Germany will be prepared for solutions that will not “be easy for them.” No reference, however, will be made to the sacrificing of any specific vital interests—an indication will only be given of the general direction of German policy. 9. At this point I gave orally to Brandt, almost verbatim, the statement of policy which had been approved by the Dept (see State 98003 and Bonn 6525).Telegram 6525 from Bonn, November 30, contained the text of a suggested statement of policy. (Ibid.) In telegram 98003, December 7, the Department of State gave its approval to the overall tone of the statement, suggesting a series of additions and modifications in the wording. (Department of State, Central Files,POL 1 GER W–US) To this I added the US policy towards emergency legislation, namely, that we, the British and French hope that legislation will be passed which would permit the lapse of Allied reserve rights to act in an emergency. We would particularly welcome legislation covering the monitoring of post and telecommunications which would enable the Allies to relinquish the rights and responsibilities they are now exercising in this field. 10. In response, Brandt expressed appreciation for the fact that we had prepared such a statement and for the specific statement with respect to German reunification and Berlin. Brandt thereupon raised the question of Berlin voting rights. He did not wish to revert to statements that he had made before assuming his present responsibilities. He did, however, think that the Embassy statement on this issue could have been expressed in a different way. He now wished to discuss this whole question with us fully. As a result of my approach to StateSec Carstens (see Embtel 6737),Telegram 6737 from Bonn, December 5, reported McGhee’s discussions with German officials concerning voting rights. (Ibid., POL 14 GER W) he had “taken care of the Parliamentary initiative (of the FDP).” “There would be no coup d'etat.” He assured me that, although he has issues to raise with us, they would in no way be directed against the rights of the Allies. 11. Brandt said that, as a matter of fact, he also wished to discuss with the Three Powers and the Senat a broader range of questions affecting Berlin, including its future economic situation. This was not with the objective of seeking new aid for Berlin, but rather advice as to how the city should proceed as had been sought after the building of the Wall. 12. I assured Brandt that we would be glad to discuss the voting rights issue or any other Berlin issue at any time. The Secretary hoped in particular to discuss this with him when he saw him in Paris. I did not wish to go into the details of the recent role of the Allies in this connection. I felt sure that if there were time to explain the situation from our viewpoint he would agree that we had no alternative than to take the course we did. I stressed that what we had done was a result of Allied positions taken in capitals. We had not made a statement but had responded to questions after a situation had developed which we felt necessitated the affirmation of our position. 13. Brandt stated that the new govt will, of course, fulfill its offset obligation. Also, it will in its discussions in the Trilateral Commission, seek to clarify its budget problems. (There was no time to clarify whether he meant this with respect to the present or only future offsets.) He expressed appreciation for our interest in the problem of the “technological gap.” This will be appreciated by the EconMin Prof. Schiller. In the German presentation in Euratom with respect to the Polish proposal, they emphasized that the FedRep did not wish to break up the European cooperation which has been developed under Euratom. However, they hoped an agreement could be worked out with IAEA. Brandt expressed the intention of the govt to proceed with preparation of emergency legislation. McGhee provided further observations on his first talk with Brandt in telegram 6976 from Bonn, December 9. (Ibid., POL 15–1 GER W) McGhee 189. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 12. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to the White House and Paris for the Secretary who arrived there from India on December 13, to attend the North Atlantic Council Ministerial Meeting. Bonn, December 12, 1966, 1955Z. 7031. 1. As you will have seen from Bonn tel 7002Not found. FonMin Brandt, in a speech in Berlin on Dec 10 at an open meeting of the SPD, repeated twice for empasis: “I have myself in the past week been prevented from acting in Bonn as a result of a combination of legal sterility and political malice.” As indicated in reftel, while we have in accordance with existing instructions done nothing further, the British Amb became agitated over this issue and raised it today for tripartite decision so that the three Allies can speak to Brandt with a single voice when this issue is raised at the Quadripartite dinner in Paris on December 14. 2. Brandt is obviously still greatly piqued at the Allied position on this issue taken during the recent governmental negotiations, which had in his view the effect of blocking an FDP/SPD coalition which would have made him Chancellor. Almost all other political observers here believe, on the contrary, that this would not have been a feasible basis for a new govt in Bonn at that time. In any event I do not believe that Brandt’s open attack on the Allies, in using such words, can go unchallenged. To do so would, I believe, invite trouble in the future—not only on this and other Berlin issues but in our relations with him as FonMin. If he elects to believe that the Allies are more tractable under public attack, our troubles have just begun. It is obvious that he has not yet become accustomed to the fact that he is FonMin, with the restraints on public speech which this position sometimes entails, and no longer Governing Mayor of Berlin for whom a major weapon has traditionally been an open appeal to public opinion. 3. Brandt’s basic reasoning which was elaborated to me by Albertz on the evening of Dec 3 in Berlin, appears to be that the voting rights reservation is outdated and that an agreement should be made at once of progressively permitting Berlin Deputies full voting rights. I believe it could well be pointed out in response to such reasoning that there are some who will argue that so is the maintenance of an Allied presence in defense of Berlin outdated (which is precisely the argument the Soviets began making in 1958). If this dangerous argument based on obsolescence were accepted, the point could be reached where the Allies would be forced to reexamine their responsibilities which entail the most direct confrontation with the Soviet Union and ultimately the possibility of nuclear war. 4. As has been pointed out in previous tels we have sent on this subject, the demand that the restriction of voting rights be eliminated raises both the issues of Allied legal rights and Allied ability to control the situation involving the exercise of our responsibilities in Berlin. Of the two the latter may be perhaps more compelling than the former. If Berlin should become a political football, as we have seen it become in recent years in connection with the issue of Bundestag meetings in the city, a situation could arise wherein the Germans egged on by the political parties acting independently and not necessarily as a government could vie with each other in demonstrating the claim that Berlin is an integral part of the FRG. It is only reasonable to recall in this connection the interference with civilian access and jet buzzings of the old Reichstag building which resulted from the last Bundestag meeting there. These incidents—which resulted from a meeting which was not necessary—could easily have resulted in a confrontation. 5. If, moreover, the Germans were to act unilaterally in defiance of expressed Allied wishes, this might well be interpreted as an example of rising German nationalism and determination to “go it alone” in achieving her postwar aims. This could be pointed out discreetly to Brandt. 6. The best argument, however, that could be used by the three Foreign Ministers in Paris, I believe, is as we have recommended in Bonn 6452 Document 186. that if the Allies are faced with a fait accompli it might force them to have another look at their Berlin responsibilities. It could also be stated that there is good ground for holding that German action on voting rights without Allied consent would be illegal and in violation of the Paris Agreement of 1954, as approved by the Bundestag, and could be so declared by the Constitutional Court. Although we would not ourselves desire it, this could have the effect of calling into question the 1954 agreement itself. 7. Our preference would be to have someone else, hopefully the French, take the initiative with Brandt on this issue, as the British have done locally today. In the Quadripartite dinner, we should, I believe, show solidarity with the others and, if necessary, take the initiative ourselves as spokesman on a Three-Power basis. As part of such discussion, it would be well to ask Brandt precisely what he had in mind in the remarks he made on Dec 10 in Berlin. McGhee 190. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Warsaw for Ambassador Gronouski and passed to the White House. Bonn, December 14, 1966, 1550Z. 7104. Subj: Relaxation of tensions in Central Europe. For the personal attention of the Secretary, Under Secretary and Assistant Secretary Leddy. This message was initiated during my visit with Amb. Gronouski in Warsaw and has been the subject of subsequent exchanges between us. It represents my views and those of Amb. Gronouski, based on draft studies in both Embassies, on how relations between Poland and the FRG might be improved and the cause of European stability thus advanced. While certain revisions in this draft have been occasioned by the FRG policy declaration, which was given subsequent to my latest consultations with Amb. Grounouski, I believe that this message corresponds to the substance agreed. He may, however, wish to make additional comments. 1. A resolution of the Central European security problem is essential to a lasting peace in Europe. A key to this resolution is the development of an improved relationship between Germany and Poland. Poland, of all the Eastern European countries, retains the greatest fear and distrust of Germany. Between the two countries there exist the most specific, unresolved conflicts remaining from World War II: (A) The division of Germany and German determination to achieve reunification; (B) The failure to achieve final agreement on the Western boundary of Poland; (C) Poland’s fear of German access to nuclear weapons; (D) Poland’s fear of a possible Soviet-West German deal which would result in reunification without resolving the security of its Western territories; (E) Germany’s fears of aggression by the USSR through and with the support of Poland; and (F) The plight of the German minority in Poland. 2. The absence of diplomatic relations between the two countries is a factor resulting from and contributing to the prolongation of these conflicts. Only in the fields of trade, culture and in the exchange of persons has there been any concrete improvement in relations between Germany and Poland in recent years. However, even in these fields progress has been hobbled for political reasons. 3. The proposal: President Johnson’s October 7 speech, particularly his remarks on German reunification and European boundaries, opened the door to new ways of thinking and working towards a resolution of the Central European problem. Considering the conflicts listed above against the background of the President’s speech, the best possibilities for improvement appear to lie in the following steps to be taken on German initiative: (A) Announcement by Germany of its intention to accept the Oder-Neisse Line, this action to be legalized however only when German reunification is achieved in the context of a final peace settlement. Such a step would greatly reduce Poland’s fear that Germany might attempt to seize the territory east of the Oder-Neisse by force. It would eliminate Polish dependence on the USSR as sole guarantor of the Polish territories east of the Oder-Neisse. By prior agreement, this action could also result in the establishment of Polish-German diplomatic relations. (B) Concurrently with and supporting the action in (A), and as a consideration for a more liberal Polish policy permitting an increased rate of resettlement in Germany of Germans still living in Poland, Germany would renounce the claim of Heimatrecht (the right to return to one’s homeland) for German expellees from Poland, except insofar as this can be achieved by a free negotiation with Poland. This would also make the acceptance of the Oder-Neisse boundary more acceptable to the Germans. (C) At the next extension of the German-Polish trade agreement, increased levels of trade and credit terms more favorable for Poland would be negotiated. 4. German relations with Poland would, of course, also be greatly enhanced if Germany would adhere to a general non-proliferation agreement and would publicly renounce a hardware solution of the nuclear sharing problem, including a reiteration of its oft made denial of any intention to possess nuclear weapons. These issues arise, however, within a broader context and it must not be expected, therefore, that their resolution can be made to coincide with the other steps recommended herein. 5. Comment: (A) There is evidence that Poland may be willing to enter into diplomatic relations with Germany on the single condition that Germany recognize the Oder-Neisse Line. It is difficult politically for any German Government to do this until a peace treaty is achieved as stipulated in the Potsdam Agreement. Few Germans realistically expect to regain territory; nevertheless, many influential Germans feel that advance recognition of the Oder-Neisse boundary would cost them one of the few bargaining counters they have for reunification. The formula proposed in 3 (A) above might be acceptable to Poland and Germany as a compromise. (B) The often but ambiguously expressed claim to Heimatrecht made by some Germans, particularly when linked with a subsequent right to self-determination, is particularly offensive to Poland. Since the Germans have renounced the use of force, it is a claim which can be realized only through bilateral agreement. By renouncing the territory beyond the Oder-Neisse and Heimatrecht, the German Government would lose considerable support among expellees. This would, however, be offset somewhat by permitting greater freedom of movement of Germans to and from the Oder-Neisse territories (para 3 B). (C) Since there is no real possibility for agreement at the present time on German reunification or—on the other side of the coin German recognition of the GDR—the Germans and Poles would ignore these points—agreeing to disagree. Although there is evidence that Poland will insist on FRG recognition of the GDR as a condition prior to eventual “normalization” of relations, it would not be required for the establishment of diplomatic relations. (D) In his policy declaration before the Bundestag on December 13,For extracts, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 935–941. Chancellor Kiesinger had the following to say about relations with Poland: “Large sectors of the German people very much want reconciliation with Poland whose sorrowful history we have not forgotten and whose desire ultimately to live in a territory with secure boundaries we now, in view of the present lot of our own divided people, understand better than in former times. But the boundaries of a reunified Germany can only be determined in a settlement freely agreed with an all-German government, a settlement that should establish the basis for a lasting and peaceful good-neighborly relationship agreed to by both nations.” The new govt thus continues to adhere to the position that settlement of the boundaries will have to await a peace treaty. At the same time Kiesinger emphasized the desire for reconciliation with Poland—and expressed greater understanding for Poland’s desire for secure borders. This could conceivably lead to a decision by the govt to grant—as proposed in (3)—what is essentially de facto recognition of the existing borders to be followed, upon a final settlement, by de jure acceptance. (E) Tact and patience will be required in dealing with the Germans on this issue, however, I am inclined to believe that the present grand coalition may offer better prospects than the previous govt for tangible progress toward a German-Polish settlement. For one thing, it can make certain concessions without fear of exploitation by a major rival party. Moreover, the SPD has been a consistent proponent of a more flexible Eastern and nuclear policy. While not explicitly endorsing the recognition of the Oder-Neisse Line, a number of speakers at the June 1966 Party Congress—including FonMin Brandt—hinted that Germany must reconcile itself to the loss of the territory east of the Line. (Brandt said: “Many people act as though we have the territories east of the Oder-Neisse. They also act as though friendly states had committed themselves to mere legal reservations, when in fact some had not even done that … therefore our demand for working out the basic elements of a peace treaty settlement.”) (F) The new German Govt has stated that it seeks “neither national ownership nor national control of nuclear weapons.” While vague, this language would not rule out the type of development foreseen in para 3. 6. Tactics: (A) The US is not believed to be in a position either openly or officially to propose the course of action described in paras 3 and 4. To do so might put the German Govt on the defensive, and would represent an assumption of responsibility for Germany’s future which we are in no position to take. (B) I propose, however, that I be authorized to suggest such a course privately to Chancellor Kiesinger and FonMin Brandt. I would propose to do so in separate personal conversations with each—“unter vier Augen”—on an appropriate occasion. I would present the ideas expressed in this telegram both as a personal reaction from my trip to Poland, and as steps which I knew the US Government would approve and, when appropriate, support. (C) In stating the case, I would congratulate them on the forward-looking approach they are taking toward all the East European countries. I would express the hope that the Federal Republic will be able to make progress in improving its relations with all the countries of East Europe, not just Poland. I would avoid any definition of what I understood the Oder-Neisse Line to cover. There would be no suggestion that Poland need be the first country tackled or that German initiatives should be limited to Poland. Indeed, once Germany has decided to breech the Hallstein Doctrine, Romania, which demands no conditions, may be the most logical country to begin with. (D) Amb. Gronouski would seek to encourage and guide the Polish Government’s response to any German initiative along these lines—as appropriate. McGhee 191. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 109. Secret. Drafted by Hirschfeld on December 20 and approved in S on December 26. The meeting was held at the Quai d'Orsay. Brandt commented on the Paris talks in My Life in Politics, pp. 156–158. Paris, December 14, 1966, 8:30 p.m.–12:30 a.m. UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE THIRTY-EIGHTH MINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL PARIS, DECEMBER 14–16, 1966 SUBJECT Quadripartite Dinner Discussion of East-West Relations; Berlin; The German Question PARTICIPANTS United States: The Secretary United Kingdom: Foreign Minister Brown France: Foreign Minister Couve de Murville Federal Republic of Germany: Vice-Chancellor Brandt (Appended is a guest list of other participants)Not printed. 1) Germany and the “German Question” Foreign Minister Couve de Murville, as host, opened the meeting by welcoming Brandt as the newest member of the group and asking him to begin. Brandt began by saying that he wished to discuss “the German Problem.” He was interrupted by Brown, who objected to the term, “German Problem,” saying it was rather a “European problem.” Brandt, nevertheless, continued saying that he had been at a similar meeting eight years ago “in this house” after the Khrushchev ultimatum,Reference is to Khrushchev’s November 10, 1958, speech and the subsequent Soviet note to the Western powers regarding the status of Berlin. For texts of these documents and of the Four-Power response, December 14, 1958, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 542–546 and 552–560. when, after he had made his presentation on Berlin and was dismissed, Dulles took his hand and told him not to be worried—the allies would not let him or Berlin down. He reminded the group that these gatherings related to the responsibilities that the three powers have in Germany as a whole to which “they were kind enough to invite the German Foreign Minister.” He added that he saw no sign that the USSR was more willing today than last year or even the year before that to discuss the German problem, i.e., reunification. Brown interrupted at that point saying that if that was the German problem, then it was not a German problem but a wider European one. Brandt said that if reunification was not the German problem, it was certainly the heart of the matter. Brown asked what his “priorities” were, and Brandt answered that he would come to that. In considering the German problem, Brandt continued, the Russians concentrate on three difficult questions: (a) German possession of, or access to, nuclear weapons; (b) the question of frontiers; and (c) recognition of the Soviet Zone. Nevertheless, there still may be useful areas of discussion on subjects besides trade and culture. There may even be limited areas of discussion with the Soviets on security matters. In this connection, he mentioned the FRG’s “Peace Note” of March 25, 1966, which contained offers to exchange declarations on the non-use of force with Eastern European states. He suggested (without elaboration) the possibility of somehow including the problem of divided Germany in such a declaration. Brandt had the impression that there was a distinct difference in attitude and behavior between the USSR and the East Zone authorities toward Berlin. Soviet representatives in East Berlin seemed to feel that broader Soviet interests made it desirable not to have trouble in Berlin. The recent decrease of shootings on the Wall, and lack of other provocations, were attributable to Soviet pressure on the East German authorities. Furthermore, the USSR was now more willing to accept Berlin “into trade and other arrangements” linking Berlin and the Federal Republic. Brandt, therefore, wanted to talk with the “Three” in Bonn on new plans for West Berlin. He wanted their “political advice” the same way as Berlin had needed allied advice in setting up the “viability program.” He stressed that he was seeking political advice and not economic aid. If there were no Soviet interference with Berlin for a certain period, then new plans might be formulated for Berlin to bring the city into West Germany’s “context, with other parts of Europe.” Brandt said he would not raise Berlin voting rights, noting that the question was now before a Bundestag committee. It was not a good idea “to mix up the rights of the Three with the rights of the Sovereign Parliament.” Nothing would be done in this area without prior consultation with the allies. Discussion might take a year or two. Brandt again contrasted Soviet behavior with that of the East German authorities, saying that the USSR was at least interested in doing something in the humanitarian field. As an illustration, Brandt mentioned a special office (not further identified) that had been reopened in Berlin (apparently under Soviet pressure) that permitted persons with emergency family situations to pass quickly into the Zone. On the other hand, Brandt admitted that there was no agreement this year on Christmas passes for Berliners. Nevertheless he thought that this would not create unreasonable problems for the people of Berlin. On the whole, the pass program had worked, and had made it possible for 5.5 million individual visits to date. The Soviets were not interfering very seriously with FRG efforts to normalize relations with Eastern Europe. The USSR was trying, however, to push the FRG into recognizing the East Zone, and the GDR in turn wanted to prevent normalization of FRG relations with Eastern European states. 2) GDR Internal Situation and Relations with the Zone Brandt said he had little to add beyond what is generally known on the internal situation in East Germany. Economic programs are developing despite severe trade conditions imposed on the Zone by the Soviet Union. Nevertheless, he said, the East German managerial class worked hard to fulfill their trade obligations to the USSR in the hope of being able thereby to develop additional Western trade. The Germans now may have reached the point where they would have to differentiate between the East German regime and the population of the area. It cannot be in the German interest to insist on isolating these people. True, there were problems even in trade and cultural exchanges. There were, of course, more serious problems in any efforts that were tinged with politics. The abortive attempt at an SED/SPD speaker exchange of last year was an example. As for the Zone’s own policy, Brandt noted that the GDR was no longer pushing the confederation idea; on the contrary, it had been dropped on the ostensible grounds that the FRG was unworthy. Actually, Brandt thought that we would have a clearer idea of East German attitudes after the SED Party Congress in March. Reports from the Zone did not suggest any clear picture as to who might emerge as Ulbricht’s successor. The Zone, like the FRG, has a “problem of generations,” but not perhaps in the classical sense—the new generation in the Zone was developing, surprisingly enough, not necessarily a commitment to the Communist system but rather a sense of identification with the GDR qua state. The approach of the new (Federal) German Government, Brandt said, was not to think that reunification had first priority and therefore not to use the word quite as often. He did not wish to suggest to the German people that reunification was just around the corner. This meant modified language in public statements and greater concentration on personal links in a divided country through science, cultural efforts, trade and sports. The FRG intended to create an office for intra-German problems in Bonn. Perhaps a similar office might be established in the Zone. (He did not indicate how such an office would relate to the existing Ministry of All-German Affairs.) On trade, Brandt noted that “certain EEC countries” had bypassed the FRG in the volume of trade with and the value of credits to the Soviet Zone. The FRG would not fall behind, and would compete on the same basis as the Allies with trade and credits. It was difficult, he said, for the electrical workers in West Berlin to understand why they could not compete with Western financed plants in the Eastern part of the City. He also mentioned a plan, on which he did not elaborate, about developing a system of “travellers checks” which would have the effect of equalizing the currencies in Germany. On recognition, the FRG would “go on as before”—they would not recognize the GDR, but below that level, the FRG would go “beyond where we are up to now in dealing with the regime in Pankow.” What the FRG aimed at was “organized togetherness” for the German people which in turn contributed to internal German and, by extension, to European détente. Naturally the GDR would resist this process and, for this reason, the FRG would be grateful if the three powers would “underline previously taken positions” (presumably on self-determination) and support and understand FRG efforts to counteract the effects of an artificial division on the German people. The Secretary asked if the links which might open up with the Zone were being thought of as intra-German activities only or open to others as well. He foresaw problems if other European states or the US were to participate. Brandt replied that since these activities would be “on German soil” (except for commercial links) it would make sense if the FRG were given a “certain chance” before the scene were opened to others. Couve said he was struck by Brandt’s remarks about differences in the attitudes of the USSR and the Soviet Zone, i.e., that the USSR appeared more inclined to a relaxation of tensions than the East Germans. He added that Brandt’s plans for developing economic, personal and human relations were more the responsibility of the FRG than of Europe and the US. “You must lead the way,” he said. He added that, without having examined Brandt’s proposal in detail, “we agree and have no objection.” He said, however, that the FRG was nevertheless responsible, being after all the party most directly concerned. Throughout the above exchange and thereafter, Brown made spirited interruptions saying there was too much talk about Berlin. He took Brandt to task for continuing to sound too much like the Governing Mayor of Berlin rather than the Foreign Minister of a country with wider problems. He drew a parallel between Brandt’s recent appointment as Foreign Minister and his own, and between their common positions as “socialist ministers” and, by implication, their relative weight and size vis-à-vis the great powers. Berlin, he said, did not dictate issues; it did not “stage the stage.” Berlin was “subsumed “ in problems of wider scope. Brandt did not agree. He pointed out that the purpose of the evening was to discuss Germany, and that divided Berlin was after all a microcosm of divided Germany. Brown nevertheless kept returning to what he called the “wider responsibilities” that Brandt had as Foreign Minister—East-West relations, relations with the US and France, and the Asian world. In making his remarks, Brown spoke rather colorfully, returning again and again to the point that what Brandt was talking about was a wider European problem and not a German one, often addressing Brandt as “my dear Willy” and admitting that he was taking this line against the advice of his staff there present. The Secretary, Ambassador Bohlen and others tried to pin Brown down on what he meant, without any real success. Brandt defended his position by citing examples from his own experience about the utility of tending to the work on hand. In this context he mentioned one of his predecessors, Mayor Ernst Reuter, who said in a meeting wherein grandiose plans for international relations were presented, that the principal problem was to maintain Berlin’s trolley cars and get them painted. Brandt added that the German contribution to limited détente might be reasonable relations with the USSR, better relations with Eastern Europe and moves to keep “our people together.” Brown countered that it might be better to “take it easy.” He thought poorly of spending “shillings” until it had been seen whether “pence” would do. The Secretary asked if the moves toward the people of the Zone that Brandt suggested or British support therefor could hurt Brown in Parliament. Brown said yes. Brown turned again to the question of “wider responsibilities” and in broad terms appeared reluctant to become involved in German specifics, mentioning Viet-Nam as another situation into which others could be dragged. The Secretary remarked that as far as Viet-Nam was concerned, he did not wish to belabor the point but Britain’s treaty obligations were as clear and binding as those of the United States. Brown again turned to his argument that there was not really a German but rather a “European” problem, saying that the Germans were in one sense a victim of the division of Europe which had been imposed by the Allies. To this Ambassador Bohlen replied that it was hardly “the Allies” but rather the USSR that was responsible. The Secretary stressed that it was not just a European problem. He reminded Brown that the US was involved in Europe, mentioning the US/USSR confrontation in Europe, and specifically that Germany was the one place where the US and Soviet Union might conceivably go to war. Therefore it was not a “European” problem. The Secretary added, by way of illustration, that our heaviest commitments in terms of total outlay have been made in this area and that the US was therefore very much involved. We could not be excluded; therefore, it was not just a European problem. Immediately following Secretary Rusk’s departure, and as Brown was leaving, the latter asked that participants make no statement to the press. Couve demurred. Brown said that we should only say that “European problems” were talked about. Brandt with considerable emotion said that he could not report to the Bundestag that the talk at dinner had been confined to the “European problem” but that he must indicate that the participants, in the tradition of Quadripartite dinners, had talked about Germany. Brandt, Couve and Brown then appeared to agree that they would say that talks had related to Europe and Germany. 192. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Immediate. Bonn, December 16, 1966, 1702Z. 7249. Pass White House. Subj: Establishment of Presidential Contact with Chancellor Kiesinger. 1. I consider it highly desirable that a direct relationship be established as soon as possible between the President and Chancellor Kiesinger. This is particularly important in view of continuing inaccurate suggestions, originating in the US press and picked up here, that the President is reluctant to meet with Kiesinger because of the latter’s former Nazi Party membership and overtures to the French. We have already taken steps directly with the Chancellor’s office to counter such reports, but Kiesinger himself may still be uncertain as to the President’s attitude toward him personally and may be waiting for a signal. 2. Under the circumstances, I recommend that I be authorized to call on the Chancellor and transmit to him orally a message from the President along the following lines: A. The President congratulates the Chancellor on the policy declaration which he delivered in the Bundestag on Dec. 13 which he found most impressive. The President naturally took a special interest in the passage concerning German relations with the United States, and wishes to express to the Chancellor our sincere appreciation for these generous and encouraging remarks. The President can assure the Chancellor that they are fully reciprocated on the American side. Through close and frequent contact, the Chancellor and the President can ensure that there will be continuing trust between the Federal Republic and the United States and that both countries will, in the Chancellor’s words, “understand and consider each other’s vital interests.” We have full confidence in the Chancellor’s leadership. B. As the Chancellor is aware, the President has expressed the hope that he would be able to visit Europe during the spring. If such a trip turns out to be possible he naturally would wish to include the Federal Republic. Plans for the trip have not yet been developed, however, and will inevitably depend on developments in America and elsewhere in the world during the next months. C. The President wishes the Chancellor to know that, for his part, he would be very happy to welcome the Chancellor to Washington whenever the Chancellor considers it would fit in with his planned State visits. 3. I believe that such an approach would open the line of communication between the President and the Chancellor and would clearly indicate—before the Chancellor visits de Gaulle on January 13—that the President and the American government are well disposed toward him and his Cabinet. I shall be returning to Washington on leave on December 21. I would, of course, point this out to the Chancellor, which would permit him to send a personal message to the President if he desires. Because of the short time available, I would appreciate urgent consideration of this recommendation in the Department and the White House.In telegram 104567 to Bonn, December 16, the Department of State informed McGhee that it believed a letter from the President would be the most effective way to open a dialogue with the new German leader. (Ibid.) The President’s message was transmitted in telegram 104879, December 19. (Ibid.,POL 15–1 GER W) McGhee 193. Memorandum Prepared by John W. McCloy Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Walt Rostow, vol. 17. No classification marking. McCloy prepared the memorandum on December 22. A memorandum of McCloy’s December 16 conversation with Chancellor Kiesinger is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 230. Bonn, December 17, 1966, 7 p.m. Memorandum of meeting with Brandt and Wehner on the evening of Saturday, December 17th, 1966, at Brandt’s Berlin office in Bonn. Was with them for about 3 hours (7 to 10 P.M.) An S.P.D. member of the Bundestag, Seydak (who may only have been a party official) was also present. I told Brandt I was anxious to get from him his conception of the direction of the new government in foreign affairs. I have talked with the new Chancellor and with the new Finance Minister and I was particularly interested in the views of the new Foreign Minister. I told him that I had been asked to talk to them about the new direction of the government and also to learn their views of the correct direction of United States policy in respect to Germany. Brandt was expecting me to talk about balance of payments. I told him this was an important but incidental matter, important but far less so than the direction of Europe and the relation of the United States to it. The talk of “change” was in the air and it was necessary to know what really was changing and what the implications were for the security of the Free World. He started out by saying that in the past German emphasis had been on reunification. That had been the inspiration of German policy. The main orientation now is, what can Germany do for peace of the world. Everything must be put in relation to this without giving up Germany’s ultimate legitimate aims, i.e., reunification. Soviets must lose their fear of Germany if reunification is ever to come about. We must find the formula by which peace is preserved—peace on a permanent basis. Germany had been concerned too much with its own worries and preoccupations and had not been as conscious or as sympathetic as it should have been over the concerns and troubles of others, particularly the United States. Reunification is not in the foreseeable future. NATO has been the security framework but within this framework now Europe had to be brought together. It was a slow process but a necessary one—contradictional in many of its aspects but it had to be accomplished. Young people needed confidence in future and they had to have new direction. As nothing can be done with Europe without France, one has to deal with France and de Gaulle is France at the moment. We cannot give France a new government and so we have to deal with him. We shall never have the Europe which is ultimately desirable while he is head of France because his concept is leadership of France in Europe with a secondary position for everybody else. People are disillusioned regarding reunification and the lack of progress of integration of Europe economically and politically but we must make progress in what direction we can; and so Germany has determined to see what can be done on a bilateral basis. He saw De Gaulle day before yesterday—cordial—talked for an hour. Brandt had felt it possible to work out common policies with France, technological problems, common market, common policies for Europe, etc. Found de Gaulle not so much interested in this any more. Now it was the East-West issue which absorbed him. Whereas before this, de Gaulle had always expressed anti-American sentiments to him, this time there was “almost no such references.” Quite evidently, de Gaulle thought that the major development was now to be the entente with the Soviet Union, deep significance of Kosygin visit and those to come after. de Gaulle had met with Rusk and Brandt had impression meeting was not unpleasant. de Gaulle believed no threat from Soviet Union for time being—possibilities of renewed threat not excluded for the future. de Gaulle had referred to United States troops on Germany’s territory. Had no objection to this—indeed, was quite satisfied with their presence there. He simply did not want them on French soil and they served the purpose where they were. Soviet Union much preoccupied with China and internal problems and way is now open to discuss things with Soviet Union—trade, culture—can't really discuss reunification now. Brandt was contemplating and de Gaulle was urging entering into an agreement renouncing all use of force in connection with solution of the German problem. Formal document. Make it appear as a significant document or treaty of far-reaching importance. This might help “normalize” relations which they had in mind. They wished to have diplomatic relations with satellites. Poland would prove difficult. All this is in line with President Johnson’s October 7th speech as Couve de Murville was careful to point out. It was not possible to mention “Oder Neisse” line at this time but they had gone as far as possible in the Chancellor’s statement. de Gaulle had said to Kosygin that reunification of Germany was a historical necessity though nothing to be done about it now. Maybe the issue of Sudetens could be included in the agreement but this was already so clearly renounced that it no longer had any significance. de Gaulle surprised him by referring to the need for a renunciation of an Anschluss with Austria Of course, no one was interested in this but it might be useful vis-à-vis Soviet Union. There are limited moves one can make and we intend to study what these moves can be. de Gaulle had said no longer interested in military matters or strategy. French troops in Germany on the proper basis—experts can take care of trade, military technological matters. “We can deal with the fundamentals”, i.e., East-West. Brandt and Wehner were impressed by the proclamation Monnet was now working on in regard to Europe. S.P.D. would support it. British would certainly be blocked unless de Gaulle could be convinced that Britain’s financial problems solved and honestly accepted full obligations of Rome. Had to deal with France. Brandt said that he had made it clear that Germans adhered to concept of integrated defense. “de Gaulle did not object”. Brandt said the Germans were going to do what they could to improve military planning but did not know how far de Gaulle would be prepared to go. Mainly interested in the Moscow-Paris axis. Germans were in a confused position. “We are the only one all of whose forces are in NATO.” Till recently all wanted Germany to do more in military field. Now suggestion is we should do less; still fear of German rearmament. Must restore confidence. This is the value of the renunciation agreement. As for United States force levels—most dangerous if important changes took place now—must not relate such action to money. This had created a very bad impression—the package approach was a major mistake—created doubts about the Alliance. Hastened the fall of the Erhard Government. No steps regarding forces should be taken which do not come about as a result of community decisions—must be a rational evolution subscribed to by all—not unilateral. Alliance has suffered a set back. Must be reinvigorated. United States should not gain the impression that there was a basic change in German policies. Geography and experience dictate the need for accommodation with France. He found a recent statement given him by McGhee helpful in that it made clear State Department’s desire for good Franco-German relations. Germany’s economic situation probably improving this fall but growth rate of 4% impossible. Need to bring order into finance. Should no longer make the defense budget a savings account for social legislation as it had been. Whatever was needed for defense should be voted and spent. (cf. Strauss) Belgians had made an interesting suggestion in Paris—all say things have changed—appoint a committee to examine into just what has changed and what is the value of the change. When I asked Willy whether he had the impression that the United States had attempted to dominate or bring too much influence to bear on German policy, he said definitely not, except in some aspects of the military field. If anything, he felt United States had not been as closely interested in German policy matters as might have been wished. At one time there had been a common discussion of problems—example of old days in Berlin, etc. Now the impression was one of some aloofness and oversensitivity in regard to undue influence. What was needed was close frank collaboration on all matters which affected Germany. He said he was pleased that Rusk had referred to the non-proliferation treaty language when he had been in Paris.December 12. Reported in telegram Secto 16 from Paris, December 13. (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 68 D 453, CF 248) His view was that Germany did not want to create any difficulties over non-proliferation. People had come to believe it was a step toward peace and momentum of opinion is in favor of it. No place therefore for Germany to stand in way, although its significance may be considerably less than claimed for it. Where Germany raised questions it would be on basis of interest of all non-nuclear powers not particularly Germany alone. On the European option he was not so concerned. Impossible to bind a new European community any way—simply not bound by treaty’s terms. Of course, if such a European political entity was favored it would have to have nuclear power. Important thing is what goes on within Alliance as it is; McNamara committee, disarmament questions. When I raised the question of the confederation with France which Strauss spoke of, he said he did not agree with Strauss on this point. He said his concern was to save De Gaulle and France from the German Gaullists. They were dangerous and most reactionary in their thinking. No accident that many rightist elements in Germany are Gaullists. Wehner added some remarks. Important for everyone to realize with all the talk of French rapprochement Europe is only possible within the concept of American partnership. We should try to find the small “auslege” with the French but never lose sight of the fact that these were interior matters and are not part of the larger waters. Germany needs a little “spielraum” within which to operate with France and the East but it must all be within the basic commitments. Wehner said he had learned to become pro-American out of discipline—simply because there was no other way. Had not been exactly seduced by the Americans over the years but he was a pro-American. Kiesinger had done well to speak of France as America’s oldest ally. Erhard was not able to establish good relations with either France, Britain or United States—too bad because he had made real contribution to the country. Now the new government was going to do this. It had authority which Erhard lacked. The S.P.D. had supported Schroeder and the M.L.F. and the Kennedy test ban. Impression created that United States interest in these things had disappeared after Germany had been committed. Too easy an acceptance of United States point of view. New government will be more satisfactory to deal with than the obsequious Hassel. Can operate on a broader basis. Wehner said United States should emphasize closer collaboration. He complained that American Ambassador had not seen him since the Ambassador’s arrival until just the other day when he was made a Minister. McGhee reported on this meeting in telegram 7161 from Bonn, December 15. (Ibid., Central Files, POL GER W–US) (This remark together with the one about the United States not having seduced him made me feel he is very sensitive in regard to his position. He has been operating in the shadows for so long due to his old communist record and the brilliance of Erler that he is now enjoying the sun. He seeks and expects recognition and one should be aware of this if he visits the United States.) Both of them thought a visit by the President to Germany would be helpful if not too long postponed. However, it should be carefully thought out and some concrete results should accompany the conclusion of the visit. Perhaps some things in regard to space or technology. He rather thought Kiesinger should visit the United States first. Visit should be not for show but for business—serious attempt should be made to re-create confidence in United States leadership. I had seen Brandt on the T.V. when he addressed the Bundestag after his return from Paris. It was too effusive and too obviously directed toward a make-up with France and a tactful detachment from the United States. I said that I wanted to say a few things: the strong emphasis on the overthrow of the old government because it had been too much under the influence of the United States, the rush to Paris, the tone of his talk was not the attitude of a foreign minister sure of himself as an equal partner in an Alliance. I said I was fearful of the result of all this Lili Marlene love affair. He should recall that it was only a few days before his “embracio” of de Gaulle that Kosygin, de Gaulle’s red carpet guest, had used French soil from which to deliver vicious attacks on his country and my country—two allies of France. de Gaulle must have been apprized of these attacks beforehand. When I recently saw Senator Mansfield he had talked to me about the Europeans not wanting United States troops and that we had better get out if this was their attitude. I complained that he was mistakenly relating French attitudes to the rest of Europe. I was now fearful that all this rather ostentatious display toward France on the part of Germany when France had hardly acted as a loyal ally of the United States either in respect of Viet Nam or in the manner it had left NATO, would tend to justify the Senator’s appraisal and that a large body of United States opinion would be saying “a plague on both your houses”, with the result that both de Gaulle and Moscow would suddenly find they had with Germany’s assistance accomplished their respective wishes for the detachment of the United States and its interests from Europe. I am sure this sobered him up. I believe it was well to say it if only to moderate the emotional transports which Bonn and Brandt are now undergoing in the way of “off with the old, on with the new.” I said that he must always keep in mind that it was not the United States which was demanding a choice between Washington and Paris. It was France only that demanded Paris. Germany did not have to decide between de Gaulle and Johnson or France and the United States. What Germany did have to decide was between a collective approach to security with all that it meant and an individual independent approach based on axes and all the other paraphanalia of the pre-war era which de Gaulle had re-introduced. This was fundamental for there was no place for the United States in Europe on any basis except a collective basis. We could not put our troops in Germany on the same basis that France now demanded hers. It was going to require high statesmanship for Germany to play these two roles—embracement of France and adherence to collective policies hostile to de Gaulle. It would prove to be a difficult role to play in Europe and an even more difficult one to play in front of United States public opinion. I asked Brandt what role the offset problem and the failure of Erhard’s visit to the United States had played in his downfall. He said it had undoubtedly accelerated it but it would probably have occurred later on without this development. There is no doubt now in my mind that this is a correct appraisal. At least all Germans with whom I spoke said the visit and the way the offset was handled triggered things and was a factor both in the fall of Erhard and the new accent on overtures to the French. He seemed to harbor no grudges over the Berlin voting problem. John J. McCloy Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. 194. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. confidential; exdis. Drafted by McGhee, cleared by Thompson, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Paris and London. Washington, December 21, 1966, 7:51 p.m. 106794. Pass to White House. From Ambassador McGhee. 1. This message should be considered as being a reporting telegram from Amembassy Bonn. McGhee was in Washington for consultations. Rusk’s Appointment Book indicates taht he met with McGhee at 5 p.m. that day. (Johnson Library) 2. I called late yesterday on Chancellor Kiesinger at my request. I was with him for an hour. Only his aide, Fonoff Rep Osterheld, was present. This was my first opportunity to call on the Chancellor, who was inducted on December 1. He had only the previous day given his initial reception for foreign ambassadors—thus putting himself in business. 3. I congratulated the Chancellor on his elevation to his high office. Recalling our long association when he was Minister-President of Baden Wuerttemberg I expressed my pleasure and that of our government in working with him. We know him well and had full confidence in him and in his friendship for the US. 4. I thereupon gave him the letter to himself from the President dated December 19,See footnote 2, Document 192. together with Christmas card from the President. Kiesinger read the letter carefully, expressed appreciation for the warmth of the President’s greeting and said he would reply shortly. 5. I also gave the Chancellor for later reading the US policy statement (see Embtel 6525 and State 98003)See footnote 2, Document 188. approved by the Dept for transmission to FonMin Brandt, and a copy of the very favorable NY Times editorial of that day which commented on his Policy Statement to the Bundestag. I attempted to clarify for the Chancellor the conflicting rumors concerning the possibility of a visit of the President to Europe in the spring, by reading to him the most recent official US statement (made December 12)Not found. on this question. 6. Kiesinger then commented that German and American interests were to a very wide extent the same. He proposed to develop and expand our traditional good relations—to bring our nations into a close understanding. He refused to accept an “either-or” in Germany’s relations with France and the US. Although he hoped to establish good relations with France, this need not be at the expense of relations with us. There are many issues, NATO organization for example, on which he differs sharply from France. 7. I assured Kiesinger that we had no doubts as to his impartiality. We were not engaged in a running popularity contest with the French. We hoped he would be able to develop close and fruitful relations with France, which we considered to be vital for the peace of Europe. 8. I thereupon raised with the Chancellor the partial draft non-proliferation treaty which I had been instructed to take up with the FonMin earlier that day (reported separately). I emphasized that in our judgment the draft did not foreclose any important German nuclear objectives, including the eventual creation of a European nuclear force, to which the Chancellor had made reference in his television appearance on December 18. It would enhance Germany’s image—particularly in Eastern Europe. If, on the other hand, Germany were the only important “holdout” to a non-proliferation treaty, her reputation would suffer enormously. 9. Kiesinger replied that although the matter had been discussed briefly in the cabinet meeting that morning, there had been no opportunity for detailed study of the draft itself. The German policy, as given in his Policy Statement, was quite clear. They were against German possession or control of nuclear weapons. He is aware of the strong reaction there would be against Germany if they would oppose a treaty. Their only concern is one of “keeping the door open”—for options for the future, and to assure Germany’s nuclear protection after the treaty is signed. He queried me as to our impression of timing. When would Germany be faced with a decision? The next cabinet meeting was scheduled for January 11. I undertook to inform the Fonoff on this point. 10. I then raised with Kiesinger the question of Eastern Policy. There was much in his Policy Statement which corresponded closely to portions of the President’s speech of October 7. FonMin Brandt had yesterday before the WEU spoken, as had the President, of the possibility of phased withdrawal of forces from Central Europe. 11. Kiesinger replied that he did not expect spectacular results from his policy, however, “something new would happen.” He wished to avoid the old nomenclature—“Must détente precede reunification or vice versa.” The supreme German policy was not reunification but peace. Although this is nothing new, there was relief on the part of the Germans that he had stated it. The new point that he sought to inject was “that we should all together try to achieve détente”—at the same time being sure that nothing was left undone in the military field. Indeed, has not the ratio of forces turned in recent years in favor of the Soviets? We must not lose the military confrontation, however détente must be pursued and reunification must be “infused” into it. 12. I assured the Chancellor of our sincere desire to see reunification accomplished. We would not be content merely to await its coming about automatically through the historical welding together of East and West Europe, if it could be accomplished earlier in any other peaceful way. 13. Kiesinger then commented on the fact that, although there was some anti-American feeling in Europe, this was least true of all in Germany—despite efforts by the NPD to stir it up. The only real problem was a fear on the part of some that the US would seek détente at the expense of reunification. Germany should not put itself in the position of a girl who constantly seeks reassurance from an old lover “that he still loves her”. This is not dignified. Great good could be accomplished, however, if the President could come to Germany and explain his policies. He would be well received. Rusk 195. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to Paris, London, and Moscow. Passed to the White House and USIA. In a January 16 memorandum to President Johnson transmitting this telegram, Walt Rostow commented: “Herewith Chancellor Kiesinger’s report on his talks with de Gaulle. In short, Bonn’s heart still belongs to Daddy.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 12) McGhee summarized this telegram and commented on the new Chancellor’s views in At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 204–205. Bonn, January 16, 1967, 2005Z. 8224. NATUS. Subj: Talk with Chancellor Kiesinger. Chancellor Kiesinger asked me to call on him today so that he could report to our govt the results of his meeting with General de Gaulle on Jan 13–14. It is perhaps significant from the standpoint of his attitude toward the US that we were the first country he had chosen to report to and that he did so on his first day back in office. 1. German and French relations with US Kiesinger said that his objective in meeting with de Gaulle was to revive the German-French treaty without, however, creating any “twilight” areas of uncertainty. He had a “very clear” discussion with de Gaulle with respect to the relations of both countries with the US. de Gaulle said that he had respect for the US, but that the US was so powerful that it could not help “dominating.” To this France will not submit, even though it is a “friendly” domination. France wishes to retain its ties and alliance with the US but to carry out an independent policy. On the other hand, he considered that Germany had been too “obedient” to the US, “even Adenauer.” In response, Kiesinger agreed that the US naturally had its own interests and would be “stupid” not to act accordingly. The problem is to determine the extent to which US interests can be brought to coincide with those of Europe as a whole, and of individual European countries. At the peak of the cold war there had been a very close correspondence of interests. Perhaps there is a difference now. We should talk about it. Kiesinger said that he had made clear to de Gaulle, however, that Germany’s position was different from that of France. Germany will continue to support NATO on an integrated basis, and Germany wished US troops to remain in Europe. To these ends Germany will cooperate with the US. He agreed, however, with de Gaulle that Europe must make an increasing contribution toward the “molding of its fate.” According to Kiesinger, there was little dispute or extended discussions in the foregoing exchange. de Gaulle admitted that he recognized Germany’s position and attitude to be different. (Kiesinger interpolated this to me to mean “for the time being” and that de Gaulle fully expects that Germany will eventually come around to the French viewpoint.) According to Kiesinger, both he and de Gaulle agreed that the cooperation of France and Germany under its treaty need not be handicapped by their respective attitudes toward the US. 2. Viet Nam Regarding Viet Nam, de Gaulle only said that the US position was “not good,” that we would find that we “can't conquer a swamp.” To this Kiesinger replied that Germany cannot say the same thing, if for no other reason than that “we are a divided country.” 3. UK membership in the Common Market With respect to the further development of the Common Market and the question of UK membership, de Gaulle raised his old objection. Kies-inger in turn proposed that the “door should be left open.” He told de Gaulle that Germany had a strong desire for the success of the Kennedy Round in order to bring down the tariff walls separating it and EFTA, with which it had important trading interests. He told de Gaulle that the question of the entry of the UK into the Common Market is one for decision by the Six. A decision should be postponed until Wilson has had an opportunity to talk with the French Govt in Paris. 4. European détente de Gaulle emphasized the importance of a policy of détente in Europe. The present confrontation in Europe must be reduced “step by step.” This was a thorny problem, however, it will be less difficult now than in the future to get the Soviets to a détente—including increased economic and cultural exchanges. France needs a period of peace in order to develop its country. Kiesinger replied that Germany also seeks détente in Europe. They agree that this is the only way to preserve peace. Germany hopes, however, that throughout the process her allies will keep German reunification in mind. He realizes that the solution cannot be “figured out now,” however, it should not be left entirely to the future. He told de Gaulle that he could not accept his interpretation that German reunification must wait until the end when complete détente has occurred and it will therefore come automatically. The Germans are not willing “to pursue détente just for détente’s sake.” He believes that every peaceful opportunity should be seized to further reunification. According to Kiesinger, de Gaulle agreed with his formulation. Kiesinger observed to me that he was not in the end able to envisage precisely what de Gaulle had in mind in his concepts of détente, entente and cooperation. According to him de Gaulle, however, does believe that the Soviets are so preoccupied in dealing with their own problems, including Red China, that they will be willing to avoid a confrontation in Europe. 5. Other matters discussed with Kiesinger, including a non-proliferation treaty, and comments will follow.Telegram 8250 from Bonn, January 17. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18) McGhee 196. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, S/S-I Files, Lot 79 D 246. Confidential; Limdis. Drafted by Kohler and approved in S on February 23. The source text bears Rusk’s notation: “OK DR.” Washington, January 18, 1967. SUBJECT Soviet Union and Germany PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Deputy Under Secretary Foy D. Kohler Soviet Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin During their meeting tonight, the Secretary asked Ambassador Dobrynin’s views as to the new German Government, with particular reference to the efforts of that Government to improve its relations with the countries of Eastern Europe. Ambassador Dobrynin said the problem involved was that of the German Democratic Republic. The GDR was a member of the Soviet Bloc and did not want to be the “poor boy.” If relations between Eastern Europe and West Germany were to be improved, the GDR insisted this process should not be discriminatory against it. The Soviet Union supports the position of the GDR. During this phase of the discussion, Ambassador Dobrynin referred in passing to the question of voting rights for Bundestag members from West Berlin, and there was some discussion as to whether relations between the FRG and the GDR might not be more susceptible to improvement after the disappearance of Ulbricht from the scene. 197. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to London and Paris for the Embassy and USNATO. Bonn, January 27, 1967, 1715Z. 8747. NATUS. Subj: Meeting with Brandt. I met today with FonMin Brandt at my request. I advised him that my basic purpose was to discuss with him his forthcoming visit to America starting Feb 8 in WashDC. I went over the present plans and asked him what subjects he had particularly in mind for discussion. I noted that he had already indicated that he wished to talk about the offset. Brandt replied that another important subject was East-West relations. He had no further specific ideas apart from the proposed non-proliferation treaty. The ensuing discussion centered around the following points: (1) Offset. I reported to Brandt the consternation which has been caused in London and Washington, as well as their Embassies here in Bonn, by State Sec Schuetz’s statement in London that there would be no money in the 1967 German budget for offset payments beyond the current agreements. This would, of course, create a severe problem, particularly for the British. We hoped that the German Govt would take no firm decision with respect to the future of the offset until after full consultation within the Trilateral Commission and, hopefully, in agreement with the British and ourselves. The British are so committed to a troop reduction in the event the offset is not continued, that a completely negative position by Germany could result in a large-scale exodus of British troops later this year, which would also play into the hands of Senator Mansfield and others seeking a reduction of US forces. With respect to the long-range offset, I felt that a suitable formula could be worked out between the Germans and ourselves involving their defense purchases which they would obviously have to make, plus suitable financial neutralization for the remainder. The FonMin replied that Schuetz’s statement had intended to refer only to funds available within the current budget. He hoped that the govt could go to the money market for additional sums. He himself was interested in the possibility of a financial neutralization of part of the US offset; however, his latest information from the Bundesbank indicated some difficulty. In response to my query, he said that no decision had been made with respect to the possible Phantom-Spey purchase from the US and UK which, I pointed out, would go a long way toward solving the British problem for some time ahead. Brandt said that the new German rep to the Trilateral Commission, Amb Duckwitz, would shortly be in touch with his opposite numbers. He speculated on the possibility of his visiting them separately before convening a new meeting, in order to convey to them the seriousness of the difficulties faced by the Germans in their budget. I did not attempt to dissuade him from such a course; however, I pointed out that little progress could be expected towards the Tripartite objectives of the commission unless all three were present. (2) Non-proliferation treaty. I advised the FonMin that Amb Foster had not intended to convey to Amb Knappstein, as we had heard he had reported, that the wording of the NPT must be accepted by the Germans on a take it or leave it basis. We welcome constructive suggestions from the Germans and others. However, we had only pointed out that great difficulties might arise, not necessarily with ourselves but with the Soviets, in attempting to get changes. I also told Brandt that we knew his attitude and that of the Cabinet, which had on Jan 11 approved the NPT in principle, but that I was concerned by the widespread criticism and suspicion of the treaty developing in Germany. In particular, I was concerned at the “straw man” being created to the effect that the treaty would stand in the way of European political unification. Such doubts would be increased by Amb Grewe’s speech before the German Foreign Policy Assn on Jan 25 (see Bonn 8688).Dated January 26. (Ibid., DEF 18–6) I hope that the govt will do what it can to clear up these misgivings. Brandt replied that it was difficult to do this. He would not make speeches in defense of the treaty because of the secrecy imposed on the subject and the fact that the draft itself could not be shown. He hoped however, in the near future, to speak publicly on several matters of principle raised by the treaty. He expected to raise not only German objectives—but those held in common with others. He mentioned, in particular, Italy. I pointed out that, according to our interpretation, which we had made clear to the Germans and would subsequently make public, the treaty would not deny them anything which was capable of their attainment or which they had not already foresworn. I was confident that the German Govt would ultimately approve; however, our relations would suffer if there resulted a widespread feeling that German interest had thereby been sacrificed by us as a contribution to our détente policy with the Soviets. (3) UK and the Common Market. I asked Brandt whether he had any information regarding the results of PM Wilson’s recent visit to Paris. Wilson visited Paris January 24–25. He replied that he did not; however, he was expecting a message shortly from Wilson. He explained that Germany’s attitude with regard to British entry into the Common Market is quite clear. Germany would like to see the Common Market enlarged, so she will have a larger trading area and thereby be better able to bear the burden of the charges forced on her in agriculture. However, Germany is not in a position to force the issue with the French. One cannot, Brandt said, “change the map of Europe.” (I assume he meant by this substitute England for France.) (4) East-West policy. I expressed interest at the recent reports of the impending establishment of diplomatic relations between Germany and Romania.For text of the January 31 communiqué announcing the exchange of diplomatic recognition, see Meissner, Die deutsche Ostpolitik, p. 181. I asked how the prospects looked in the other capitals. Brandt replied that State Sec Lahr, who has just returned from Budapest, reported the Hungarians “may be willing” to follow the Romanian example. They must first, however, discuss the matter at a party meeting which is scheduled in the near future. In response to my query, he said that the Berlin clause question would not appear to be a problem. The Hungarians appeared willing to accept the formula worked out with the Romanians. Prague, however, posed greater difficulties. There was no trade mission there which, as in Bucharest and Budapest, could be transferred over to the economic section of the new Embassy as a going concern. He would, in addition, while he is in Washington, wish to discuss German relations with the Soviet Union. Unfortunately, these are negative. I commented on the tough line that Soviet Amb Tsarapkin has been taking in private conversations (i.e. with the British Amb and myself, as reported in Bonn 8085).Dated January 12. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 GER W) Brandt remarked that, following Tsarapkin’s recent return from Moscow, he had either very rigid instructions or no instructions. (5) Indian wheat. I went over the general objectives of Under Sec Rostow’s recent visit to Bonn, pointing out the great importance we attach to the members of the consortium assuming responsibility in the future for emergency shipments of grain to India, and specifically for 1/2 of the requirements for the last half of this year. The President looked on this as comparable to a “community fund” operation in the US, where the leading citizens are all expected to help their less fortunate neighbors. The better endowed countries of the world could not ignore, on humanitarian grounds alone, the impending food crisis in India. We felt that Germany, one of the wealthiest of the free world countries, would certainly want to do her share. Having in mind Germany’s tight budget, we would be glad as Under Sec Rostow advised, for Germany to get credit under the current offset for any grain purchases she made from the US. I pointed out that this would, of course, be limited to payments during the first six months of this year. It could not come from deposits made in the past, which had already been adopted into our balance of payments. I hoped that the German Govt would make its decisions within the two week period estimated by Min Wischnewski. It would be most favorably received in Washington, if he would come there with a positive response. Brandt replied merely that he understood the importance of the US proposal and that he would discuss it with the Chancellor. McGhee 198. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 15–1 GER W. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Paris, London, and Moscow and passed to the White House. Bonn, January 31, 1967, 1734Z. 8889. NATUS info. Subj: Chancellor Kiesinger’s concern for U.S. understanding. 1. During a dinner party given by the Chancellor yesterday evening, he drew the DCM aside to express the hope that there would be no misunderstanding in the United States as to his intentions. He was firmly committed to NATO and to the necessity for a continuing U.S. troop presence in Europe as essential to German security. He also wanted us to know that the developing German Eastern policy would be conducted with due regard for U.S. interests, and that we should not be alarmed if, in view of current French influence in Eastern Europe, the FRG relied primarily on the French to vouch for it. 2. Kiesinger went on to say that he did not have the impression from his recent visit to Paris that de Gaulle hated the United States or was taking revenge for imagined or real slights suffered in the past. He was, however, genuinely resentful of U.S. cultural and economic influence in France and of what he considered the contamination effect of the overwhelming American presence in Europe. Kiesinger noted he had emphasized that the FRG wants a strong United States in Europe to which de Gaulle had responded with a shrug. Comment: Osterheld, who remains on in the Chancellery as head of the External Political Affairs Section, later stressed to the DCM that the Chancellor is very sensitive to the possibility that his actions will be misunderstood in the United States. He wants us to know that the basic German policy of friendship towards usPresident Johnson reviewed a copy of this telegram, circled the phrase “German policy of friendship towards us,” and wrote: “Walt, I have my doubts—Can we talk about this. L.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 12) and reliance upon us for the security of Europe remains unchanged. We have heard from other sources of Kiesinger’s concern in this regard. We have no reason to doubt his sincerity, though some of the advice he is getting from within his party may not be so friendly. McGhee 199. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Kohler Files: Lot 71 D 460, Memoranda of Conversation. Secret. Drafted by Puhan on February 9 and approved in S, M, and G on February 17. The source text is marked “Part 2 of 2.” The meeting was held in the Secretary’s Conference Room. A memorandum of conversation dealing with NATO is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 235. Washington, February 8, 1967, 11:30 a.m.–1 p.m. SUBJECT East-West Relations PARTICIPANTS Americans The Secretary The Under Secretary ACDA Director Foster Under Secretary Rostow Deputy Under Secretary Kohler Assistant Secretary Leddy Counselor Bowie Ambassador McGhee Ambassador Cleveland Mr. Puhan Germans Vice Chancellor Brandt Egon Bahr, FRG Foreign Office Ambassador Knappstein, FRG Embassy Minister Von Lilienfeld, FRG Embassy Counselor Von Staden, FRG Embassy Dr. Hans Arnold, FRG Foreign Office Mr. Weber, Foreign Office Mr. Soenksen, Foreign Office The Secretary asked how East-West relations were developing. Brandt replied with a smile that this was an area where the issues could be discussed both in Paris and in Washington without differences. He added, however, that relations with the Soviet Union remain difficult. He mentioned a Note received from the USSR this morning returning the FRG’s Note informing the Soviet Government of the establishment of relations with Romania.For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 946–948. The FRG Note was returned because of mention that the FRG was the legitimate spokesman for the German people. However the Soviet Note was not in itself as tendentious as that which the FRG had received in January.For extracts, see ibid., pp. 944–946. Nevertheless, Brandt thought this might be part of the Soviet effort to convince the other Eastern European states to take a harder line with the FRG than Romania had. In this the Soviets may have achieved some success. The Czechs were again asking that the Munich Agreement be null and void ab initio (a more acceptable formulation appears to have been under consideration by the Czechs before). Nevertheless Brandt retained the impression that the Hungarians and Czechs still had a strong tendency to develop better relations with the FRG, i.e., to follow the Romanian example. He mentioned Manescu had told him in Bonn to do what they liked with the Hungarians and that the FRG might say Romania had only done what the Soviet Union had done earlier with Germany, i.e., included West Berlin in trade with the FRG. (Brandt said the Romanians would permit the FRG to take care of West Berliners “a titre humanitaire”.) Poland was admittedly more difficult. Danish Foreign Minister Krag in Warsaw found no particular change, thought Gomulka difficult, Cyrankiewicz relaxed and Rapacki colder now than during the Cold War. Still the FRG had hopes, in part because they thought French contacts on their behalf might be successful and because they were hopeful that Krupp manager Beitz, who had good connections with the Poles from wartime days, might be able to achieve something. The FRG will keep us informed through Ambassador Knappstein on what transpires. Brandt hoped Poland will come around, but said it will take time. Yugoslavia was difficult largely for juridical reasons. The FRG broke relations with YugoslaviaWest Germany broke diplomatic ties with Yugoslavia in 1957. and the problem of course concerns how third-world countries will regard FRG resumption of relations with a state that still recognizes the Soviet Zone after the FRG broke relations with them for that very reason. In this connection, Brandt mentioned German gratitude for our efforts to prevent recognition of the GDR by third countries. He added the FRG was still looking for a legal formulation that would make Yugoslavia a case distinct from others, like declaring Yugoslavia part of Eastern Europe. He admitted making a special case of Yugoslavia is a headache. Meanwhile the first step was to get direct communications in Bonn for the German diplomat in Belgrade who is at present attached to the French Embassy. Returning to the Soviet Union, Brandt thought that considerable progress had been made on the one hand between him and Abrasimov in Berlin and, on the other, between Carstens and Tsarapkin in Bonn. However, since then the new Government there seemed to be a wall between Tsarapkin and the Germans. Even trade talks were interrupted with Tsarapkin saying that he wanted Soviet trade to receive the same treatment as that of Common Market members. The Russians were not amused by the rejoinder asking whether the USSR would also be willing to accept the same obligations. Brandt knew that the Russians had tried the same trade approach to the French, from which he concluded that this policy was not directed exclusively at the FRG. He wondered whether Tsarapkin was really properly instructed yet. Before the new Government, he had an impression of forward motion on the question of exchange of declarations of the non-use of force. He had heard nothing since. As for the Soviet propaganda note, he said Bonn intended to answer it against the advice of the FRG Ambassador in Moscow. As seen from Bonn the note was worth answering, if only to score a few propaganda points and place the German position clearly on record. The FRG would then try to move forward on trade, scientific and cultural exchanges. The Secretary mentioned that our own bilateral relations with the USSR had not really been inhibited by Viet-Nam, mentioning the Civil Air Agreement concluded in May, the Consular Agreement now before the Senate and the Outer Space Treaty as examples.For text of the Civil Air Agreement, signed on November 4, 1966, see 17 UST 1909. For text of the Consular Agreement, signed on June 1, 1964, see 19 UST 5018. For text of the Treaty on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, signed on January 27, 1967, see 18 UST 2410. He said wryly that the Soviet negotiators do not appear to have the word reciprocity in their vocabulary, that somehow the greatest tragedy which could befall a Soviet negotiator was to realize that he could have gotten more. The Secretary concluded it was important for all of us to contribute to the bettering of East-West relations. 200. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Geneva. Bonn, February 22, 1967, 1915Z. 9817. DISTO. Subject: Meeting with Kiesinger—NPT. 1. I called on Chancellor Kiesinger late today at his request. At the outset he told me, as I had previously been advised that he had arranged the meeting in order to reassure me that the report made earlier in the week by a US news agency to the effect that the German Govt was dissatisfied with its relations with the US and with the American Amb was entirely false.A UPI dispatch reported that German officials had attributed a worsening diplomatic climate in part to McGhee. (Telegram 9702 from Bonn, February 20; ibid., PER McGHEE) As an old friend, I had certainly known this. However, he wanted to set the record straight and had asked his Press Rep Von Hase to make a statement earlier in the day to this effect, advising the press of my visit. Some anonymous informant had apparently given rise to the story. He assured me, however, that there was no such attitude on the part of him or his Cabinet. 2. Kiesinger continued that he had, during his recent meeting with Sen Robert Kennedy,February 2. made the observation that he hoped that discussions between us would not be limited to points of disagreement—but also deal with broader issues and with areas in which there existed a common understanding. He had not intended to say this in a critical vein, since he considered it applicable equally to the German side. In response I said that we agreed with his observation. I pointed out the many specific areas such as defense, foreign aid, information policy, anti-pollution and resource development and space, in which organized consultations had proceeded with the previous govt and which we were in the process of resuming. I referred to the recent successful visit of FonMin Brandt, the invitation to DefMin Schroeder for a visit in April and the invitation we are extending to Min Heck. 3. The Chancellor replied that this was all excellent but he was also referring to those broader policies within which particular issues fit. He used as an example the NPT issue, which had struck Germany so emotionally. He is in the process of trying to calm Germany down on this issue. He is seeking to prevent the impression that Germany is reacting emotionally, causing unusual difficulties or conspiring to obtain nuclear weapons. He regretted some of the public statements that have been made, particularly that of former Chancellor Adenauer,During a February 16 speech at the University of Madrid. For text, see Konrad Adenauer, Reden, 1917–1967 (ed., H. Schwarz) (Stuttgart, 1975), pp. 484–491. as he had told Adenauer. Others, however, have raised sincere and objective questions which he hopes can be answered. No one, for example, can accuse Prof Weizsaecker of wanting an atomic bomb, but even he finds problems with respect to the treaty. 4. I suggested to the Chancellor that, as a way of precipitating more definitive discussions, he might wish to have Amb Foster visit Bonn at a suitable time. I had discussed this matter with our higher officials in Washington and yesterday with Amb Foster in Geneva, and he had indicated willingness to come after the current ENDC session gets underway. Also Dr. Kratzer of the AEC, who had recently been here on a short visit, would be willing to return with others and sit down around the table with the German technicians to answer their doubts and questions. I referred in this connection to my discussion of the previous day with Science Min Stoltenberg, who had raised with me some seven technical points which we had undertaken to answer. The Chancellor said that both suggestions seemed appropriate and he would let me know when this could be arranged. Next week may be impossible since he would be spending most of the time in Berlin. 5. The Chancellor observed that an important aspect of the problem was to assure that no impression is given the German people that they are being pressured to sign the NPT. Such pressure could have bad results for the coming Landtag elections. Kosygin’s statement in London,For text of Kosygin’s press conference at the conclusion of his February 6–13 visit to the United Kingdom, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, March 1, 1967, pp. 3–5. Extracts of his Guildhall speech which that also treated these issues are in Keesing’s Contemporary Archives, 1967–1968, p. 21881. which he said had been confirmed by the Soviet Emb in Bonn as being accurate, to the effect that “if the treaty came about the FRG would have to sign” had had a bad effect in Germany. This had caused concern as to how the Soviets would function under the NPT; would they use it as a basis for interference in German affairs. 6. I expressed appreciation to the Chancellor for the statement made by the German Govt yesterday to the effect that they were in agreement with the idea of nonproliferation in principle. We agreed with the two conditions they had posed, namely, that nuclear powers should undertake disarmament measures and that Germany should be protected in scientific research and commercial applications. Both had been included in the draft preamble we had shown the Soviets in Geneva.The February 20 U.S. draft is summarized in The New York Times, February 21, 1967. Subsequently the United States and Soviet Union agreed to a joint draft that was presented to the Geneva Conference on August 24. For text, see Documents on Disarmament, 1967, pp. 338–341. I presented the Chancellor a copy of the preamble, along with the statement of President Johnson read on the opening of the ENDC meeting on Feb 20.For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1967, Book I, pp. 210–212. I also gave him the oral note received from the Dept in Deptel 141946,Dated February 21. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18–6) pointing out that this would be superseded by a formal note when the complete draft treaty can be tabled. McGhee 201. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Limdis. This telegram is summarized in McGhee, At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 216–217. Bonn, February 25, 1967, 1430Z. 9959. Subj: Improvement of FRG-US relations. For the Secretary. 1. As is evident from our recent reporting, we are currently in a difficult stage in our relations with the FedRep. The fears and accusations of American disinterest and abandonment, voiced by men of much influence in Germany, have reached disturbing proportions. In large part, they have an emotional rather than a factual basis, however, there is small comfort in this circumstance for us. I believe it to be essential at this point to try to understand what lies beneath this emotion, and to consider what steps we can take to reverse the trend. 2. I believe that the German Govt and people are troubled because they do not see clearly for Germany the future role they feel that they—as one of the three leading economic and military powers of the free world—are entitled. They have during the past year witnessed a weakening of NATO, to them the keystone of the established order which provides the basis for their security. They see a number of mutual interests emerging between the US and the Soviet Union, which they feel could bring about a realignment in the post-war security pattern. In such an atmosphere it is perhaps only natural that there has developed an urge for Germany to pursue its own national interest in establishing a more favorable position for itself in the world community. German authorities are so far unable, however, to define just what this position should be. Meanwhile they are suddenly fearful that before they can reach this definition the two great powers will decide Germany’s destiny between them. They feel “boxed in.” They are frustrated by the limited freedom of action that they feel is permitted them in their international relations. 3. We began our relations with the grand coalition under a number of handicaps. First and foremost, there was the fall of the Erhard government which, because of its close ties to the US and our alleged association with its demise, constituted a blow to our position here. The offset issue, which was so central to Erhard’s problems, seemed itself to raise the question of how closely the US continued to identify European security with its own. Although the new government says little about it, they must deeply resent having to pay the current offset in the light of the serious budgetary problems they have inherited. In addition, there is the increasing conviction here that the US has lost interest in Germany and Europe because of its preoccupation with Asia. 4. Nonetheless, we have made considerable progress in establishing good relations with the new government. Kiesinger and Brandt are well known quantities to us—and sympathetic to us. They have made it very clear that despite their bow to the French they wish to improve understanding with Washington. Their efforts in this direction, however, have until now been largely thwarted by the highly negative German reaction to the NPT, a reaction which shows signs of the psychological considerations mentioned above. There is in particular a feeling of frustration that we have, without adequate consultation, presented Germany with a fait accompli in the NPT with which it has no choice but to comply—despite possible adverse effects on German and European interests. Despite our best efforts the almost universal impression persists in Germany that the NPT is a sign of a new pattern of world organization being worked out secretly together—and imposed—by the two superpowers. There is widespread fear as to where this will leave Germany. In many cases this fear has nothing to do with German access to nuclear weapons. Rather it is a fear that the US has lost faith in NATO and hope for a united Europe, leaving Germany to find its own future, possibly in the company of such neutrals as India and Sweden. 5. As the Chancellor told Senator Robert Kennedy and subsequently me (Embtel 9817), Document 200. he hopes that German discussion with the US can go beyond specific points of disagreement—to broader and more positive aspects of common policy as well. I believe he has in mind that the US should try to inform the German Govt, and Kiesinger in particular, what our plans are for the longer range future—when the NPT will have become a reality and the offset solved in one way or another. To do this a good bit of preparatory thinking will obviously be required on our part—as well as by the Germans. 6. It is with this background that I make the following recommendations: A. Kiesinger visit. A principal element of uncertainty in our relations with Chancellor Kiesinger is the unclear status of the initial meeting between Kiesinger and the President. Kiesinger is a man of high intellectual qualities—who seeks an overall conceptual frame within which to place the particular aspects of policy, such as NPT, with which he must deal. It is evident that Kiesinger strongly desires, at first hand, an exposure to the President’s personal thinking for the future. There is ample evidence that the postponement of discussions for a meeting with the President is being used as evidence of a negative attitude in our government toward the Chancellor and his Cabinet. I would propose, therefore, that I be permitted to tell Kiesinger that although the President wishes to come to Germany he has not yet been able to make a firm decision and that this should not interfere with a Kiesinger visit to the United States. If the Chancellor will tell us when in his view he considers such a visit to be propitious, and mutually convenient date can be found, the President will be delighted to extend an invitation. I would assure him that he will be warmly welcomed. B. NPT consultations. For the immediate future we should do everything possible to provide answers to the seemingly unending series of questions raised by the Germans—public and private—on the NPT. I have, as reported in Embtel 9817, proposed to the Chancellor that Amb Foster come to Germany to discuss the NPT with him personally. The Chancellor’s reaction was positive. I have been in contact with Foster who will be glad to come once the ENDC gets underway—perhaps after another week. I have also urged that Dr. Kratzer of the AEC return for a second visit to talk with the German scientific community, as well as with FonOff officials, and that he be accompanied by other technical experts. This has been arranged starting Feb 27. I am continuing my detailed private discussions on NPT which so far have included Kiesinger, Science Min Stoltenberg and Kurt Birrenbach. C. East-West relations. I believe that we should make a concerted effort to bring home to the Germans that we offer them full support in the achievement of their own Eastern policies, and that we stand ready to coordinate with them our activities in this field where this proves desirable. (Although this seems obvious to us there is evidence that it is not so to the Germans.) This could also be a central theme of any eventual meeting between the President and the Chancellor. Speeches by leading Department officials should include approving references to Germany’s new Eastern policy. We should make clear to the Germans that we are always prepared, where this is appropriate, to plead their case in Moscow and other East European capitals. Finally, as concrete proposal, I recommend that a group of three or four ranking Department officials come to Germany to discuss with their counterparts here in a systematic way our mutual assessments of the situation in Eastern Europe, our mutual policies and the means for better coordinating these policies. Perhaps this group could be headed up by Under Sec Rostow or Counselor Bowie, and include Lisle, Director for Eastern Europe, and Brzezinski of Policy Planning. The agenda might include the following: closer prior consultations concerning impeding unilateral move in Eastern Europe; greater German access to the end products of the US intelligence community, whose resources are greater than those of the FedGovt; a more systematic effort to pass on to the FonOff reports received from Prague and Belgrade, where the FRG has no regular missions and instructions to our missions in other Eastern European capitals to maintain the closest liaison with one another. D. Western security. I would suggest that State Secretaries Schuetz (FonOff) and Carstens (Defense) be invited to Washington for a few days of off-the-record discussion, to include at least in part, the Under Secretaries of State and Defense. Every effort would be made to encourage an atmosphere of confidence and informality. Since both Carstens and Schuetz speak English, communication would be easy. The talks would center on the future of NATO and how we see Western security ensured for the future. We would attempt to give the Germans the feeling that they have some insight into our long-range thinking. This kind of conversation would be of immediate benefit in increasing confidence between us, and would be an excellent preparation for an eventual meeting between the President and the Chancellor. 7. I would appreciate your personal attention and comment on the foregoing at the earliest opportunity. McGhee 202. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Puhan and Hirschfeld; cleared by Leddy, Rostow, and ACDA; and approved by Rusk. Washington, March 1, 1967, 9:53 p.m. 146957. From the Secretary. 1. I have reviewed your thoughtful analysis of the current state of our relations with the Germans, Document 201. as well as your recommendations to improve them. I agree with your assessment that, to a large degree, the German reactions to issues like the proposed non-proliferation treaty have as much of an emotional as a factual basis. I suspect much of the current uneasiness among many of the Germans stems from their efforts to adjust to changes which are occurring in Europe, particularly as a result of de Gaulle’s work and the subsequent looser cohesion in the alliance. Unquestionably, the reorientation of the Germans in their relations to France and to us has contributed to this uneasiness. Although Brandt and Kiesinger on one or two occasions have spoken out on behalf of better relations with us, I fear that most German politicians, and particularly the German press, have not helped very much in keeping our relations on a level keel. It seems to me that we will have to let the Germans spend a little time sorting out their own attitude and determine for themselves in what directions their best interests lie. At the same time, we would want to make sure that their reactions do not result in upsetting the moderate government which now runs Germany or let them drift in a direction dangerous to our national interests. 2. With this in mind, I come now to your recommendations. I believe that a meeting between the President and Kiesinger at the proper time would be in order. The problem is essentially one of finding an appropriate time. Right now, for instance, such a visit would be interpreted as a desire on our part to call him to task for his remarks in Bonn before the CDU/CSU press club.Apparent reference to a statement made at the February 11 CDU/CSU Party meeting in which Kiesinger outlined current Ostpolitik efforts and the basis of the policy. For extracts, see Meissner, Die deutsche Ostpolitik, pp. 188–190. I understand one German press service has already taken this line. I notice Kiesinger said in his remarks that our conversations have all dealt with contentious subjects. While we have sought in the past not to have this happen, it is rather difficult to avoid discussions of subjects like the NPT, troop levels, balance of payments problems and so forth. 3. As far as the proposed non-proliferation treaty is concerned, I believe we have been forthright in giving answers to the questions posed by the Germans. I have seen to it that all questions posed are answered. We discuss the proposed NPT with any German who comes to us. Blumenfeld, the Hamburg Deputy, was here just the other day and Adrian Fisher spent considerable time with him allaying his concerns. I know you and your staff have similarly been responding to German requests. We shall be glad to have Foster or Fisher go to Bonn as soon as possible. I agree that it was a good idea to have Kratzer of the AEC return to Bonn. If the Germans wish to explore technical aspects raised by the NPT further, they would be most welcome to do so in Washington where the resources are most readily available. 4. On the subject of East-West relations, I find it a little difficult to believe that the Germans could question our support of their activities leading to an improvement of East-West relations. When Brandt was here, he opened his discussion of this subject, you may recall, with the remark that this is one subject that he could take up in Paris or in Washington and get the same positive reactions. Our own efforts to improve relations with Eastern Europe ought to serve as a fairly good indicator of our views on this. However, I am not opposed to impressing upon them that we do approve, and your suggestion that leading Department officials include in speeches approving references to Germany’s new Eastern policy can certainly be carried out. On the whole, our willingness to respond to their request that we support them in the Arab World, Finland and India is a more demonstrable indication of our support of their position. I see no problem either in giving them greater access to the end product of the U.S. intelligence community or to pass on to the Foreign Office reports received from capitals where the Germans have no diplomatic missions, subject to the usual limitations of not endangering our own intelligence gathering efforts. I am not convinced that group discussions on East-West relations of the sort you recommend in your paragraph C would, however, serve a really useful purpose at this time. 5. As for the visit by Schuetz of the Foreign Office and Carstens of Defense to Washington for off-the-record discussions of Western security, I believe such and similar discussions might well precede a meeting between the President and Kiesinger when such a meeting can be arranged. Carstens will of course be over here with Schroeder for the discussions with Secretary McNamara in April. But the suggestion you make would provide an opportunity for our as well as the German side to prepare their respective positions in some detail and perhaps reach preliminary agreement, thereby assuring that a meeting between the President and Kiesinger might have more substantial results. Rusk 203. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 7 GER W. Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Eyes Only. Bonn, March 3, 1967, 1219Z. 10199. Subject: Kiesinger visit. For the Secretary and Under Secretary. 1. In accordance with the instructions given me late yesterday over the telephone by the Under Secretary, I sounded out Chancellor Kiesinger last evening on the question of a possible visit to the States. McGhee discussed the meeting in At the Creation of a New Germany, p. 215. Knowing the sensitivity of the subject, I was, as I have always been in the past, extremely cautious. As instructed, I did not purport to speak either for the President or the government, but assumed personal responsibility for my remarks. Our discussion took place alone after a small informal dinner in honor of retiring Con Gen Paul Sweet, an old friend of the Kiesin-gers, which was the first private social function the Kiesingers have attended since he assumed office. Since I have known Kiesinger well for almost four years our conversation was on a very easy and confidential basis. 2. I began by advising the Chancellor that I wanted to discuss frankly with him the question of his possible visit to the States, in light of the speculation on this question which had emerged on the preceding day in the German press. Naturally, as the head of a country which is such a close friend and ally he would always be welcome in the States. We have not as yet raised the question of a visit with him officially because we have not wished to appear to be “rushing” him so soon after his coming into office. We have wanted to give him ample opportunity to carry out his planned visit to France, to establish his regime and to evolve his own policies—without apparent pressure from us. We had, moreover, observed certain statements attributed to him to the effect that he wished to delay his visit to America until after he had achieved his main legislative objectives. When he reaches the conclusion that he is ready for a visit, and there is something important that he wishes to discuss with the President, I would appreciate it if he would advise me. I was confident that, once a time suitable for both him and the President could be found, there would be no difficulty in arranging the visit. 3. Kiesinger responded by saying that he had never intended to give the impression that he wished to delay his visit to America for any reason connected with his attitude toward the US. He recounted his long background of good relationships with Americans in Bonn and Stuttgart and his frequent visits to the US to see his daughter who is married to an American citizen. When he came to power he had felt a strong necessity for overcoming the results of the “neglect” in German French policy, which he considered had resulted from Schroeder’s curiously negative attitude toward the French. He had to this end visited Gen de Gaulle and they had had a very frank discussion. He had pointed out to de Gaulle the limitations on French and German cooperation, and had advised de Gaulle that Germany would continue to cooperate with the US. de Gaulle had responded to this in a rather cynical way, i.e. that the Germans would ultimately come to the French view with respect to the US; however, he would not seek to influence them in this respect. Kiesinger said that he really didn't know whether anything important would come of Germany’s relations with France; however, he considered it important for all that he make an effort to continue friendly relations. I assured him that we fully agreed. 4. Kiesinger then said that, assuming we thought it desirable, he wanted to go to the US. When should he go? I replied that I believed this to be a decision for him. When did he feel that he would be ready, in terms of the evolution of the policies and actions of his regime? He replied that he thought it best to go before his next meeting with de Gaulle, which is now scheduled for June. He has, up to now, been consolidating his leadership over the coalition government. I gathered that he felt this had just about, but perhaps not quite yet, been accomplished. There were certain high priority pieces of legislation that he wished to see well launched toward passage. When I asked him if he referred to the emergency legislation, the stabilization law and a new electoral law, he nodded. He hoped that all this could be accomplished by May. In short, he thought May was the right time. 5. Kiesinger said that the principal purpose of a meeting with the President and other US leaders should, in his view, be to provide the opportunity for a broad discussion on long-range problems and policies of the West vis-à-vis the Communist bloc. He referred, as an example, to the discussions held in the Bilderberg Group, which he on one occasion attended. He did not wish to negotiate specific issues, such as the offset or the NPT. Indeed he hoped that by then the NPT would be signed on conditions which would be considered to be honorable for Germany. (I thought it interesting that he apparently revealed his expectation that the NPT would be signed.) 6. I advised the Chancellor that I would inform my government fully on our conversation, portraying it as not being an initiative on his part but as a result of a frank discussion which I had myself raised. Comment: I believe that Kiesinger has now gone as far as we can expect him to go in suggesting that he visit the US. In view of the uncertainties which have been discussed privately and in the press as to whether he would be welcome, I do not believe that we should expect him to be the first to make the suggestion publicly. To do so would, from his viewpoint, possibly result in an embarrassing rebuff or delay. We would, in almost any normal similar circumstances, welcome a visit from a new German Chancellor—in connection with his calls on other heads of allied states. Our only hesitancy in the past has, as I understand it, arisen out of the unusual circumstances surrounding our relationship to the previous Erhard govt and Kiesinger’s relationship to de Gaulle. Since Kiesinger has, I believe, in his conversation with me, removed any barriers arising out of these associations from his standpoint, I believe that we should do the same and should proceed to extend a normal invitation for him to visit the President, and attempt to work out a suitable date in May. It is obvious, in any event, that the visit must ultimately take place. As soon as a decision has been made to explore the time, I would hope that an announcement could be made both in Bonn and Washington to this effect. This would, I believe, have the effect of “pricking the bubble” of speculation which has grown to sizeable proportions here, and would enable us to resume a more normal relationship as preparations for the visit get underway.In a March 3 memorandum to President Johnson, attached to a White House copy of this telegram, Rostow wrote: “Herewith George delicately explores with Kiesinger and comes up tentatively with May. Is that agreeable in principle? It sounds right to me: the prospect will help us with McCloy and other negotiations in the next several months and we should have things in pretty good shape by May.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Walt Rostow, vol. 22) McGhee 204. Telegram From the Mission in Berlin to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 17–8 US. Confidential. Repeated to UNNMR SHAPE, Moscow, Bonn, Paris, CINCUSAREUR, and CINCEUR. Berlin, March 18, 1967, 1400Z. 1214. NATUS info. Subject: Meeting with Soviet Ambassador Abrasimov—European matters. From Ambassador McGhee. 1. I attended a two-hour luncheon March 17 at the Embassy residence of Soviet Ambassador to the GDR Abrasimov. He was accompanied by Embassy Counselor Komarov, Protocol Officer Khrustalev, and a translator named Michurina. Minister Morris and Polansky of USBER accompanied me. The atmosphere was relaxed and straightforward. Abrasimov was quite forthcoming and in good humor. 2. Our conversation touched on relations between the FRG on the one hand, and East Germany, Eastern Europe and the USSR on the other, Berlin matters, and US-Soviet relations. The Berlin and US-Soviet topics are subjects of separate telegrams. McGhee reported on the discussion of U.S.-Soviet relations in telegram 1215 from Bonn, March 18. (Ibid.) He reported on their discussions on Berlin in telegram 1216 from Bonn, March 18. (Ibid.) 3. FRG relations with Eastern Europe and USSR. After an initial exchange of pleasantries, I noted that the USSR and the GDR appear to have reacted negatively to the new Eastern European policy of the Kiesinger government. I said that the establishment of diplomatic relations between Bonn and Eastern European countries could hardly be construed as a threat to the USSR or East Germany and invited Abrasimov’s comments. 4. In a lengthy response, Abrasimov made the following points: the USSR was not opposed to the FRG establishing diplomatic relations with socialist countries. However, Bonn would have to give up its claim to represent all of Germany, and efforts to acquire nuclear weapons. Bonn makes pleasant noises about improving relations with Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, but does not follow this up with practical deeds. In fact, Bonn’s policies are similar to those of Adenauer and Erhard. As Governing Mayor Brandt, in his conversations with Abrasimov, made many intelligent comments about improving relations with EE and the USSR, but said he (Brandt) was not in power in Bonn and therefore could not do anything. Now Brandt is in power and still is not doing anything constructive. The US welcomes Bonn’s new Eastern European policy; we should, however, advise Bonn to take new, realistic steps in its Eastern European policy which would be acceptable to the USSR and East Germany. 5. With respect to Berlin, the US and the Soviet Union say that they are for the status quo. However, the US apparently makes no efforts to prevent the Kiesinger government from taking provocative actions, such as high-level talks and Bundestag meetings in Berlin. These are provocations against the USSR, when they occur in Berlin. 6. In reply, I pointed out that the US and the USSR appraise Bonn’s policies differently. One can hardly call the Bonn government revanchist just because it wants to reunite the German people. Bonn has done nothing aggressive in this regard, and has gone so far as to renounce unilaterally the acquisition of nuclear weapons. It makes no claims for any specific areas beyond the Oder-Neisse Line, and asserts only that the final determination of German borders must await the signing of a peace treaty. I pointed out that I knew the present leaders of the FRG government very well personally and that Abrasimov knew Brandt. One could hardly call these leaders aggressive. 7. I said it seemed to me that the USSR and the East Germans had adopted a harder attitude toward the Kiesinger government than they had toward Erhard or Adenauer. The Bundestag Committee meetings in Berlin were normal and could hardly be called provocative. Furthermore, the GDR appears to have adopted a much harder line on such issues as passes for holiday visits and hardship cases. I saw no reason for the USSR to fear the FRG, which is a relatively small country. Moreover, the FRG has only a small army, much smaller than Soviet forces in the GDR, which remains under NATO control. 8. In response, Abrasimov stressed several times that the USSR is not afraid of the FRG. If the FRG starts something, however, there will be not much left of it. 9. Troop withdrawals from Europe. In response to a question about rumored Soviet troop withdrawals from the GDR, Abrasimov said that there was no truth to it. The USSR favors a continuation of the status quo in this connection. Abrasimov said that, as regards reciprocal withdrawals, the USSR would wait for deeds, not words. After the US, the UK and France withdrew from Germany (it was not clear whether he meant all or part), then the Soviet Union would withdraw from East Germany. He added in a jocular vein that since the US had the farthest to go, it should start first. I said nothing committal on this question. 10. Abrasimov said he had read that the cost of maintaining US troops in Europe amounted to approximately two billion dollars. He observed that the FRG pays for US forces stationed in West Germany, whereas the USSR pays for Soviet troops in Eastern Europe. I replied that there was widespread misunderstanding on the issue of troop costs. The FRG does not pay for US troops. We ask only that Bonn balance its foreign accounts with us either through the purchase of weapons or of bonds. We do not insist they purchase weapons they do not need. 11. German reunification. Abrasimov said that we should be realists and not expect German reunification during our lifetime. Moscow will not give up the GDR and Washington will not give up the FRG. Two separate German states exist, with different social-economic systems. I noted we had no illusions about when reunification would occur. However, we were certain that Germany would ultimately be reunited, and that until this comes about the division of Germany would continue to represent a serious source of tension in Central Europe. Morris 205. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 13. Secret. Annotations on the source text read: “Send to Watson,” “C[op]y sent F. Bator, 3/24/67,” and “Rec'd 5:30 p.m.” Washington, March 23, 1967, 4:45 p.m. Mr. President: I had a good talk with our old friend Ray Cline today, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. He makes the following points. 1. Kiesinger himself never believed there was much to be gotten from Paris but felt the try was necessary to convince others of the limits of that relationship. There now is more widespread understanding that Paris cannot—or will not—advance serious German interests. 2. With respect to openings to the East, the Germans are finding, as might have been predicted, that the going will be long and slow. They will not despair of this policy; but they are increasingly conscious that the problem of German unity will not be solved soon; and that there are great resistances as well as historic opportunities in playing Eastern European nationalism and assertiveness. 3. Therefore, they have pretty well come to the judgment that they must rebuild their tie to the United States as the foundation for their policy over the near and middle future. 4. Kiesinger himself—and almost certainly others such as Schroeder—knew this from the beginning but they had to reckon with the pressures from Strauss, with respect to Paris, and Wehner, with respect to the East. 5. The coalition, while tolerably close to a consensus on the above, remains extremely uneasy politically. As we know, Kiesinger is presiding over a cabinet which contains at least three major contenders for the Chancellorship in 1969. He has a great vested interest in making this coalition a success. The others have a primary interest in their own emergence by 1969 and judge the success of the coalition on whether its success will advance or detract from their candidacy. 6. Ray’s point is that we should deal with Kiesinger as a man facing an extremely delicate political problem and not as a normal political leader with an assured domestic base of power. It is his assessment that Kiesinger’s general orientation with respect to U.S. interests is good; but he is under pressures from elements in his coalition to make noises which are at best independent-sounding, and, at times, almost anti-American. The case for compassion is not sentimental, so far as U.S. interests are concerned; it is that the most probable successor to a failure of the coalition, in Ray’s view, is Strauss—not Schroeder or Brandt. In particular, Strauss appears to be picking up support by taking a nationalist line on the non-proliferation treaty; and he hopes to build from his position as Finance Minister the paternity of a new phase of German revival and prosperity. 7. Specifically, Ray recommends that you do see Kiesinger some time before he is scheduled to see de Gaulle—in June. (The Franco-German agreement requires that they meet at 6-month intervals.) de Gaulle visited Bonn July 12–13. 8. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] it is clear that Kiesin-ger found your letter to him constructive,The President’s March 10 letter, which included a statement of interest in a personal meeting, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspondence, Germany, January 1–April 30, 1967. but he was uncertain whether, in fact, you intended him to come by the end of May or thereabouts.A notation on the source text reads: “Keep options open.” Walt 206. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 142. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Passed to the White House. Bonn, March 30, 1967, 1243Z. 11431. Vipto 27. Pass White House for President. Subj: Vice President’s visit: March 29 meeting with Brandt—offset and troop deployment.Vice President Humphrey visited Europe March 28–April 8. A complete set of the reporting telegrams and memoranda of his conversation is ibid. A report on his discussions with Brandt regarding European relations is in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 244. (Following is approved record of conversation.) 1. Brandt said that he felt urgent need to bring trilateral talks to a good result. Redeployment of troops should come not on the basis of balance of payments, but on a basis of technological change. Then, obviously quite concerned re this point, Brandt said “democracy in the Federal Republic of Germany does not depend on the presence of foreign troops.” He was quite certain that rightist groups in Germany had no future, and that Germany’s partners should recognize this. 2. Vice President assured the Vice Chancellor that the U.S. did not regard the NPD vote as significant. It did not indicate any more influence in Germany than did Birch Society strength in the Rocky Mountain states indicate power in U.S. American troops in Germany are not forces of occupation, Vice President said, they are there to add reality to our commitment to European security. Any reduction of our troop levels would not mean any lessening of that commitment. 3. Brandt said that this was a very delicate issue, particularly because of leaks on German side following discussions with U.S. He regretted these leaks. He had discussed matter with his colleagues in hope that something could be done about problem. If he had chosen not to speak with his colleagues, it would have [been] difficult to make anything happen. 4. Vice President acknowledged the American concern with the news leaks. This was always a problem. There was a need for frank discussion in private about this matter. He believed that after trilateral discussions were concluded and modifications in troop levels might be made, there might be possible press misunderstanding. But what counted was the commitment to each other of nations and leaders. McGhee 207. National Intelligence EstimateSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates. Secret; Controlled Dissem. The estimate was prepared jointly by the Central Intelligence Agency, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, and the National Security Agency. It was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board. Washington, March 30, 1967. NIE 23–67 BONN’S POLICIES UNDER THE KIESINGER GOVERNMENT The Problem To assess the cohesiveness of the grand coalition government in West Germany and to estimate the development of West German foreign policy over the next two or three years. Conclusions A. The coalition headed by Chancellor Kiesinger has gained broad public support in West Germany and will probably remain united at least until the federal election of September 1969 draws near. B. The extreme rightist National Democratic Party (NPD) is likely to make further gains in the next year, but we believe that it will remain a fairly small minority of the German electorate during the period of this estimate. C. While maintaining its defense ties with the US and NATO, the Kiesinger government will be more assertive of national interests than previous governments in Bonn. Recently emerging political differences have led to a gradual increase in German criticism of various US policies and the present dispute over the proposed non-proliferation treaty will intensify this development. Nevertheless, we believe that if the principal other nonnuclear nations sign, the Kiesinger government will feel compelled to go along. D. Kiesinger will continue his efforts to improve Franco-German relations, but the practical results will probably be limited, and the West German Government is not likely to accept French hegemony in Western Europe. E. Bonn’s present emphasis on improving relations with Eastern Europe, already successful in Rumania, will probably have some success in Hungary, Bulgaria, and—somewhat later—in Czechoslovakia. We think it unlikely that the West German initiatives will bring about any major change in Soviet policy toward Germany. F. Bonn will seek to expand contacts with East Germany, even high-level contacts which might eventually approximate de facto recognition, but will almost certainly not grant de jure recognition to the Pankow regime. [Here follows a 6-page discussion of the factors that led to the report’s conclusions.] 208. Telegram From the Mission in Berlin to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 142. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Repeated to Paris for the Vice President. Berlin, April 6, 1967, 2250Z. 1356. Vipto 90. Subject: Vice President’s visit: Private Kiesinger comments on US–FRG relations. Humphrey and Kiesinger met twice on April 5. During the morning session, they discussed U.S.-German relations. In the afternoon, they talked about the Non-Proliferation Treaty, East-West relations, and a Kiesinger-Johnson meeting. Reporting cables on these discussions are ibid. Humphrey summarized his impressions of these talks in telegram Vipto 85 from Berlin, April 6. (Ibid.) 1. Both Chancellor and Vice President expressed their satisfaction with today’s discussions. Latter stated that he thought they had closed a chapter of misunderstandings between the two countries which had existed over the past year or so. They had come out of a “dim atmosphere” back into “the clear air.” He considered today’s talks a political success for both sides. 2. Following the discussion, Chancellor took the Vice President privately aside and, in great earnestness, told him he would do nothing to impair US–FRG relations. Nothing was more important to him than friendship and close cooperation with the US. He would not heed others in Europe who would divide the US and FRG. The Chancellor said discussions during the day had been “like sunlight bursting through the clouds.” President Johnson must know of his loyalty and steadfastness—he could be counted on as our friend and partner. As a result of today’s talks he felt happy and confident. He was particularly reassured re NPT. He would help however we asked re liquidity and other problems, including the Kennedy Round. He desperately wanted the friendship of President Johnson and America. 3. Vice President thanked him for his obviously sincere expression and told him he would so inform President Johnson. He (the VP) wanted Chancellor to know that we stood by our friends, kept our commitments, and that FRG could count on us. Morris 209. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Berlin for the Ambassador. Bonn, April 14, 1967, 1755Z. 12257. Department pass Treasury. Subject: International liquidity. Ref: State 175047.Dated April 13. (Ibid.) 1. Reftel, which requests me to make an oral presentation to Chancellor Kiesinger on the possible adverse effect of the ECE Finance Ministers' meeting, scheduled for April 17–18, on the ultimate solution of the international liquidity problem, has been forwarded to me in Berlin where I am making a scheduled visit. I have been in touch with Embassy Bonn, who advise that Kiesinger is not available under normal circumstances today and tomorrow, since he is campaigning in Schleswig-Holstein. 2. Under the circumstances, it would appear to me to be putting undue pressure to seek an extraordinary meeting with the Chancellor, say out of Bonn, wherever he might be in his campaign, in light of the fact that this same subject has been raised with him in the President’s letter,See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 241. and in his meeting with the Vice President,See footnote 2, Document 208. as well as in two letters from Fowler to Minister Schiller Transmitted in telegram 171594 to Bonn, April 11, and telegram 175048 to Bonn, April 14. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US) and by Walter Heller personally with Schiller and Schoellhorn on April 10Not found. in behalf of Fowler. Both in his reply to the President’s letterDated April 4. The text was transmitted to Vice President Humphrey in telegram Tovip 34, April 4. (Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US) and to the Vice President, Kiesinger assured us of his “full cooperation,” even though neither he nor Schiller in his discussions with Heller, indicated what the precise German position would be. The fact that Schiller observed to Heller, as reported in Embtel 12111,Dated April 12. (Ibid., ORG 7 WH) that Germany expected to be a buffer between France and the U.S. on this issue, would indicate that the Germans have no intention of capitulating to the French during the ECE meeting. 3. As a consequence I propose to send the following letter to the Chancellor today. We have been assured that it will reach him well in advance of the departure of Schiller and Strauss for the meeting. 4. Following is text of letter: Begin Text Bonn/Bad Godesberg April 14, 1967 His Excellency Dr. H.C. Kurt Georg Kiesinger Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany Bonn Dear Mr. Chancellor: I have been asked to bring to your attention the concern of the United States Government over current developments in the negotiations on plans to reform the international monetary system. In particular this concern relates to the possible outcome of the April 17–18 meeting of the Finance Ministers of the European Economic Community. Our fear is that the Ministers will at that meeting adopt a common position in international liquidity negotiations favoring a general drawing rights proposal, based on inadequately defined and limited common ground, which would fall far short of what is needed. Such a result would risk failure of the four-year effort to reform the international monetary system, with grave consequence for the future evolution of economic relationships between Europe and America. You will recall, of course, the interest of the President in a successful outcome of these negotiations by September of this year, which he expressed in his letter to you of March 11. The Vice President also told you of our hope that your government would extend its active cooperation in bringing about agreement on an effective plan for reform of the monetary system. Secretary of the Treasury Fowler has written two letters to Economics Minister Schiller about these matters. I attach copies of these letters for your ready reference. In his letters Secretary Fowler explains in some detail our objectives in the negotiations, and our concern at the trend of recent developments. In particular the possible outcome of the forthcoming meeting of the Finance Ministers of the European Economic Community. I have been instructed to tell you that the viewpoints expressed in Secretary Fowler’s letters reflect the political policy of the United States Government at the highest level. I hope therefore that you will review personally the issues and positions presented in Secretary Fowler’s letters, so that they may be given appropriate consideration in your discussions with your Cabinet colleagues prior to the meeting. Sincerely yours, George C. McGhee American Ambassador End of text. McGhee 210. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Trilateral Talks. Secret. Washington, April 20, 1967, 7 p.m. SUBJECT Trilateral Talks 1. Gen Boie, FRG Embassy, met with Lt Gen Spivy, Director, Joint Staff at 1900 hours on 20 April 1967. Gen Boie delivered the substance of a message received from the FRG Government pertaining to the proposed redeployment of US forces from Germany. 2. The proposal of the German Government relating to US forces redeployments is attached at Tab A.Not printed. 3. Gen Boie stated that if possible the German Government would like to obtain agreement on their proposals prior to the Trilateral Talks; if not, they would be discussed in the Trilateral Talks. If still necessary, they intend to make such proposals to the DPC. 4. Gen Boie also indicated that the German Government would like to discuss at the Trilateral Talks whether and in what way the US and the UK redeployments from the FRG might be used as an initiative to obtain mutual withdrawal from the “other Germany” of Soviet troops. In this connection, they ask that “experts” meet in London on 27 April to discuss the mutual reduction problem. (The German Government has requested that the Principals' meeting be held in London on 28–29 April.)For a summary of these talks, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 249. 5. Gen Boie stated that the German Government requested that a joint report by the three governments not be prepared this time but rather that each Principal prepare a separate report to his government to be passed to the DPC. It is further requested that any troop redeployment proposals be made by the individual governments to the DPC. Finally, Gen Boie stated that the German Government requested that the results of the Trilateral Talks not be presented to the WEU before being presented to the DPC. 6. Gen Boie stated that these same FRG proposals would be presented to the Department of State on the morning of 21 April 1967. 7. He further requested that I come to Bonn early next week to meet with the FRG Joint Staff. Tuesday, 25 April 1967 would be appropriate, since Gen Buchs and staff would be available then and since this would give the FRG needed time before the Trilateral Talks on the 28th of April 1967. B. E. Spivy Lt General, USA Director, Joint Staff 211. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, President’s Trip to Europe. Secret; Sensitive. Washington, April 21, 1967, 2:30 p.m. SUBJECT Your Trip to GermanyFormer Chancellor Adenauer died on April 19, and President Johnson flew from Washington to Bonn for the funeral ceremonies on April 23. He returned to Washington on April 26. Memoranda of his conversation with German and other foreign government officials are ibid. President Johnson’s statements regarding the death of Adenauer and his talks with Kiesinger are in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1967, Book I, pp. 454, 462–463. McGhee discussed Johnson’s visit in At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 220–223. I understand Walt spoke to you about my staying behind on Sunday-Wednesday. On reflection, I suspect I can be of more help to you here than in Europe. I hate to miss the trip, but with the Kennedy Round, liquidity negotiations, trilaterals, and non-proliferation all coming to a head, I had better keep holding the ring. One comment about your meeting with Kiesinger . I may be soft on the British, but I am not on the Germans. However, in deciding how to talk to Kiesinger, I think it is important to remember that you are three times his size—and that he knows it. He also knows that Erhard was close to you. For both reasons, as well as the Nazi business,Chancellor Kiesinger had been a member of a Nazi youth organization. he is deeply insecure about his relations with you. A congenial and collegial approach could do wonders in reassuring him, and turning him into a more reliable friend. And I don't believe that this would mislead him into thinking that he has any hold or claim on us. I am aware of your doubts. But I would bet that with a little Presidential warmth you can bring this man into line, in spite of the pressure on him from Strauss et al to prove that he is not an American stooge. The gain to us from making him feel that he is a friend—and therefore has to act like one—can be very great. The Germans will have a lot to do with the outcome in non-proliferation, the Kennedy Round, international liquidity, etc. And together, the above will cast a very long shadow. It is true that deGaulle has nothing to offer the Germans, and that they will soon find that out. But by then they may have committed some great mistakes. If they stick with the French on international money, or don't help us move the Kennedy Round forward, or balk on non-proliferation, the structure of our relations with Europe could turn very sour. I am afraid it will be of no comfort to us that the Germans too would soon find out how wrong they had been. They are not immune to some whoppers, even when they have the most to lose. Forgive me this special pleading. But we are reaching a crucial moment on a lot of fronts and the Germans are in a key position. I agree: it would be dead wrong for the President to plead with this man or to twist his arm. But to sit down and do a little friendly reasoning together—spelling out for him what kind of pressures you face at home, anxieties you have about the future of U.S.-European relations in case Kennedy Round and non-proliferation and liquidity go down the drain—could make a great deal of difference. Now I'll hold my peace. Have a very good and successful trip. My thoughts will be with you. Francis M. Bator Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. 212. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 163. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Obst and approved in S on April 24 and in the White House on June 28. The meeting was held in Kiesinger’s office. Bonn, April 24, 1967, 11:30 a.m. PARTICIPANTS President Johnson Chancellor Kiesinger Secretary Rusk Ambassador McGhee State Secretary Guttenberg Ambassador Knappstein Mr. Heinz Weber (interpreter) Mr. Harry Obst (interpreter) Opening Remarks Kiesinger stated that it was a great honor for his government and for the German people that the President of the United States, together with so many of his most distinguished assistants, had come to attend the State funeral of former Chancellor Adenauer. Though this was a very sad occasion that had brought the President to Germany, he was nevertheless happy that the President could be here and meet with him for the first time. He hoped they would find an opportunity to exchange views on their common problems. President Johnson expressed his appreciation for the Chancellor’s kind reception this morning. He was aware that the Chancellor had an extremely busy schedule for the next two or three days. He did not want to add to his burdens more than was necessary. He equally regretted to have to come on such a sad mission, and equally welcomed the opportunity to be able to meet with Mr. Kiesinger to talk about his problems (Johnson’s) and learn about those of the Chancellor. Upon learning of Adenauer’s death he had immediately determined to make the trip and had so stated. The purpose of his coming here was to underscore the great respect that he and the entire American people felt for the contribution to the world made by the late Chancellor. They also felt the same respect and admiration for the German people as a whole, and would continue to uphold the relationship of friendship and alliance with the Federal Republic. He appreciated the courtesy that Mr. Kiesinger had shown the Vice President during their recent meeting in Bonn. The Vice President had conveyed a clear picture of the substance of their talks to the American people. He had been extremely pleased with the warm reception he had been given in Germany. The President was gratified that Mr. Humphrey had had an opportunity to review mutual problems with Vice Chancellor Brandt, a very good and old friend. Efforts to divide U.S. and FRG There were many people in the world who would like to divide Germany and the United States, and many attempts had been made particularly during the terms of office of Chancellors Adenauer and Erhard. None of those attempts, however, had been successful. He was positive that the same excellent relationship we had enjoyed during this period would continue in the future. He hoped that no enemy would ever be able to divide us or cause us to doubt each other. Future meeting with Chancellor The President hoped that he and the Chancellor would be able to discuss certain subjects of mutual interest when they meet on Wednesday. He only wanted at this time to express the sincere grief and deep sorrow of the American people over the passing of Konrad Adenauer. Apart from meeting with the Chancellor on Wednesday, he was looking forward to a meeting with the Chancellor in the future, maybe in a few months time. He hoped that such an encounter would be possible. He had just told Mr. Humphrey over dinner before his departure to Bonn, when Mr. Humphrey was telling him about his visit to Germany, that during the three years that he had been President he had spent two of the three Christmases with German Chancellors. He had, during this period, met with them about a dozen times or so. US–FRG Consultation He had read several editorials a few days ago which stressed that there were no consultations between the U.S. and German Governments. While these editorials were being published, Ambassador Foster was in Bonn to talk to the Chancellor, Vice Chancellor Brandt was leaving the White House, Defense Minister Schroeder was entering his Cabinet room, Secretary Rusk was in Europe for consultations and the Vice President arrived a day or so later. Notwithstanding all this activity, the press maintained no exchanges of views were taking place. FRG high on U.S. priority list He welcomed the opportunity of the forthcoming meeting with the Chancellor, and would always look forward to further future discussions of joint problems and interests. His (the President’s) election had not come out as well as Mr. Kiesinger’s and he had to deal with a very recalcitrant Congress.In November 1966 Congressional elections, the Democratic Party lost 47 House and 3 Senate seats. He was facing complex problems in other parts of the world. Some of these had already existed before he took office about three years ago. The United States had to live and deal with these problems, but it would never disregard the interests of the Chancellor and the German nation. He (Mr. Kiesinger) and the German people were right at the top of the list of American attention. The United States was willing to discuss all mutual problems with Germany and try to find solutions to them. Even if the Chancellor was not willing to sacrifice his Christmas celebration, a meeting with him would be welcome at any time. Praise for Knappstein and McGhee The President emphasized his high regard for Ambassador Knappstein, who had visited his home many times. Mr. Knappstein could be sure that he could call on the President with any message at any time and be welcomed with open arms. The President also expressed appreciation for the very many courtesies and great cooperation shown by the Chancellor and the German Government to Ambassador McGhee. Mr. McGhee was doing an excellent job in representing the United States in Bonn. He was not only from the President’s home state of Texas but also a long-time neighbor and good friend. Vital that US–FRG stand together Despite the fact that so much time and sacrifice had to be given for the support of the U.S. fighting men in Viet-Nam, and despite the difficulties with Congress that was trying to tie him down much more than he would like, there was hardly any question that he was giving more time and attention to—to the relationship of the United States with Germany and the other European nations. In the future, as in the past, there would be those who would by rumor, gossip and doubt try to divide them. He had no doubt, however, that the peace of the world could be assured in the future, as long as the German and American leaders would fully trust each other and stand shoulder to shoulder. That was what he and his government intended to do. The President then explained that he was descended from German stock and lived in a German community in Texas. If he did not have the deep respect and love for the German people that he possessed, he would have moved long ago. He was aware that there were many difficult problems and many danger signals in the 20th century. There would be times of uncertainty on certain subjects. If, however, the Chancellor and he would, with equal friendship and determination, continue to stand side by side, the period of their cooperation would turn out to be a very good one. In closing the President said that President Eisenhower had very much wanted to be present at the funeral, but he was 76, ill and had a heart condition. His doctor had vetoed the trip. FRG wants US friendship Mr. Kiesinger, in response, said that the President had spoken of the burden of the Chancellor’s office. He was almost embarrassed to compare it with the gigantic burden of concerns and responsibility that the President had to bear. He assured the President that his government was not only thinking of their own worries and problems, but were very much concerned about those faced by the United States. He had so stated in his initial Statement of Policy to the Bundestag. His government wanted the same firm relationship of determination and friendship that the President had spoken of, and would try to consolidate that friendship and make the alliance even stronger. If the President had heard certain complaints made on the German side, and even by the Chancellor himself, these complaints were not meant to be unilateral accusations against the United States. Rather they were expressing what the Germans themselves had so often failed to do. Quality of consultation As far as consultations between the two governments were concerned, he was not worried so much about the lack of frequency, which indeed did not exist. His concern was one of quality rather than of quantity. Some subjects should be explored in greater depth. Candor should always prevail in their discussions, even on complex and troublesome questions. Today, maybe more than at any time since the peak of the cold war, there was in Germany a feeling of deep sympathy for the United States, maybe more so than in any other European country. He appreciated the President’s willingness to discuss mutual problems in depth and with candor. Need to adjust to changes It was true, of course, that great changes had taken place. Nowadays, the world was changing as much in a decade as it had once changed during a century. It was necessary to follow and adjust to these changes. Kiesinger would like to visit President He assured the President that he would be available whenever he would deem it advisable to have talks with him, be it Christmas, Easter or Whitsuntide (This would be an especially appropriate time, since the Holy Spirit descended during this period). He was as much concerned as the President that they work closely together in the future, to help secure peace and freedom and justice. And he did not just want to utter those big words. Hope for even firmer friendship He was aware of the fact that the United States was extremely powerful. It was indeed the first nation of the world. The President, as leader of this nation, was carrying a tremendous responsibility. He hoped that it would not be considered arrogant on his part (or whatever one might want to call it) if he stated that the Federal Republic would endeavor to make the friendship between the two countries even firmer and their alliance stronger. However, in the joint discussion both sides should endeavor to reach the degree of “quality” which was commensurate with this particular hour of history. By the way, he did not think the President would hear many more complaints coming from Germany. He had conducted many discussions in the previous weeks, first of all with Ambassador McGhee—and he appreciated greatly the great job the Ambassador had done in making clear to him the problems and position of the United States Government—then with Special Representative John McCloy whom the President had sent twice to Germany in recent weeks. He had, indeed, made a wise choice to dispatch such an old and highly esteemed friend of the German people. He was equally grateful for the visit of Vice President Humphrey, who had proved to be an eloquent and convincing representative for the American people, and for the call by Ambassador Foster, whom he had known since his early days as a member of the Bundestag Defense Committee. He was also glad to see again Secretary of State Dean Rusk for whose ability he had great respect, and whom he had visited on several occasions. Need for candor He was convinced that on most of the very important political issues, the interests of the two countries coincided to a large extent. Since the height of the cold war, great changes had taken place. Still many interests were similar; however, one should review their nature as well as those areas where possible friction could arise. The best method to secure a firmer alliance was through complete and candid exchange of views in an atmosphere of trust. He could assure the President that this was the will of the German Government. The President had spoken of growing up in a German community in the United States and of hailing from German stock. Many of the Chancellor’s family had emigrated to the United States, at one time or another, for reasons of material want or political persecution. Once, during the term of office of Chancellor Adenauer, the latter had asked him to be the German Ambassador in Washington. He had asked Jean Monnet his opinion on the matter. Monnet had advised him to go, but had warned him at the same time that if he had any children to be prepared to have one or all of them take up residence in the United States. He had not become Ambassador, yet this had not prevented his daughter from taking up residence in the United States. Having a daughter, son-in-law and grandchild there in itself tied him closer to the United States. He appreciated very much the Vice President’s kindness to have visited with his daughter before departing the United States. He also was grateful that the President has seen fit to bring his daughter and son-in-law along on this trip. By this he had made him and his wife extremely happy. President Johnson said that it had been a great pleasure to have Mr. Kiesinger’s daughter and son-in-law on the plane. He had enjoyed their company very much. Topics for Wednesday’s discussion As for their discussion on Wednesday, if he had to try and outline the main subjects on which the two might have fruitful exchange of views, he would name the nonproliferation treaty, the question of troop levels, the Kennedy Round and the international liquidity negotiations. High quality of U.S. personalities If it was “quality” that the Chancellor was interested in, he could not expect to find better quality people than those handling the nonproliferation treaty and disarmament negotiations for the United States. Among them was the Vice President who had handled these matters already as a senator, and Ambassador Foster. Secretary Fowler himself had kept in close touch with the Munich Conference on currency matters. He had told the President that he was quite dissatisfied with the state of affairs at that meeting. Troop levels The troop level question had been discussed in Congress extensively in the past months, and he had been subjected to considerable pressure from that side. A hearing on foreign troop levels was coming up in Congress next week. He had invited leading congressmen to the White House for talks in anticipation of this hearing. Speaking of “quality”, he had discussed the question of troop levels two or three times with Secretary McNamara before coming here. He had reviewed with him the commitments that both countries had made to each other. He had asked Mr. McNamara, at that time, if he himself and top experts could make themselves available for Mr. Kiesinger if he so desired. The Secretary had agreed. Also, Defense Minister Schroeder had been in Washington just a week ago and had had extensive talks with Mr. McNamara. He had also called on the President. One of the two biggest problems existing between the two countries—and this had been present ever since the end of the war—was this problem of troop levels in Europe. In the past, any expected changes or doubts in this regard had always been reviewed and straightened out in a sort of “family talk” between the two governments. Now, however, these matters were spread all over the New York Times and other papers. The American people had started to think and talk about them and some had gotten very upset. He thought it wise that the two governments keep such questions “in the family”. As was once said in Hollywood, in a different context, “include the newspapers out.” This would be in the interest of the German Government as well. Added to this publicity was some heavy resistance in congressional circles. Mr. McNamara, or his experts, would be available to discuss details on this matter and to give the United States reasoning on any of these questions. He wanted to assure the Chancellor that Mr. McNamara would speak on his behalf. He had been given complete authority by him to make any agreement he considered necessary. He trusted the Secretary completely. Secretary McNamara had spent some 80 hours before Congression-al Committees on questions of troop levels. The Chancellor was certainly aware of gentlemen like Senator Fulbright and Senator Mansfield, whose thinking was not exactly the same as that of Mr. McNamara. They believed, just as the Chancellor had expressed to him before, that great changes had taken place and that these changes were very material ones. The President stated that he had urged Mr. McNamara to stay in frequent touch with the German military and the Defense Minister. He believed that cooperation on that level was closer than ever before. Speaking of men of “quality”, Secretary Rusk had just returned from a Washington meeting of the SEATO countries. The United States had serious problems in SE Asia. The Secretary would return to Europe for the NATO meeting in June. So then “quality” seemed well represented in his Government with such people as Secretaries Rusk, McNamara and Fowler. And these men could be put at the disposal of the Chancellor for consultations at almost any time. Should, in addition, the Chancellor need the direct advice of the President, he would be glad to find a way to accommodate him. To summarize, the main issues between us included the NPT, the troop level issue and the liquidity question. There seemed to be some new matter to deal with every year. There was now in Germany a new Government, a new Chancellor and there was in Washington a new assertion of power by Congress, in particular in the Senate. For instance, the foreign policy committee of the Democratic Party, before which Mr. Rusk and Mr. McNamara had been pleading the President’s case, favors substantial troop reductions in Europe. People like Mr. Mansfield do not think about a reduction of maybe a few thousand, but about many scores of thousands—indeed, entire divisions. Out of his own party members, 13 voted against him and none for him on the troop issue. In view of such developments, he had to stop, look and listen carefully on these matters. He was happy to see the Vice Chancellor again for whom he had warm feelings of friendship. He (as Vice President) had been the first to go to Berlin when the Wall was built. Johnson’s report on his visit to Germany August 19–20, 1961, is in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XIV, pp. 354–358. He wanted to be the first to go there when it would be torn down. Discussions on troop levels should better be conducted in such a manner as not to supply ammunition to Congressional critics. He assured the Chancellor that there was no “complicity”, that he was in favor of extensive discussions. The President of the United States had not changed. He was still the same. He had always had good and friendly feelings towards the German nation and the German people. Keep vital discussions within “the family” Mr. Kiesinger stated that he understood the problems the President had with his Congress. He often had similar problems with the Bundestag despite his great majority. There would be a discussion of the NPT coming up in the German Parliament in about a week, on which the Bundestag had insisted on its own initiative. He agreed with the President’s suggestion that discussions on troop levels should be kept in the family circle as much as possible, though it could not always be kept out of the press. He would try to steer a course that would not involve him in American domestic frictions and polemics. He was convinced that the President had men of outstanding quality around him, and he always preferred to talk to the political leaders rather than to experts. There was much agreement on major trends in their thinking (President’s and Kiesinger’s). He was hopeful that the talk on Wednesday would produce some common results. Regarding the problems with Congress on the NPT, the Chancellor would be very careful to avoid giving the press an opportunity to again sow any seeds of friction between the two countries. FRG problems with Bundestag The new coalition government commanded a greater majority which gave it a better opportunity to come to solutions on some problems. However, he also often encountered dissension within his own party. Sometimes he had to walk a very narrow path to make his policies prevail. Also, he did not have the strong power with which the United States Constitution endows the President. In general, however, his Parliament was showing a great amount of good will. Mr. Johnson stated that despite the 30 years he had dealt closely with Congress as Senator, Vice President and President, he sometimes did not have much control over its decision. International liquidity One item which he intended to discuss in detail in the Wednesday meeting was the “new-money problem”. The talks on this matter had not produced good results. He was seriously concerned about this matter. Press briefing Secretary Rusk suggested one should think about what to say to the press before adjourning. He suggested that they say that the President had called on the Chancellor to pay his respects with regard to the passing of former Chancellor Adenauer. The President and the Chancellor had also taken note of the issues that they wanted to discuss in their meeting on Wednesday. It might be acceptable to the President and the Chancellor to say no more than this. The President and the Chancellor agreed, and the meeting adjourned having lasted about one hour and twenty minutes. 213. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Adenauer Funeral. Secret. Bonn, April 24, 1967. Mr. President: The memorandum that follows may be important for your talk with Chancellor Kiesinger on Wednesday. Here is the story. At his request I called on Rainer Barzel at 11:00 a.m. this morning. As you know, he is the Majority Floor Leader in the German Parliament. We are good friends. Therefore, I gave him your position as outlined yesterday with the bark off, explaining that you cannot deal with the Mansfield problem unless they stop behaving like children and start behaving like serious partners in the task of preserving the unity of the West. We then went on to the four specific issues. In his judgment, the withdrawal of aircraft is the most difficult for politicians in Germany to accept. As we were leaving he said he was going to report immediately to the Chancellor. I received a message this afternoon that he wished to see me again. I saw him at 6:00 p.m. at the American Embassy. He asked that I report the conversation only to you and that the interpreter destroy his notes. This is what he said: I. Chancellor Kiesinger was greatly impressed with you and your personality this morning.See Document 212. II. He wishes on Wednesday to talk to you “extensively and, if possible, alone.” III. He wishes to discuss the large outlines of your policy rather than the details. This is particularly important after your conversation this morning and after Barzel’s report to the Chancellor of what I said to him. (He meant, it turned out, that the Chancellor is pretty clear about what you wish him to do about the four specific issues.) I then began to probe what he meant by the “large outlines of policy” rather than specifics. I said President Johnson was a man of large ideas and ideals; but he would rather discuss the next step in achieving them rather than to discuss them in abstract, rhetorical terms. (At that point he smiled and said President Johnson is like Adenauer: His last words to his children were not: “Keep the family together”; but “make sure you meet every Christmas.”) He then began to explain as follows: There are some people telling the Chancellor that if Germany signs the non-proliferation treaty, Germany is giving in on one of the three things the Soviet Union demands: the other two are the Oder-Neisse line and formal recognition of the East German Government. They then go on to say that troop levels will be reduced by us but not by the Soviet Union. After that they ask: Will we have any possibility of raising the question of German unity in the future? The critical question for Kiesinger in the face of this pressure is to be able to tell his cabinet that President Johnson has a concept of policy in which there is a place for German unity. For example, Barzel said, President Johnson might say: “I am doing everything I can to ease tensions between East and West because the world needs peace. German unity cannot be my first consideration; but out in the process of bringing peace and arms control, German unity will have a place. Non-proliferation will contribute to the process of arms control. That is the kind of world in which German unity has the greatest chance of coming about.” Barzel went on to say that there is no chance for German unity if the world is divided into two big blocs. “We cannot achieve German unity by nuclear war; but if relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union improve as we achieve progress in a limited way on East/West issues, then we create an environment in which German unity becomes more possible in the future.” He then shifted to a specific, practical point. Chancellor Kiesinger in the Parliament made a Declaration of the Federal Government on Amelioration of Living Conditions in All of Germany.For text of the April 12 declaration, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 955–957. He urged that Germans in East and West Germany be permitted to travel more: that doctors—specialists—be permitted to cross from East to West. Kiesinger has spoken movingly in human terms about Germans being allowed to get closer in these matters. Still, the Soviet Union denounced Kiesinger’s speech and has flatly refused to move in this direction. Barzel then said: “Would it not be possible for President Johnson to tell Kiesinger that he will instruct Ambassador Thompson in Moscow to make representations to the Soviet Government that they should respond to this simple human appeal?” He said that nothing would affect Kiesinger and German opinion more than to know that President Johnson—with his great humanitarian heart—has considered seriously, among the human problems on this earth, the problem of human relations among Germans and German families divided one from the other. I explained to Barzel that, while you worked for every reasonable approach to the Soviet Union, you were skeptical of Soviet motives and how fast they would move. And I came back to my central point in the morning, which was: If we had any chance of making progress in the East, it was on the basis of a strong and united West; and it was not useful for the German Government to have these hopes to the East while it was cutting the ground from under your feet in maintaining the unity of the West. Barzel said that he understood this fully; and he believed Chancellor Kiesinger understood it also. Before I make my recommendations, I wish to tell you now strongly I was impressed in this conversation that the Germans understand in their hearts—if not in their pocketbooks or their press relations—that they depend absolutely on you. You should also know that: The German cabinet has been meeting in the wake of your talk with Kiesinger; Strauss has asked that I see him, which I shall do tomorrow morning; I have received an invitation to talk with Guttenberg this evening—the other extreme nationalist in opposition to Kiesinger. My assessment and recommendations: I. Your interview this morning with Kiesinger has had one hell of an effect. II. You should agree to talk at length with Kiesinger alone on Wednesday. III. Your talking points should be these: —Although we have 500,000 men fighting in Southeast Asia, I have not pulled out one fighting man from NATO through this difficult period; —I have kept my commitment in Europe because we have a vital security interest in Europe, but also because I am fully aware of the hope for peace in Europe; —Working together in unity we have demonstrated in these 20 years since the end of the World War that we can defend ourselves against the Communists, that we can make more economic and social progress than the Communists; —And that we can produce in the West societies that are so attractive and successful that Communism is failing as an ideology in the East; —The Chancellor should remember that it was only after the Cuba missile crisis that people began to talk of détente and that very small steps—the atmospheric test ban—were possible; you have been working for small agreements with the West because you believe that as Communism becomes weaker, nationalism in the East becomes stronger in each country and more normal relations can fully be developed; so far as the non-proliferation treaty is concerned, you believe: it makes sense for the human race; it makes sense for the free world; and if we stay together it could contribute to arms control—for example, the avoidance of a major race in ABM and ICBM’s; —This is the environment in which you believe that movement towards German unity may gradually become possible; of all the American Presidents in this century, you have the closest ties to the German people; you understand the pain felt by every German that the division of their country cuts across families and language and cultures and memory; —It is a simple fact that of all the nations in the West, the United States is the only one that honestly wishes to see German unity brought about: neither the British nor the French honestly wish this to happen no matter what they say; —The reason the American people want German unity is because they want an end to the Cold War and that requires the drawing together of Germany and all of Europe under conditions of security for everyone. If, however, the West cannot remain united and if we cannot settle sensibly issues of trade and money and troops, then we shall not have détente and movement towards German unity, we shall have danger and crisis again. Therefore, the Chancellor should work with the President to maintain the unity of the West and count on the President—and on the United States—to be the strongest supporter he has in taking steps towards German unity. —You might then say that we are prepared to take small steps or large, whatever is realistic and possible. For example, you have been informed of the Chancellor’s interest in improving the simple human contacts between the people in East and in West Germany. Your men have spoken often to Soviet representatives and told them how unwise it is for them to attack democratic Germany. You have asked Secretary Rusk to arrange that we talk to the Russians about the wisdom of encouraging these human contacts between East and West. —I suggest that you should close by saying once again that it is our experience together—Germans and Americans—that we have gotten nothing from the Russians through weakness and disunity. It is only if German policy and European policy is rooted in unity and strength in the West, that we have any chance of bringing peace to Europe and unity to the German people. W. W. R. Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials. 214. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US. Secret; Nodis. No drafting information is on the source text, which was approved in the White House on June 28. The meeting was held at the Chancellor’s private residence. A copy of this memorandum was sent to the Embassy in Bonn “for Ambassador McGhee only.” Bonn, April 26, 1967, 10:30 a.m.–12:30 p.m. PARTICIPANTS Chancellor Kiesinger Hermann Kuesterer, Interpreter Press Secretary Von Hase President Johnson Harry Obst, Interpreter Press Secretary Christian Chancellor Kiesinger stated that he had been thinking about their earlier conversationSee Document 212. and would like to repeat the following: General US–FRG relations 1. His government was strongly interested in maintaining good relations with the US, its government, and the President. 2. The President had been a little annoyed about some of the comments coming out of Germany recently that had contributed to a certain strain of relations. He wanted to assure the President that his government would do everything possible not to create any difficulties for the US. He did not intend to make any statements on the matters discussed between them that would tend to involve him in any efforts by any party directed against the President or the US government. The German Government was aware of the big burden and heavy responsibility the President has to carry and did not want to add to it. In general, he first would like to say how happy he was to be able to be with the President though the occasion may be a sad one. The very fact of the two of them meeting for the first time was more important than any of the individual decisions they would have to make in the coming weeks and months. He would like to emphasize that he himself, his government, and the majority of the two ruling parties wanted good relations with the US and trusted the President and the US. As a matter of fact, they did not only want to continue those good relations but indeed to try to make them better and closer. Need to avoid certain public statements Two days ago the President had talked to him about his concern for keeping certain subjects more “in the family circle”. He agreed with that. In the last year the Germans had some worries. It had been necessary for him to make certain public statements at certain times but anything that he or Vice Chancellor Brandt had said had always appeared in the American news media magnified and exaggerated. In the light of this experience he would tend to be more cautious in the future. German public opinion As regards German public opinion—and he was always following reports on this matter closely—there seemed to be general conviction that permanent reconciliation between France and Germany would have to be established. On the other hand he would like to emphasize that the same people just as much advocate good relations and close cooperation with the United States. These two sentiments were not in opposition to each other. He believed that at this time public opinion in the FRG was more favorable to the US than in any other European country. He would also like to say a word about the occasional doubts that had arisen in the FRG. These doubts were not so much about the President’s actions but had arisen from general developments. For some years there had been the question whether some change of US policy vis-à-vis Europe had taken place. Anything that could be done to allay these doubts would be advantageous. He did not want to discuss this matter in great detail. However, he wanted to assure the President that it did not amount to a crisis of confidence. Such doubts could be understood from the fact that the cold war had abated to a certain extent and that people had not yet become adjusted to the new period properly. President Johnson interjected that he was familiar with those doubts and agreed that some of them were due to the change in climate of the cold war. He believed that current German public opinion presented a big problem. US public opinion problems So far, the United States had not reduced its troop level in Europe and had not given up its support and efforts in other areas despite the serious balance of payments situation. The question was, could he continue such a policy in the face of so many doubts? During the last six months the US press each day had been full of statements about German doubts, lack of faith in US policy and questioning of our commitments. He could not quite understand what was really causing those doubts. The US was maintaining over half a million troops in Europe and spending over a billion dollars there annually. This very morning Secretary of Defense McNamara and Under Secretary Katzenbach were testifying under oath before Congressional committee.For text, see U.S. Troops in Europe: Hearings Before the Combined Subcommittees of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations and Armed Services. United States Senate, 90th Congress, 1st Session (Washington, 1967), pp. 5–56. The first question that would surely be put to them would be “Why do we not pull out of Europe in the face of the changes that have taken place?” The closer ties between Chancellor Kiesinger and de Gaulle, the European statements about détente and other reasons would certainly be brought up by Congressional critics. Mr. McNamara would have a hard time to make them believe anything. Force deployment Chancellor Kiesinger stated he understood that if the US were to withdraw some forces at this time it was planned to cut the number of aircraft in half. The people would ask why does the United States not try simultaneously to make the Soviets agree to similar cuts? The US had introduced the “rotational plan” which he considered to be reasonable. The people would ask why would it not be possible for the US to try to get some commitment from the Soviet Union out of the negotiations on the Non-Proliferation Treaty which would tend to lessen the danger of war. They felt if there were changes to be made there should be some reciprocity on the other side. de Gaulle comments on US–FRG relations He had been told by de Gaulle in Paris on January 13–14 that he, even Adenauer, were too obedient to the United States. He had answered de Gaulle that he was not obedient to the US. Certain changes had taken place since the height of the cold war. During that period US and German interests had been completely identical. He realized that US policy in Europe had to follow the US interests. This was legitimate. He also believed that Bonn and Paris should not proceed on anything without the knowledge of Washington. Both sides should review where their interests are identical as well as where the areas of friction are. They had neglected to do this until now. FRG supports NATO In the final communiqué in ParisExtracts of statements by Kiesinger and de Gaulle at the conclusion of their January 13–14 meeting are in Keesing’s Contemporary Archives, 1966–1967, pp. 21855–21856. he had stated that France and Germany agreed on certain matters. However, he had stated the disagreements, for instance on NATO, with equal clarity. He had made this very clear to the public and had emphasized that the FRG fully supported an integrated NATO. There was no danger that the FRG would drift away from the US. This he had also stated clearly in a speech in the Bundestag. However, he could not prevent certain people occasionally making use of his public statements on certain matters to their advantage and trying to exploit them. Comments on Erhard He would like to say a few frank words also with regard to his predecessor Ludwig Erhard: He had a very high regard for Erhard’s excellent accomplishments as Minister of Economics. However, the German people thought that his foreign policy was a little “naive”, that he failed to analyze the situation in depth and failed to recognize at times where the true interests lay. The people believed that he failed when he visited the President last year. This failure was one of the major reasons that the German public had lost confidence in him. His party prior to that had had a constant majority in public polls. This had dropped to 38% during the final days of the Erhard administration. The Social Democratic Party at that time had received over 50% of the votes taken by the public opinion polls. Now, happily, the Christian Democrats were above 50% again. He was happy about this fact as otherwise the coalition might break up if the Social Democrats should receive a majority. This tendency had been reaffirmed in the elections last week in Schleswig-Holstein where the SPD had not received the landslide they had hoped for. German doubts about U.S. The doubts about a changed US policy, he believed, started as early as the last period of the Eisenhower administration. He wanted to make clear, however, that there was no real distrust about the present relationship between the US and the Soviet Union. However, there were some people who were saying that the US had sold out to the Soviet Union and was no longer supporting the cause of German reunification. Some of this might just be the result of so many years of frustration on matters like German reunification. The President asked why the Chancellor thought that such doubts were already present during the Eisenhower administration. The Chancellor replied he thought this started with the Camp David meeting with Khrushchev. The people believed that Eisenhower had been too trusting and on top of this came the constant warnings of former Chancellor Adenauer. Some of these doubts were allayed by President Kennedy through the excellent speeches be made during his visit to Germany. However, later the same doubts arose again. After a period of personal distrust it seemed to him that during the last meeting with the dying Adenauer the latter seemed to have reached a point of trusting that he (Chancellor Kiesinger) would follow the general direction of policy set by Adenauer. The Chancellor stated he strongly believed in the necessity for close ties between Germany and France, but without the “romantic attitude” on this question that Adenauer had displayed. Need for US–FRG unity; Need for US-Soviet relationship He, Kiesinger, was convinced that it was impossible to guarantee German security and find solutions to the German problems without the United States. Solutions to these problems could not be found by any drastic actions but only by a gradual approach and by creating an appropriate climate. Most of the German people had no illusions about this matter and realized it would take a long time. If the US and Germany would stand united, show trust in each other and support each other’s interests as far as possible, those doubts should be appeased. The people realized that a certain relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States was necessary in view of the power and the heavy responsibility of these two countries. Otherwise, the result might be disastrous. Some people were talking a different language but they should let them talk, because it did not matter as long as the leaders would consult each other closely and make their own decisions. US supports NATO and German reunification The President said the Chancellor should make no mistake about the US determination to support German reunification and the Alliance. He was aware that the Soviet Union kept making attacks on the FRG. However, he invited the Chancellor to appoint his best research man on these matters to make a comparative chart of Soviet accusations made against Germany and those made against the US President. He was convinced he would come out number one on such a comparative chart. Real nature of Soviets The President stated he had very strong feelings about the real nature of the Soviets, just as much as Adenauer did. He just did not talk so much about them. Soviet attitudes on FRG The Chancellor said it was shameful in what a blatant way the Soviet Union could permit itself to attack the FRG in foreign capitals. The only European ally that had spoken up in defense of the FRG had been President Saragat of Italy. If the Soviets were to attack one of his allies like this he certainly would speak up in defense with determination. Right-wing extremist party Many people did not realize the complexity of the situation, the domestic antagonism against the President and the immensity of the problems he was facing in Southeast Asia and other parts of the world. He wanted to repeat again that despite existing doubts there was no present crisis of confidence, no serious situation. There had been a feeling that Erhard had not taken a firm enough stand on the offset problem during his last visit in Washington. He, Kiesinger, was happy that a solution had been found for this problem now. He had been forced to take a firm stand, not least because of the threat emanating from the propaganda campaign of the NPD. The NPD was not only composed of national socialists but contained a great number of what the French would call “poujadists”, i.e. mostly disgruntled small businessmen, and a few old hard-core nationalists. The NPD knew that its campaign could only succeed if the party was able to create anti-American feelings in the German population. Fortunately, they had received less votes during the last two state elections than they had expected. The elections in Schleswig-Holstein were a hopeful beacon, as the NPD had only been able to poll 5.6% of the vote in this state which is traditionally very nationalistic. Gallop polls indicate that their national strength does not exceed 3%. Their propaganda plus statements by Adenauer on the Morgenthau plan and his declaration that the US had turned its back on Europe and did not really see the magnitude of the Communist threat had contributed to the doubts they were talking about. He wanted to reemphasize, however, that these were not major doubts and could be coped with. Non-Proliferation Treaty On the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Chancellor saluted the President’s intervention through which some important points had been cleared up. The individual points of the present text he considered acceptable but the question was if the FRG could accept the Treaty out of the consideration of its relationship with the Soviet Union. The FRG had alone committed itself to forego nuclear weapons in the WEU agreements and had reiterated this policy repeatedly in public. The FRG wanted better relations with the Soviet Union but was running into such statements as Kosygin’s declaration in London that it would have to sign the Non-Proliferation Treaty whether it liked to or not. There was a strong group in his own party disliking the Treaty and the Bavarian branch of the party had voted against it altogether. There was also some opposition in the SPD. The question was what could be done to meet the desire of the US to have the Treaty and get the necessary approval in the Bundestag. Many people including himself and Prime Minister Moro felt strongly that the Treaty should be of a limited duration. Five years had been suggested, but he himself felt that such a period would be too short and he would consider ten years more acceptable. During the ten years one could see what could be accomplished on disarmament and how German-Soviet relations would develop. Then one would be in a better position to talk about a possible permanent Treaty. The idea of a limited Treaty was spreading fast. It might be useful for both of them to resume discussing the NPT after the US congressional hearings and the forthcoming Bundestag debate have been concluded. International liquidity He was not an expert on the liquidity question. It had not been possible to get French cooperation on this matter. He would have to explore it further to try and find out where the difficulties were located. Troop reduction On the reduction of troops he was prepared to do all that he possibly could. He favored first exploring the matter further in joint discussions. It would have to be reviewed in the light of the needs of European security and in the light of future developments (e.g. the changes expected in China during the next ten years). The thinking of the FRG on these matters was not guided by egotistical motives. The common [good?] was very much on their mind. Kiesinger visit to Washington The Chancellor then asked the President if he had any thoughts on a possible visit in Washington. He said he was prepared to come at any acceptable time. Press briefing The President might want to think about the possibility of including their principal assistants for the remainder of the talk and what to tell the press. He would suggest telling the press that they had friendly and comprehensive discussions, and that they wanted to continue the close and friendly relations that had existed between the countries in the past. The President replied he had no objections to saying that to the press. US and German public opinion He said he was trying to put himself in the Chancellor’s position and wondering how he could convey to him a picture comparing the problems that the Chancellor had with those that the President had without becoming argumentative or disagreeable. He believed that the picture on German sentiment and German public opinion painted by the Chancellor was about correct. He was of the opinion that in the next few months public feeling here and public feeling in the US would somehow jell and move jointly into one direction or into the other. He was disturbed and doubtful about the state of German public opinion at this time and still was not sure what was really causing it: the change of government in Germany; the sentiments of former Chancellor Adenauer; de Gaulle’s reproaches on being too obedient; or whatever else it may be. (Von Hase entered room) While this was going on in Germany there was a similar type of “unfaithful husband-wife” thinking towards Germany in the United States. People were saying to themselves: Why should we continue to spend over a million dollars? Why should we keep on maintaining our troops there? Why should we not let them handle their own defense? They are grown up now. They have rebuilt their countries. They can take care of themselves. They have a better balance of payments situation. Why should we stay if de Gaulle feels we should get out, if the Germans doubt us? Why should we not talk to them in terms of the 20th century, in terms of planes and rockets rather than in 19th century terms of ground troops? If they are looking for defense protection by the French, why not let them do just that? Problems in Congress over US troops in Europe The President repeated that he had congressional hearings starting this very day in which many of these sentiments would be echoed. He also repeated that 13 of his own party leaders had voted down his own suggestions on these matters in a committee. He was opposing their views 100% but he did not know if he would always be able to prevail. The question was what action to take in view of the sentiments in the two countries. He did not want to be the architect of the dismantling of the Alliance. However, in the last months much had happened to further such a dismantling. (Mr. Christian entered the room) Bad effect of some European press stories The European press was feeding our press. And he was reading in his press ideas like:LBJ did not care about Europe, LBJ was forcing the non-proliferation treaty on them, LBJ was only interested in Southeast Asia. This was very disturbing. The press was saying: it had become fashionable in Germany to be independent, to criticize the US; some governments believed the US to have become a second-rate power; the US was “buddying up” to the Russians. Some people were doing all they could to try and divide the two countries. US friendship for FRG He wanted to be friends with Germany. First of all, he had no illusions about the Soviet Union, not any more than the late Adenauer, President Eisenhower, or President Kennedy. He also had no illusions about the importance, necessity and desirability of enduring friendship and loyalty to the German people. He would never want to give up this partnership. He had been the first to say this when the Berlin Wall went up. He was speaking up for the reunification of Germany. He had made clear that if the need should arise he would do whatever was necessary with the troops stationed here. He had made clear his desire to ask for concessions from the other side whenever possible. If he were to reduce his forces to any significant extent he fully intended to ask the other side to make similar reductions in their troops, their ABMs and to ask them also to adjust to the 20th century. Non-Proliferation Treaty As far as the NPT was concerned, the US was not close to an agreement with the Soviet Union. If the Germans really meant what they were saying, namely that they did not want to have any nuclear arms he felt sure that a satisfactory arrangement for the treaty could be found. The US had changed the treaty text 25 times, just for the benefit of the FRG. He (the President) still could not accept the current version. The treaty was not all set and ready to be signed, as he had also told Prime Minister Moro yesterday.Documentation on the President’s meeting with Moro is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XII. He did not believe the Soviet Union would accept a treaty with a time limit. This seemed out of the question. He was in no hurry to rush the treaty and do anything that might help the Soviet Union and hurt the Germans. But at the same time he did not want to be looked upon as “the guardian of Germany”. That was the Chancellor’s job. (The Chancellor nodded approval.) However, he would not sign a treaty directed against Germany. No US secret deal with Soviet Union To repeat, he had changed the draft 25 times for the benefit of the FRG. The US was not close to signing the treaty. The latest version also was not acceptable to the Soviet Union. He was ready to cooperate with the Chancellor and Prime Minister Moro. The news media constantly made it appear as if he were making a secret deal “behind the barn”, as if he were telling the Germans “to get in line.” Nothing could be further from the truth. The two sides were not close to an agreement. The German people did not know these things. The Chancellor said he had stated several times in public that the United States had been very cooperative with the FRG on the NPT. The idea of limiting the treaty was mainly born out of considerations of German policy commitments towards the Soviet Union. President Johnson repeated that the US did not yet have a treaty with the Soviet Union. He would have to see what progress could be made now in the negotiations. He would not sign the treaty without having first consulted again with the FRG. The Chancellor should not be misled by the statements of Mr. Kosygin. The Chancellor should make his own judgment about the President. He could be sure that this President would work with him. Likewise, he was looking towards Kiesinger, the Chancellor of the Federal Republic. Comments on Adenauer and Erhard He would like to say just a few words about the two previous Chancellors Adenauer and Erhard . He had had great respect for Adenauer and for the great accomplishments of his life. However, he thought that Adenauer sometimes had taken too strong a stand vis-à-vis the Soviet Union. One did not want to close a door permanently just because somebody was trying to break in. We had not thought of Erhard “as a softie”. We did not believe that he had neglected the interests of the German people. He was wise to see the danger of an isolationist trend which was growing in momentum in the US and he was willing to make certain concessions in an effort to head it off, just as we were trying to meet German interests on the question of the growing popularity of the NPD. Erhard had left a “good taste in our mouth.” The American people were not angry with Germany. After 20 years of being committed all over the world they were just growing weary and wanted to go back home. Rotation of US Air Force elements Chancellor Kiesinger asked about the 172 planes the US intended to withdraw from Germany. The President said the figure was 144 and not 172. Chancellor Kiesinger replied, 144 planes would be one-half of the US planes stationed here. The President indicated his disapproval and pulled out a paper from which he determined that there were 662 planes of the US on European soil. Chancellor Kiesinger replied he believed there were 288 US planes on German soil, thus it would be one-half of that figure. Mr. Von Hase interjected: withdrawing one-half of the US air force in Germany would have a strong psychological impact on the German Luftwaffe. Chancellor Kiesinger said he believe this would not be the time to try and make any specific suggestions on this matter. He was not a military man. The President asked him if he meant to say that he wanted to reserve this decision for the future, after more consultations on the expert level. Chancellor Kiesinger answered yes, he would. They should not try to decide too many difficult problems all at once. The President summarized that there were basically four problems he was concerned with now, plus the added problem of public sentiment. US support for FRG First of all, he wanted to repeat the following: the US, as before, was in favor of German reunification; the US was determined to stand by Germany; the US was prepared and ready to defend Germany if that should become necessary; the US considered Germany a trusted ally. NPT First, on the NPT: the US had made the adjustments wanted by Germany; it was working together with German experts on this matter; it would not sign the treaty without prior consultations at the top level. US–FRG relations Secondly, on the question of consultation and trust, he would like to tell the Chancellor about the first meeting he had with Chancellor Erhard. At that time Erhard had told him of his constant fears about the Soviet Union. He had then taken Erhard’s hand and pledged to him the US would stand by his side against any aggression by the Soviet Union. That handshake was more important than any individual assurances. He had told them he would remain the friend of Germany. He was ready to renew this pledge to Chancellor Kiesinger. (The President then took the Chancellor’s hand and shook it.) The Chancellor thanked the President for this pledge. International liquidity The President continued by emphasizing the importance to the US of a successful outcome of the liquidity talks. He said he expected that the Chancellor would not affect our position adversely. Troop levels In the fourth place, on the matter of troop levels, the President said, he expected understanding from the German side. He believed the Chancellor understood this problem well. German confidence in U.S. One matter which might well be more important than any of the above was the question of doubts. Statements about feeling neglected, lack of consultation, being guilty of complicity, etc., were doing much to hurt the standing of the German people in the United States. He reminded the Chancellor of what he had said before about the difference of saying something in privacy and having it all over the news media. He suggested also the Chancellor call him directly if he should ever have any serious doubts. What the press was writing was only helping his critics. It did not hurt him personally but he did not think it was good for the German people. Important that US and FRG stick together He was aware that the Soviet Union was trying to divide them any way they could. Equally, there were people in Europe trying to do the same. They were both smart enough not to be influenced by this. It was with this alliance (between the US and Germany) that the survival of freedom would best be served. If the Chancellor would stand by the US as we were loyal to Germany, nobody, neither the Soviet Union, nor de Gaulle nor anybody else would be able to divide us. We believed that the future of Europe also depended on complete trust between Germany and the US. He had never said anything unkind to de Gaulle but the General had told him to “get out,” and he had left quietly without creating a scene. They should not allow themselves to be swayed by the pronouncements of others. They were the Chief of State and as long as they stood together everything would be all right. Economic commitments He hoped the FRG would keep its economic commitments. A successful Kennedy Round would be in the interest of the FRG as well as in the interest of the US. He trusted that the FRG would try to support our interest in the liquidity talks. NPT There was no agreement on the NPT yet. He would not sign the treaty without prior consultation with the Chancellor. Prior consultation The Chancellor expressed his agreement with the latter suggestion. He said it had been necessary for him to speak out on certain points. Sometimes it was impossible to remain silent. However, he knew a little better now to what extent each of his statements was being magnified by the news media in the US. He therefore agreed that it was good to exchange certain views in confidence. The President agreed that it was necessary to speak up at times. One could not be a statesman without getting elected. One had to have the support of the people. One could not do much good without being in office. US efforts to improve relations with Soviet Union Apart from the NPT, the US was working in many areas for a different relationship with the Soviet Union. It had adopted a Space Treaty and was working on a Consular Treaty. The Consular Treaty was not only in the interest of the Soviet Union and of the United States but in the interest of the entire free world. The Soviets had plenty of people in the United States. The US was interested in getting some of its people into the Soviet Union to be able to observe at close hand what was going on there. Troop levels The President suggested that the Chancellor present his views on troop reduction and that they consider the question at the highest level. Both sides should give and take until a satisfactory solution could be found. Details were not so important, what counted was the handshake. That pledge would be honored “when the roll is called.” The President and the Chancellor then agreed on what to say to the press after the meeting. Strength in unity The President then repeated that he was making no “backroom deals” with anybody, that he believed there was strength in unity and disaster in division. They should not let themselves be driven apart by columnists or others. Kiesinger optimistic for future of our relations The Chancellor said that he was very gratified about this conversation. He wanted to repeat that he would do nothing that might damage the good relations between the two countries. As a matter of fact, he would try to strengthen those relations. He accepted gladly the President’s suggestion to call on his advice and have joint talks and try to find solutions on any difficulties that might come up. He believed that the small worries of Germany and the uneasy feelings could be overcome. He believed that public opinion in Germany and in the US would move again in the direction of closer friendship. The President would always find understanding here. The majority of the German people were for the President because they knew that whatever happened to the US would happen to the entire free world. FRG should help less developed areas The President said he wanted to add one more thing. He wondered how big the German population was—sixty million? (The Chancellor nodded yes.) Those sixty million, he said, eat very well and are dressed very well but there were over three billion people in the world that were not faring so well. The FRG should think about sharing some more of its prosperity with, for instance, the people of Asia and support his food program. This might be worth a few squadrons to him. The Chancellor assured the President of the willingness of the FRG to cooperate as much as possible. He explained the restrictions placed on him by the bad financial situation of the Federal Government. The President stated that the US was willing to give three million more tons of grain to India if the rest of the free world would match that total together. He urged the Chancellor to do his utmost to support this program. At this point, the conversation ended, having lasted a little over two hours. Note: The conversation was preceded by a fifteen-minute social talk with the entire Kiesinger family, including Mr. Kiesinger’s son-in-law from Washington. The atmosphere was very cordial. The President, during that conversation, extended an invitation to Mrs. Kiesinger to accompany her husband to the US. The private conversation between the President and the Chancellor also was conducted for the most part in a very cordial manner. It was noticeable that the Chancellor was feeling slightly uneasy about the emphatic, determined and simply-worded delivery of the President’s thoughts. He (the Chancellor) seemed unable to control the direction of the conversation as he normally does. However, toward the end much of this uneasiness seemed to dissipate and it became clear that the President had made a positive impression in many respects on the Chancellor. The President, on the other hand, appeared completely at ease throughout the conversation. 215. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 13. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Bonn, May 8, 1967, 1734Z. 13352. For Under Secretary Rostow. Ref: State’s 89416.Not found. The telegram number appears to be incorrect. Subject: German support for US position in international monetary reform. 1. I fully recognize the great importance that the administration places on the successful completion of negotiations on the basic framework of an acceptable plan for reform of the international monetary system in time for presentation to the IMF Governors at their meeting in Rio de Janeiro in September. At the same time, my considered judgment is that the approach suggested in the reftel is the wrong way to try to advance our interests in this field, and, in fact, would be counter-productive. 2. The main point, I believe, is that if the battery of expert opinion and argumentation which was obviously marshalled in Washington for the April 24–26 meetings could not carry the day, there is little chance of our making any contribution to swinging the balance by organizing approaches of the kind suggested in the reftel. I believe that the discussions have now progressed to a point where it would no longer be effective simply to have influential people urge Chancellor Kiesinger to support the US view generally against that of France. This is the one confrontation that Kiesinger and the German Cabinet will seek to avoid at all costs. A break in the EEC on this issue would be considered by the Germans only as a last resort, it could be accepted by them only on a showing that the French persisted in positions which threatened solutions that the Germans, in the light of their own interests, considered reasonable and desirable. 3. Kiesinger has little personal interest in this issue and no technical financial background on which to base an independent judgment. He has, to the best of our knowledge, no American confidants in such matters and relies on his government advisers:EconMin Schiller and Econ State Sec Schoellhorn. If he has an outside adviser on such matters he is likely to be Prof Dr. Otto Pfleiderer, President of the State Central Bank of Baden-Wuerttemberg. We have a report on Dr. Pfleiderer’s general financial views which indicates that he is very conservative and a strong supporter of Pres Blessing in the Bundesbank Council. He would not be likely to counsel the Chancellor to take any action not favored by Blessing and possibly Emminger. Neither, in my judgment, would any other influential German financial leader. We know, for example, that Erhard opposes our position strongly. 4. There would, moreover, be a high probability that the approach suggested in the reftel would become known to Kiesinger and probably to Schiller as well. This would, in my opinion, be certain to arouse their resentment and that of their Cabinet colleagues. I have the distinct impression that there has already been some little annoyance at the totality of our actions mounted before the meeting of the EEC Finance Ministers in Munich. It will be recalled that I directed a strong letter to the Chancellor, enclosing copies of Sec Fowler’s two letters to Schiller, on the eve of the meeting. I have never received a reply or any comment. The strong emphasis given to this subject by the Vice President before the Munich meeting, and by the President after, will have left no doubt as to where the US Government stands on this matter. Unless we have some persuasive new element to inject in support of our point of view, I can see no further advantage to be derived from additional general political type pressures. 5. To add the type of campaign now being suggested to what has already been done could, in my judgment, even arouse suspicion as to our real purpose in seeking reform. When we originally proposed the reforms now under consideration, it was on the basis that additional reserves would be required because of our intent to balance our payments. Since it is now well known that we cannot attain a balance in the immediate future, it will be generally concluded that the urgency of the situation should have been diminished rather than increased. During the parallel discussions conducted with Schiller during the President’s recent visit, the amount of new liquidity required annually was stated by the US side as being roughly comparable to that currently being injected by the US. For us now to press with what will be considered an unwarranted degree of urgency, may lead others to the conclusion that our real purpose is to facilitate our financing of a continuing large payments imbalance. The possible benefits which might accrue to us through such a campaign are not in my opinion worth this risk. 6. My own feeling is that the best way for us to advance the negotiations in the direction we desire is through our regular contacts at all appropriate levels. I and my staff will take advantage of our contacts with German Government officials, and German and American businessmen, to sell the US point of view on these matters. In order to be effective in this effort, we will need to be kept up to date on the progress of the negotiations and the evolution of the US viewpoint on the issues of the day. McGhee 216. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, London, Moscow, Paris, and Rome. Luxembourg, June 13, 1967, 1630Z. 470. Secto 05. NATUS. Secretary received Vice Chancellor Brandt for breakfast June 13, during which one hour conversation took place. Others present were Arnold (Brandt’s Chef de Cabinet), Weber (Brandt’s staff assistant), as well as Bowie and Johnpoll. Major items discussed follow: 1. Non-proliferation treaty. Brandt asked whether Secretary to ask for any NATO action during course of current NATO FonMin meeting. Secretary replied he intended discuss status of draft but would not ask for any action. Secretary mentioned the two alternatives on amendment procedures, but Brandt gave no indication of FRG reaction or preference. 2. Middle East. Secretary told Brandt we had not expected shooting to begin when it did, particularly since Israelis had told us privately they would exercise restraint. We had, however, anticipated that if shooting began the outcome would be what it turned out to be. Secretary told Brandt he intended to discuss Middle East situation at NATO Ministerial Meeting, particularly to illustrate current status of East-West relations. US and Soviet Union had been able to cooperate only to a very limited degree during the crisis, essentially only on the cease-fire. The Soviets had pushed the Arabs up to the closing of the Strait of Tiran; and they will now try to exploit the situation to enhance Soviet influence on the Arabs and to minimize Western influence. Secretary thought that it would be a long time before real peace comes to the area, with one side suffering from humiliation and the other from great pride. Brandt said that FRG relations with the Near Eastern countries are poor on the whole. However, he thought FRG relations had been affected less severely by the crisis than ours. Secretary said quite a few of the NE countries who had broken with us had done so as a public gesture but privately wished to maintain contact. Secretary told Brandt there some indications, still inconclusive, that Soviet Union may ask special session UNGA. Secretary and Brandt agreed that there evidence that Israeli Government had been seriously divided between activists and moderates before shooting began last week. 3. NATO role. Secretary expressed concern over NATO reluctance look after matter vital NATO interest even though out of immediate NATO geographic area. Said he hoped we could stimulate more continuing interest in these vital areas. France opposes common approach in principle, and feels NATO failed to help on Algeria, but NATO should nevertheless be concerned with its vital interests. Brandt expressed general agreement and said he would have something to say during NATO Ministerial about the need for crisis consultations. He was afraid, however, that there would be little enthusiasm. Even as far as Germany was concerned, NATO involvement might have some politically damaging consequences. Secretary asked whether European interest might be fostered by Harmel’s idea of trying to develop European caucus. Said that we would have no objection. Brandt thought it might. Both agreed that consultation didn't mean everyone must agree to act jointly. Of course, the general objective would have to be kept in mind. For example, some could counsel moderation on Israel, others could seek to maintain contact with the Arabs. 4. Bilateral security consultation. Brandt suggested that Secretary designate someone to maintain contact with one or two FRG people to exchange and develop thoughts on development of Eur security system. On German side Brandt proposed the Chief of FonOff Political Department or Planning Chief Diehl although not certain he would be available since Kiesinger wants him to replace Von Hase as FRG Press Chief. Brandt said that in addition to the talks on Eur security system, he would be prepared to send someone to Washington to exchange views with us on developments in Eastern Europe and GDR if we felt, as relayed to him by Embassy Bonn, that there had not been sufficient discussion of these matters. Secretary suggested that Bowie hold preliminary discussions with FRG reps concerning Eur security problems, and subsequently talks could move to senior level, possibly during Kiesinger visit to Washington. Secretary asked Brandt whether he intended accompany Kiesinger. Brandt replied he might not accompany Kiesinger since they have a general agreement not to go abroad together. However, Von Hase in announcing Kiesinger’s acceptance of President’s invitation had mistakenly said Brandt would accompany; it might be internally embarrassing if after this announcement Brandt failed to do so. In any event,FRG would probably decide within next few days. Secretary indicated to Brandt we would welcome it if FRG decides Brandt to accompany Kiesinger. Said that as a general practice we had found it useful for SecState and FonMin to hold discussions while President and Chancellor were conducting their talks. 5. East-West relations. Brandt told Secretary that FRG would probably send brief reply to Stoph’s letter today. Stoph and Kiesinger exchanged four letters between May 10 and September 28. For texts, see Europe Archiv, 1967, vol. 2, pp. 327–330 and 473–477. Did not expect it to lead to any immediate results but will be embarrassing to Ulbricht because some of the Communist countries would welcome show of FRG flexibility. Brandt said Soviet Union had not slowed down FRG progress in developing EE contacts as drastically as had been feared two or three months ago. Shortly after the Karlsbad meeting,Reference is to the April meeting of Communist Parties on the questions of Germany and European security. For extracts of the meeting’s final statement, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 961–963. the Czechs had privately indicated to FRG desire for discussions, had not excluded eventual diplomatic relations, and had indicated that some intermediate solutions might be possible in the near future. Brandt thought that establishment of trade missions might be next step with the Czechs. Brandt said that the Poles, potentially most difficult problem, also seem to be somewhat more flexible and undogmatic towards Bonn. Brandt said he had impression Soviets themselves were becoming a little less rigid toward the FRG. For example, Tsarapkin had made some remarks at the Hanover Fair in favor of increased German-Soviet trade, using some of Brandt’s own words on this subject. Brandt said that Soviet Embassy Bonn had sent two officers to the FonOff NATO Section to ask for FRG reaction to NATO redeployment plan at about same time two Soviet EmbOffs had called on US Embassy Bonn. Brandt said these Sov EmbOffs had made a vague statement to FRG FonOff that time might come when Soviet Union might not necessarily have to keep troops in GDR at present level. Secretary said we had not approached Soviets on question of mutual troop withdrawals because we have nothing to offer Soviets. NATO redeployment is too small to interest Soviets, and we intend to maintain current effectiveness NATO forces. In response to Secretary’s question Brandt said FRG had no information to indicate reduction Soviet troop levels in East Germany. 6. Free world exports to China. Secretary told Brandt we hoped to discuss with authoritative Germans—perhaps Brandt and Schroeder—contributions being made by free world to Chinese nuclear program by export metallurgical and other essential items. These items not covered by COCOM but UK and FRG exports involved. Japanese have already been briefed. Secretary said we hoped to send briefing team to Bonn in near future. 7. Common Market. Brandt said de Gaulle’s objection to British entry is political. Brandt had told de Gaulle in Rome that UK could make important contribution in East-West relations, but de Gaulle had replied that UK would do nothing without US permission. Nevertheless, Brandt said he and Kiesinger believed de Gaulle understands he cannot have his way against the weight of European public opinion. Even in France substantial number of Gaullists disagree with their chief on British entry. Brandt said that the French had not only gone along with the selection of Rey but that last April Couve de Murville had suggested Rey’s name to Brandt as a compromise candidate. Secretary and Brandt agreed that French behavior during Kennedy Round had been encouraging. Rusk 217. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,NATO 3 LUX. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, London, Paris, Moscow, and Berlin. Luxembourg, June 14, 1967, 0930Z. 486. Secto 18. NATUS. Following is report of June 13 Quadripartite supper meeting between Secretary Rusk and Foreign Ministers Couve de Murville, Brown and Brandt. It serves as approved memorandum of conversation. 1. FRG efforts with East Germany—After brief discussion Middle East situation and speculation about possible special UNGA session (to be reported septel) Brandt led off discussion on FRG relations with East Berlin regime and their effects on FRG relations with Soviet Union and EE. Brandt said that since December NATO meeting, Ulbricht has increasingly followed policy isolation vis-à-vis FedRep. This dominated recent SED Congress. Clearly, ruling group in East Berlin does not want contact with FRG. Nevertheless FRG is offering contacts; accepted Stoph letter; and today has sent reply.See footnote 2, Document 216. Brandt said FRG not optimistic regarding reaction to reply, but aims to convince its allies, neutral countries, and other Communist states that FRG willing to accept reasonable modus vivendi. Seeks to reach agreements where these are possible, is willing put aside problems on which agreement not possible, but cannot accede to Ulbricht demand that his regime be accepted by Germans as foreign country or that it be legitimated on democratic or national grounds. Brandt said it would mean much to FRG if allies would regard its moves with respect to East Berlin regime as German contribution to détente but not as signal to treat that part of Germany as separate state. 2. FRG-EE relations—Brandt then described current state of FRG relations with EE. Said that after new FedRep Government had undertaken policy of improving Eastern relations, Ulbricht regime and Soviets had taken counter measures which have slowed up progress but have not destroyed the FRG policy or its future prospects. Brandt said there was considerable evidence of continued interest in EE for developing relations with FRG. For example, after Karlsbad conference, Czech privately contacted FRG reps for exchange of views. Brandt thought this might lead to exchange of trade missions and perhaps more. Poland has made some private contacts, but Brandt not very optimistic early progress could be expected here. Thought diplomatic relations would come with Czechs and Hungarians before Poles. Yugoslavs eager for diplomatic relations, but FRG has not yet found the right formula. Brandt said FedRep wishes to put more emphasis on improving relations with Soviet Union. There are some signs, he said, that Soviet attitude toward FRG has recently become less aggressive. Said he expects to see Tsarapkin June 15 and will explore Soviet attitudes further. Brandt said it more apparent now than six months ago that FRG must make clear to Communist countries that it not seeking to isolate Ulbricht regime from rest of Soviet bloc. Brandt said he thought there might be some Soviet interest in FedRep proposal re exchange of declarations on non-use of force on matters relating to the German problem. FRG might be willing, if Soviet interest develops, to extend declaration not only to USSR but also to her allies. He anticipated that Soviets might in that event ask whether FedRep declaration would also be binding on allied troops stationed on German soil. Of course the FRG answer would have to be “no.” Brandt, responding to Secretary’s query, said Berlin would also be excluded and Allied rights unimpaired. Brandt thought it might be useful for FRG to explore entire question with US,UK and France. 3. Reply to Stoph letter—Couve de Murville at this point stated that he had read the reply to Stoph, and thought it a good letter. He called it an important step. While he wasn't at all sure there would be a reply from the other side, the document was important as a new definition of FRG position. Brown said he agreed. Secretary Rusk asked Brandt what FRG intended to do if Ulbricht regime replied that its Ministers were prepared to talk with FRG Ministers. Brandt said that FRG intention was to use State Secretaries, but that if prospects were otherwise favorable, and some technical subjects come up within the competence of certain Ministers (e.g. Minister of Communications), he did not rule that out. Contact between Ministers of Foreign Affairs was out of the question, however. Secretary asked Brandt whether he had had any private indications re possible reaction of Ulbricht regime to the letter. Brandt replied that the dominant group, which holds very rigid views, would have preferred to receive no answer. Now this group will have to debate with less doctrinaire colleagues as well as with other bloc countries. The FRG letter is being published on June 14 together with a FRG declaration of policy. Secretary Rusk asked whether it would be useful to discuss this problem with Gromyko if latter comes to NY in near future. Brandt thought that it would be useful if we could let Gromyko know that we thought well of current FRG efforts to develop contacts with the other part of Germany. Secretary said he felt line FRG was taking was constructive and well reflected the confidence of FedRep and its population. Thought it useful for FRG to stay a step ahead of East on this matter. Brown agreed with Secretary. Said he was impressed during recent visit in Moscow by extent to which Soviets had changed in their reaction to Bonn. Thought that Soviets would continue anti-FedRep propaganda but more quietly than before. When he had supported FRG people like Brandt, Wehner, and Erler in talks with the Russians, the Russians had replied skeptically, but without invective, that they would wait and see. 4. On question of Soviet attitudes, Secretary said he had impression until blocking of Straits of Tiran that there was quite a debate between moderates and militants taking place in Moscow. He asked whether current developments in Middle East would tend to discredit the militants. Had someone in Soviet Union made serious mistake in estimate of Arab military ability? Brown thought that the militants in Moscow might be strengthened rather than weakened. Nevertheless, someone will be called to account in Moscow for the mistaken judgement that the Arabs could take care of themselves militarily against Israel. Secretary asked whether Soviets have the mistaken impression that we control Israel and had acted in bad faith in telling Soviets we would counsel moderation. Brown said he was convinced Soviet leaders knew we did not control Israel. 5. Berlin morale—Brandt then reverted to Berlin. Said he was worried that situation there was deteriorating psychologically. Economic problem did not seem so serious at present. Berlin unemployment lower than in FRG. Brandt pointed to recent Berlin student demonstrations, said these were more or less the same students who in 1961 and 1962 had risked their lives against the Wall and to rescue their compatriots. That these students are now turning their energy to destructive demonstration results from the psychological frustrations which are becoming a serious problem in Berlin. Brandt thought that in addition to the factors making for unrest among the students everywhere, Berlin presented special problems. After a genuine détente comes, Berlin will find a new role to play. Until then, it will suffer from frustrations. Brandt said that of course the plight of the civilian population of Berlin in this respect is an FRG problem. Brown said that any organization suffers a letdown after release from the tensions of crisis; in the absence of crisis, it is inevitable that the spirit of Berlin would be subdued. Secretary Rusk thought that Berlin suffers from the fact that an illusion of détente has been created without the reality. As a result, Berlin at present has neither the stimulus of crisis nor the opportunities that would come with genuine détente. Brandt said that the Berlin government would set up a committee to work out various ways of putting new life into the city. The FRG would cooperate. He asked that US, UK and French reps in Berlin show sympathetic interest in the activities and plans of the committee when it is established. Secretary Rusk thought it might be possible to make greater use of Berlin for international meetings of a technical or cultural nature. This might be psychologically useful. He also suggested that Brandt talk to the three Ambassadors in Bonn to explore quietly what can be done to help ameliorate the situation. Rusk 218. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential. Bonn, June 20, 1967, 1850Z. 15024. Subj: Conversation with Wehner. I had an hour with All-German Affairs Minister Wehner on June 19. 1. The Stoph letter and its aftermath—I said that I was aware of the importance which Wehner attached to the reply to the Stoph letter and congratulated him on having won his point. Wehner said a corner had been turned; however, there would be many others. A majority of the leadership of the CDU/CSU Parliamentary group had fought to the last to prevent a reply. If Ulbricht’s answer provided an opening, the fight would be on again. 2. Wehner said that while Neues Deutschland had been sharply negative, Ulbricht had been much more flexible. Ulbricht would be clever enough to put the ball back in the FRG’s court. He might agree to appoint a delegate for the purpose of discussing with his FRG counterpart arrangements for a meeting between Kiesinger and Stoph. In this event, Wehner said that the FRG should respond positively. There was at this juncture no need to envisage a meeting between Kiesinger and Stoph. The meetings of the delegates could be strung out for a long time, and serve precisely the purpose desired by the FRG, i.e., a discussion of practical measures to prevent a widening of the gap. If these discussions reached a promising stage, a meeting on the Ministerial or sub-Ministerial (State Secretary) level could be held. Wehner defined science and transport as substantive fields for initial discussions and indicated that Kiesinger had accepted in principle this idea that Minister of Transport Leber could hold discussions with his East German counterpart once there were prospects for concrete results. Postal affairs could be another subject of discussion if it were not for Minister Dollinger’s adamant opposition. 3. Wehner said that an Ulbricht reply along the lines indicated above would lead again to a strong negative reaction of a majority of the CDU/CSU. However, if this Chancellor led, the CDU/CSU would fall into line. If, on the other hand, he sought the advice of his party, there would be mounting opposition and long delays. 4. The Soviet attitude—Asked whether there were any indication of a more flexible Soviet attitude toward the FRG, Wehner said the Soviets were taking the position “Why are you in such a hurry?”. He said that the two leading Soviet journalists who had visited the FedRep last March had finally written their articles. The tone was patronizing; the German problem had not yet sufficiently matured for a solution; moreover, there were other more important problems. In Wehner’s opinion, if the FRG persisted in its attempts to create motion on the German problem, the Soviets eventually would have to become involved. They were already showing some interest in the proposal for a mutual renunciation of the use of force, although they were suggesting that this should be done directly between “the two German states.” Also, Kiesinger’s astute and repeated denials that the FRG, in its Eastern policy, was attempting to sow discord in Eastern Europe, and between the Eastern European countries and the Soviets, undoubtedly were having some effect. 5. Berlin—I noted that FonMin Brandt had talked about the Berlin situation at the NATO meeting at Luxembourg,See Document 217. and that the Secretary had indicated that we would like to be of help. Wehner said that there was no major morale problem; some substantive problems had to be met. Important industrial investments had been cancelled and this had led to unrest among the labor force. There was also the student problem, but this was a general phenomenon throughout Germany. On top of this, the Berlin press was highly irresponsible and overdramatized the issues. Wehner said that Minister Schiller would probably discuss in Washington the possibility of holding more international meetings in Berlin. This would be of some help. Discussions were also taking place with the industrialists (Berg) for a more determined effort to maintain investments in the city. The SPD was now paying greater attention to the student problem, with good effects. 6. Voting rights for Berlin Deputies—Wehner said that he and Brandt had killed a proposal to discuss voting rights for Berlin Deputies during this week’s meeting of Bundestag committees in Berlin. They had taken the position that there would have to be preparatory discussion with the Allies before the Bundestag could consider the problem and that the time was not ripe for such discussions. He had just learned that Bundestag President Gerstenmaier, in Berlin, had called attention to the tripartite opinion on the Niekisch case. Wehner indicated that he had full understanding for the tripartite position and sharply criticized Gerstenmaier for having played up this issue. He said it was precisely this kind of unhelpful action which affected morale in Berlin. I said that we had a good record of finding practical solutions to such problems in Berlin. Wehner agreed. 7. The SPD and the coalition—In response to my question about the current mood in the SPD and the situation within the coalition, Wehner said that there had been difficulties within the SPD but these were being contained. There would be no extraordinary party convention. Instead, the SPD convention would be advanced from the autumn to the spring of 1968 and a meeting of elected delegates would be held this autumn. This would permit people to blow off steam. 8. Wehner said that unnecessary statements by spokesmen of both parties created friction within the coalition. On the SPD side, Helmut Schmidt, in his free and easy manner, was constantly repeating that there would be an SPD Chancellor in 1969. This kind of brave talk, reminiscent of “casino language of reserve officers,” irritated Kiesinger who had queried Brandt whether the SPD was toying with the idea of a coalition with the FDP. State Secretary Jahn had recently called into question the Chancellor’s authority to issue binding policy guidelines, arguing that under the grand coalition there had to be prior agreement between the two partners. Whether well-intentioned or not, public discussion of these problems was harmful as it immediately led to counter pressures from the other side. This merely embittered the atmosphere and served no useful purpose. 9. Wehner said that medium term financial planning and the financial reform were the most serious substantive problems currently confronting the coalition. A full day Cabinet meeting would be held on these problems on July 5. Painful decisions were required. In such a situation there was always room for demagoguery. Wehner indicated that he opposed those who argued that since there would have to be cuts in the social security budget, the defense budget should also be reduced. These were not comparable issues. Wehner also noted a tendency on the part of the CDU/CSU and the SPD Parliamentary groups to conclude deals between themselves in order to defeat unpopular but necessary economy measures proposed by the govt. If this tendency continued, the coalition might find itself in serious difficulties. Comment: Throughout the discussion, Wehner was frank and candid. He was obviously pleased that he had won his point on the Stoph reply and appeared as firm as ever in his support for the grand coalition. At the same time he made it clear that he would continue to insist on using every opening that promised motion on the German problem. Wehner’s expectations on East German and Soviet reactions is probably overly optimistic, reflecting the great importance that he attaches to motion on the German problem. McGhee 219. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 GER W. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Obst and approved in the White House on July 13. The discussion took place during a luncheon in honor of former Chancellor Erhard. The source text is noted as a “revision” of the original memorandum. The original read: “The Chancellor wanted the President to know that there will be no cuts in troops.” In a memorandum attached to the source text, Benjamin Read, Executive Secretary of the Department of State, noted: “Although we have every reason to believe that Mr. Obst is accurate in recalling the statement, subsequent information including a check with Ambassador McGhee indicates that Ambassador Knappstein’s statement should have been qualified to indicate that there had been no decision on troop cut levels.” Washington, July 11, 1967, 1 p.m. SUBJECT FRG Troop Levels; Chancellor Kiesinger’s Visit PARTICIPANTS President Johnson FRG Ambassador Knappstein Mr. Harry Obst, Language Services (interpreter) Ambassador Knappstein told the President that he had a message which he had just received from Chancellor Kiesinger. The Chancellor wanted the President to know that there has been no decision to cut troop levels, just a reduction of the military budget in terms of money. He wanted to assure the President that he will make no important decisions on foreign policy without first consulting with the US. He accepts the President’s invitation to come to Washington and accepts the dates of September 12–13. He would write the President a personal message the same day.A copy of the July 11 Kiesinger letter confirming that no decision had been taken on troop reductions is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspondence, Germany. 220. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Chronological File. Confidential. Washington, July 13, 1967, 9:30 a.m. SUBJECT Your Meeting with George McGhee, 5:30 p.m., July 14According to the President’s Daily Diary, the meeting with Ambassador McGhee took place on July 14 from 6 to 6:30 p.m. (Ibid.) No record of the discussion, in which Bator also participated, was found. George will want to talk to you about the German defense cuts. Specifically, he will ask for guidance on what to say to Kiesinger when he returns to Bonn. The Germans have clearly got the message that we are unhappy. They are coming in on every channel with assurances that there has been no decision on troop cuts. In any case, it will take them the rest of the summer to figure out how best to save the money without getting into a war with us. In light of the above, my strong instinct would be to play the hand in low key—for the time being. If we keep hitting them hard during the next several weeks, I think we simply play into the hands of the Gaullists in Bonn, whose strongest card is German pride and vanity (“it’s high time to assert independence from big brother, etc.”). A secondary point is that we badly need German cooperation in the international money negotiations between now and September. If you agree with the above, you will want to instruct George (who may be in a rather combative mood vis-à-vis the Germans) to play it softly, and to say to Kiesinger that: —You were deeply concerned by the press reports about the defense budget and troop cuts. —Any unilateral action would undo all the work in the Trilaterals. It would certainly play into the hands of those in the US who want to reduce the American commitment in Europe. —You were reassured by Kiesinger’s message about no decision on troops and about his intention to consult before doing anything that will affect the common defense.See footnote 2, Document 219. —We sympathize with German worries about the state of their economy. (George might also say to Kiesinger—though not as coming from the President—that the economists in Washington are puzzled about the case for budget balancing at a time of recession in Germany, especially given the large German balance-of-payments surplus.) —You look forward to seeing the Chancellor in Washington in September. Until then, you hope that the two governments will remain in very close touch. I would advise against you taking personal notice of the press stories that we didn't consult about the aircraft rotation. As you know from my memo of yesterday,Not further identified. I have already made the point through the Embassy here. At Tab A is a good cable from Marty Hillenbrand, McGhee’s No. 2 in Bonn.Not found. In case you want us, Walt and I will be standing by. Francis 221. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Paris. London, Moscow, Berlin, USAREUR, EUCOM, USAFE, and SHAPE. Bonn, July 18, 1967, 1607Z. 698. Subj: Meeting with Brandt. NATUS. I called on FonMin Brandt today at my request. The following topics were discussed: 1) Defense budget. Brandt said that he did not know precisely how the present unfortunate situation resulting from the defense budget decision had come about. There had been confusion and misunderstanding all around. The issue of “a change in defense concept” resulting from the budget decision had been injected into the Cabinet discussion by FinMin Strauss, but was included in the decision report only by accident. It will not be included in the final action. One thing he is sure of, however, is that the agreed overall defense budget figure will not be changed. He expects that the Germans will start discussions with respect to any changes in NATO commitments in September. This will be well in time for the NATO force planning and strategic decisions which will be taken in December. There are several points of view, Brandt said, with respect to what steps the Germans should take in light of their defense budget decision. There is one point of view, which apparently includes the U.S. Congress, which is concerned principally with the number of divisions involved. General Lemnitzer tends, however, to look to the effectiveness rather than the number of divisions. Brandt believes that we should take into account the fact that there will be at least three or four days warning time and that “several divisions” might be left in skeleton form to be filled up in an emergency within the alert period. Although SACEUR is, in general, not interested in reserves as such, he might be interested in such divisions. Another proposal is to fold the territorial forces into the Bundeswehr. 2) German public attitude. I asked the FonMin how he could explain the apparent general apathy on the part of the German public to the defense cuts. I had been told that 64 percent believe that the cuts should be deeper. Brandt replied that there was no simple answer to my question. Since there had been no crises since that in Berlin in 1961–62, many considered there to be no immediate danger. Others believe a better defense can, with changes in the organization or concept, be obtained for less money. He did not believe that there was any general feeling that NATO in its present form had outlived its usefulness and required major revision. This feeling, should it ever come, will come much later and only after a change in the situation in Eastern Europe. 3) European security. I referred to recent public remarks Brandt had made regarding a European security system, particularly his statement on July 2. Did this represent a coherent plan which the German Government might put forward? Brandt replied to the contrary, stating that his remarks had indeed only been “tactical starting points.” He felt that they must not leave the search for peace as a monopoly for the other side. Brandt had recently told Couve de Murville that he was opposed to calling a peace conference, as had been recently proposed by French Prime Min Pompidou. This must come later. Brandt said that he is currently more interested in the substance of peace securing arrangements, concerning which his thinking has focused on the following points: A) The renunciation of the use of force B) Making clear that Germany is not aiming at ownership of nuclear weapons C) The search for East-West arrangements which could result in a reciprocal lowering of troop levels without disadvantages to either side. These are matters which NATO itself is seized with, and in which the Germans are already cooperating. In the meantime, no drastic changes in NATO are required. Brandt regrets the fact that unilateral decisions are in the meanwhile being taken in the West through reduction in forces, without obtaining corresponding Soviet reductions. Indeed, he opposed the recent budgetary cuts as FonMin for this reason—even though, as SPD leader, he had to support them in the end. Brandt said that the Chancellor’s recent statement to the effect that a reunified Germany could not be a member of either power bloc, reflected the view that the German question cannot be solved within the present context of East-West confrontation. This does not mean, however, that Germany would withdraw from NATO. Indeed, Germany could not withdraw from anything unless, at the same time, it enters something new. (I interpret this to mean either East-West security framework or a situation in which the East-West confrontation has disappeared.) 4) de Gaulle visit.July 12–13. According to Brandt, the discussions during the recent de Gaulle visit went quite well in the bilateral field. The principal gain had been in the creation of organizational structures for intensified cooperation in the industrial and technical areas. In the political field, the talks had resulted in agreement for a greater exchange of information between the two affecting Eastern Europe, including telegrams received by both from their Embassies. (It is interesting to note that the FonOff has (Embtel 523)Dated July 13. (Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US) recently declined our offer for intensified intelligence exchange affecting Eastern Europe.) With regard to the big political issues, however, the situation after the meeting remains as before. de Gaulle had emphasized that the two countries must defend their national identities. Referring to “our American friends,” which Brandt thought an amusing slip, de Gaulle said that he did not think they aimed at domination, but that they were so big that they could not avoid it. The Germans, for their part, had said that they were concerned only with the threat imposed by the Soviets. With regard to England, de Gaulle had posed the question “What is England?”, mentioning Singapore and Hong Kong. He had warned against the special relationship between the UK and US and the threat of an Atlantic Europe. Brandt said that the attitude of de Gaulle toward UK entry posed a serious problem for Germany, which would become more acute before the end of the year. With regard to the Middle East, de Gaulle revealed the French objective as being basically to establish a presence there, without being too specific as to what it could accomplish. de Gaulle is convinced that the Arabs will not stick together in the long run. In Brandt’s view, it is not possible for Europe in its present state of organization to form a common policy toward the Middle East—or other similar problems. 5. Common Market political cooperation. Brandt pointed out that the EEC Ministers had in their meeting on May 30 agreed to consider the question of political cooperation, not however any particular subject. Brandt does not know how far France will be willing to go in discussing particular political questions. The Six Foreign Ministers will meet again towards the end of October and will attempt to arrange another heads of state meeting before the end of the year. de Gaulle had asked Kiesinger to take the initiative in proposing such a meeting. Brandt is contacting the Italians to check the possibility of their proposing Luxembourg as the meeting place. He is, however, not optimistic that the meeting will take place, since the Dutch are reluctant to take part in such a meeting without progress on UK admission. In the event no progress is made in the next Council Ministerial Meeting, Brandt will attempt to convince the Dutch that this is a necessity. McGhee 222. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Kiesinger Visit. Secret. Washington, August 11, 1967, 6 p.m. SUBJECT Preparing for the Kiesinger Visit: Strategy and Procedure This will be a critical meeting—not quite in a league with Glassboro,Reference is to the June 23 and 25 Summit meetings between President Johnson and Soviet Prime Minister Kosygin in Glassboro, N.J. Documentation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XIV. but close enough to call for very careful preparation. And, in my judgment, the general impression we make will be much more important to future German behavior than what we say on any of the specific issues on the table. If we seem to have no broad, coherent approach to our European relations, or if we appear disorganized and uncertain about our priorities—or if we seem unaware of the sense of drift and uncertainty in Europe—we will lose what I think is a major opportunity to condition Kiesinger’s thought and action on the full range of Atlantic issues. The only way to be certain that we will speak with vision and with one voice is for the President to give clear marching orders. The rest of this memo sets out a strategy we might follow and a procedure whereby you could instruct us. Strategy Kiesinger must leave this meeting convinced that: —the President has a set of firm principles in his head which govern U.S. behavior toward Europe and the Russians; —those principles are broadly consistent with German interests; —they will not permit America to turn its back on Germany and Europe; —specifically, the U.S. is not going to scuttle the Alliance whenever the Germans do something which annoys us; —in turn, when we are forced by our problems to do something the Germans don't like, it does not mean that we are going to sue for divorce. It follows that the President should: 1. Lay out for Kiesinger—and draw him into a dialogue about—the basic components of our European policy: —Our solid commitment to Atlantic security in the context of an evolving NATO. —Our commitment to bridge building and general improvement of the East-West environment as the best way to create conditions in which the healing of Germany is possible (it being understood that we will take our cue from the FRG on sensitive East German issues). —Our need to keep open our bilateral channel with the Russians, which reflects our special nuclear responsibilities. —Our support for an increasingly coherent and effective Western Europe. 2. On the tough, sensitive issues: the future of NATO, German unification, etc., probe in detail what is on Kiesinger’s mind. 3. Use this kind of a conversation as the context in which to raise the currently hot issues (defense budget, troops, international money, future offset, etc.) and for getting across the general point that we both must be careful not to overload each other’s politics; that isolationism breeds isolationism. The point of the above strategy is to avoid limiting the conversation either to the hot questions of the day, or to a broad benign exchange which ignores both current troubles and the more fundamental strains which are inevitable in our relations with Europe following the excessive dependence of the post-war period. If Kiesinger goes away without being confident that he understands what is really important to the President—and that he can depend on us not to overkill him on day to day problems—no amount of pleading or browbeating will make him more amenable on concrete issues as they arise. For instance, without such a framework a U.S. threat to cut troops might only draw a shrug and an air of bitter resignation. On the other hand, if the President can give the Chancellor a sense of confidence that he can calculate U.S. reactions to specific problems because he understands our general priorities, we will have a much better basis on which to lean on him, and to get him to lean on his anti-Americans when we have a specific problem. Benefits If the strategy works, the Chancellor will leave thinking that—whatever discordant noises there may be in the background—Lyndon Johnson understands the central propositions necessary to a good, workable relation between Europe and America, and can be counted on to steer a true course despite periodic flaps. It’s quite possible that this would even show up in the newspapers. Further, —it would maximize the chance that Kiesinger will try to play particular issues our way; —when he cannot do what we want, he will be more careful to manage German policy so as to minimize the negative effect on us; —when we must do things he doesn't like, rather than blasting away in public, he will be more inclined to deal quietly with us, in private. Fundamentally, he will work harder to keep U.S.-German relations on an even keel. Procedure On Monday, I would suggest you chair a strategy session with Rusk, McNamara, Fowler, Walt and myself.According to the President’s Daily Diary, Johnson met with his senior advisers from 6:50 to 7:30 p.m. on August 14 for an “off the record” discussion of the Kiesinger visit. (Johnson Library) You might use that meeting to cross-examine your advisers, to instruct us on the general line, and also on the handling of the specific question of U.S. troop levels. (At Tab ANot found. is a memo on that one question. If you do not wish to take the time to go over it on the weekend, I will send in another copy on Monday morning, prior to a strategy meeting.) In addition, if it would be useful, I could spend 15–20 minutes before such a meeting going over the ground in this paper with you. I apologize for asking for your valuable time for a strategy session on Monday, but this is the only means for pulling the government together and avoiding the inevitable tendency of the rest of us to emphasize our own particular concerns in conversations with the various Germans who will be fanning out around town. FMB OK for Marvin to set up mtg. with Rusk, McNamara, Fowler, Rostow, Bator on Mon. afternoon In addition, Bator and Rostow to come in for 15 min. before such a meetingThe President checked these first two options. Speak to me 223. Letter From John J. McCloy to the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow)Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Walt Rostow, vol. 38. No classification marking. In an August 14 memorandum to the President, attached to the source text, Rostow provided a brief summary of the contents of the letter and commented: “You will, I believe, wish to read this letter from John McCloy. He underlines that the critical objective of the [Kiesinger] visit should be to achieve a significant meeting of the minds on détente.” President Johnson appointed McCloy as U.S. Special Representative to the United States-United Kingdom-Federal Republic of Germany talks on Central European Defense on October 11, 1966. New York, August 11, 1967. Dear Walt: I have been increasingly impressed by the importance of the coming talks with Kiesinger so much so that I am taking the liberty of writing you directly in the thought that you might convey some of my concern and some of my thinking to the President in preparation for the visit. We are at a point of history where some very important decisions must be taken soon in respect of the Alliance and Germany, as an extremely important part of Europe, is one of the focal points on which a number of these far-reaching decisions have to be made. The Alliance is coming up for review in 1969. Perhaps the review will be precipitated in 1968 by a formal notice of the renunciation of the Alliance by France. There are some in this country who are already advocating “some dilution of the Alliance” in the form of a détente with the Soviet Union. There are others who instinctively favor a return to a form of opportunistic isolationism on our part. There are those who feel that difficult as the prospect of reinvigorating NATO in the light of the French defection appears to be, that it is still the best clear chance for peace and security and for a reasonable modus vivendi with the Soviet Union. deGaulle has not only defected from NATO, he is from all the signs seeking an outright reversal of the Alliance.Maybe this is too strong, but it certainly is an outright neutralization of the Alliance. [Footnote in the source text.] On top of this, we have an equivocal position on the part of Germany—equivocal due in part to a domestic political diversion which has taken the form of a pro-French-pro-U.S. division in Germany. This division has become a bit overheated by a very strong and very virulent campaign on the part of France to convince the Germans that the only way they can prove their loyalty to the Franco-German treaty is to follow the French lead in its present anti-American phobia. There is also some equivocation apparent in respect to the German Government’s attitude toward the East as has been evidenced by some recent speeches of Brandt and even in some of Kiesin-ger’s. A new phenomenon has entered into the picture in the form of the emergence of the Soviet Union in the Middle East and the Mediterranean as an aggressive political force there. It is clear that the Soviets intend to expand their position there if only to remove the sting of their miscalculation of the Israeli capacities. They intend to gain a position, if possible, which will enable them to influence the flow of oil from the area. They have seen the long-range potentialities of new pro-Soviet forces on the southern flank of NATO and astride the strategic nexus which the Mediterranean represents between the East and the West and between Europe and Africa. This only accentuates the pressing need for the Germans and the Americans to understand each other’s objectives very clearly at this critical period in the history of the Alliance. The Soviets have not become benign merely because they seek to avoid a nuclear exchange. Their actions in the Middle East clearly demonstrate this. On the other hand they have been hearing much from us on the subject of détente with the Soviet Union. This is not only in the nuclear field but in other areas as well. The article by Gilpatric in the Sunday Times will set them off again. What are our intentions? They are not going to be satisfied with general protestations any more than we should be. The Germans are great ones to insist on new assurances every week, but in the political world in which Europe moves, I have no doubt our position seems equivocal and disturbing too. The important thing is to achieve, if at all possible, a real meeting of the minds as to what our respective objectives really are and what steps should be taken to bring them about. What do we intend to do about the Alliance if France does withdraw? What are the actual steps Brandt has in mind to take in furtherance of his long-range objectives in respect of the East? What do we really wish the Germans would do in respect of France? It is important also to understand what should be avoided at the meeting. I suppose all would agree that we should not start out by berating the Chancellor for the reduction of his forward budget. We should not, I repeat, not, attempt to replay the record of the Erhardt visit. I doubt that it would be wise to even bring up offsets again. We should not take the budget cut as a new excuse to move in on our own troop levels. If we did this so close to the 1969 date, I think the base for a convincing reconfirmation of the Alliance and NATO would be too dangerously narrowed. I should assume that the tripartite agreements carried us beyond the need for that. It was implicit in them that we would not proceed unilaterally toward the reduction of troop levels except in conjunction with each other and with a real discussion of what the strategic and tactical needs were. It was also agreed that the Foreign Exchange problem was a common problem. I would leave it at that assuming that both they and we intended to operate under those principles. This whole issue is one which is so dependent on what our long-range objectives in respect of Europe and the Soviet Union are that the time should be spent in exploring those objectives in real depth rather than threatening further troop reductions or bickering with them over the budgetary developments or the way they handled the deGaulle visit. We have a real opportunity now with the decline of deGaulle’s prestige to begin now to lay a base for more meaningful discussion of our relations with Germany and Western Europe than we have had for some time. The disenchantment with deGaulle in Germany goes very deep and if we can show Europe that in spite of our domestic problems and with Viet Nam, we are prepared to think seriously of our future relations with Europe, this will be impressive. At the same time we ask that they be aware of our problems and relations with the rest of the world. Neither Europe nor we can afford these days to be provincial in our thinking. I hope this may be of some help. Sincerely, John J. McCloy 224. Record of MeetingSource: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File. No classification marking. Drafted by Christian. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room prior to Kiesinger’s arrival. Washington, August 14, 1967, 6:50–7:35 p.m. ATTENDING The President Secretary Rusk Secretary McNamara Secretary Fowler Walt Rostow Francis Bator George Christian Marvin Watson The President said he thought he would tell the Chancellor that the U.S. has a 30 billion dollar deficit but is ready to go through hell to stay with McCloy’s agreement;Reference is to an agreement regarding troop deployment and related financial arrangements announced by the United States, United Kingdom, and Federal Republic of Germany on May 2. For text of the U.S. statement, see Department of State Bulletin, May 22, 1967, pp. 788–789. that if the Germans do go through with an adjustment of their troops the U.S. would have to do it proportionately. Secretary Rusk said that Kiesinger has four plans. One calls for the reduction of men in uniform and a cut of about 15,000 in civilians. He said that if the Chancellor says he has to make a troop reduction, the President will have to say what he indicated. Rusk said there were two contingencies: Failure to get satisfactory execution of tri-lateral agreements; and failure to keep a satisfactory number of Germans in uniform. The Secretary suggested that the President use this approach in talking with the Chancellor: 1. Count our blessings—that in the political and economic sphere, we are in good shape with the Germans; that we are doing a respectable job in foreign aid. 2. They have gotten away from Adenauer’s rigid attitude towards the East. 3. In the broadest sense, the U.S. and Germany have a lot of common policy. 4. He is on the rebound from talks with De Gaulle, so be prepared for that. The Secretary said it is well for everyone to remember that we are working against a pretty solid background—that the Germans are solid partners in NATO compared with others. He said a thorough explanation of each other’s problems would be a good way to start the discussions. George Christian 225. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US. Secret. Drafted by McGhee and approved in S on October 31. Brandt accompanied Chancellor Kiesinger on his August 13–19 visit to Washington. For text of public statements issued during and at the conclusion of the visit, see Department of State Bulletin, September 11, 1967, pp. 325–330. McGhee commented on the visit in At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 228–229. Washington, August 15, 1967. SUBJECT Secretary’s Meeting with German Foreign Minister Brandt PARTICIPANTS German Foreign Minister Willy Brandt German Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein The Secretary of State United States Ambassador George C. McGhee 1. U.S.-Soviet Relations—The Secretary asked Brandt whether there was suspicion in Germany, arising out of U.S. contacts with the Soviets, that we would reach agreement with the Soviets at the expense of German interests. Brandt replied that, although there are recurring intimations of this nature in the press, there is no substantial body of informed opinion in Germany that has such a concern. The Secretary pointed out the poor state of relations existing between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, which is not conducive to reaching new agreements. It is the Soviets who have failed to ratify the Consular Convention between us, even though it has now been approved by the U.S. Senate. His impression is that the Soviets are dominated by the fear of China—by the prospect of an unfriendly nation of a billion people possessing nuclear weapons on their border. Indeed, in his judgment it is the position of China with respect to the Vietnamese war, which prevents the U.S. and Russians from bringing about an end to the war. The Secretary felt that we and the Soviets could reach an agreement to end the war without difficulty. The Secretary referred in this connection to certain evidence that both the Soviet people and the satellites are getting tired of the sacrifices they are making throughout the world, i.e., in Vietnam, the Middle East and in the under-developed world. 2. German-Soviet Relations—Brandt reported that although the official Soviet attitude toward Germany, and the Soviet press, remained harsh and critical, he had received certain suggestions in recent months that the Soviets might be seeking an improvement. He considered that certain signals had been passed to German officials in Moscow and Geneva which could be so interpreted. He has discussed this matter with Soviet Ambassador Tsarapkin in Bonn, however, there has been as yet no change in Soviet policy. He would continue his efforts, since Germany desired an improvement in relations with the Soviets. 3. German Policy Toward Eastern Europe a. Romania—Brandt commented very favorably on his recent visit to Bucharest.August 4–8. For text of the communiqué issued at the conclusion of the Brandt visit, see Meissner, Die deutsche Ostpolitik, pp. 218–220. He had been warmly received, having had some nineteen hours of conversation with high officials including six with the Prime Minister. He had found the Romanians willing to act quite independently of the Soviets. They seemed anxious to give practical effect to their recent establishment of diplomatic relations with Germany, both in the cultural and economic fields. They proposed cooperative economic enterprises in third countries—citing Morocco as a possibility. No details as to such arrangements, however, had been worked out. In discussions with the Romanians on how to proceed with negotiations on East-West security matters, Brandt had found, however, a sharp difference in view with the Romanians. Whereas Germany preferred that any negotiations be between the Blocs, i.e. NATO and the Warsaw Pact, the Romanians preferred that they be bilateral—looking toward the removal of the Blocs. Manescu said jokingly that “they did not propose to let the Germans put the Russians in control of them again.” b. Czechoslovakia—Brandt was also optimistic about the exchange of Trade MissionsFor text of the August 3 German statement on these discussions, see ibid., p. 217. recently negotiated between Germany and Czechoslovakia by his personal representative, Ambassador Bahr. Although this had not been extended to official diplomatic or consular relations, the Czechs understood that the German Trade Mission would look out for the interest of Germans in Czechoslovakia generally. c. Bulgaria—According to Brandt, Germany could also have diplomatic relations with Bulgaria, if it were willing to cancel certain Bulgarian indebtedness to Germany. In response to a query by the Secretary, Brandt advised that these arose from recent commercial transactions. d. Eastern Germany—With respect to their relations with the GDR, Brandt commented on the harsh and unyielding attitude displayed by Ulbricht to the recent proposals made by the FRG, looking to the establishment of contacts in various technical areas. 4. UK-European Security Proposal—The Secretary made reference to a recent proposal made by the UK to the effect that the Four Powers, i.e., United Kingdom, United States, France and Germany, should together consider possible moves in the field of European Security. Brandt commented that British Foreign Minister George Brown had asked him to speak to Secretary Rusk about this proposal. As far as he could see, however, the proposal was largely procedural in nature. He was not clear as to what the mechanism created would deal with. His own concept was that the Germans might first feel out the East Germans, to see what possibilities existed, after which these could be taken up by the Four Powers. The Secretary commented that it was easy for us to accept the British proposal as a procedural step, however, he too is not clear as to what they really have in mind. 5. Greece, Turkey and Canada—In discussing NATO problems, Brandt referred to a rumor that he had heard to the effect that Greece and Turkey were considering withdrawing from NATO, and associating with some regional group—in Greece’s case with Tito. The Secretary pointed out that Turkey’s interest lay more with Iran and Pakistan, and that this association might prove profitable in dealing with the Arabs. In the course of the ensuing discussions, skepticism was expressed by both the Secretary and Brandt that Greece and Turkey would in fact take such a step. The Secretary explained the recent apparent inconsistencies in Canadian policy, in terms of Prime Minister Pearson’s having been awarded the Pulitzer Peace Prize. Ever since that award, the Canadians have been looking for opportunities to be peacemakers. Difficulties arise in negotiations involving the Canadians, since no matter what the position of the U.S., they tend to take contrary or different views in order to demonstrate their independence of us. 6. UK Entry in the Common Market—Brandt referred to the strong public opinion in Germany supporting British entry into the Common Market. If de Gaulle persisted in blocking British entry, a serious problem would arise before the end of the year in German-French relations. 7. de Gaulle —The Secretary referred to de Gaulle’s recent visit to Canada and indicated our concern as to the implications of de Gaulle’s unusual behavior. de Gaulle visited Canada July 23–26. During a speech at Montreal City Hall on July 25, he repeated the rallying cry of French-Canadian separatists, “Vive Quebec libre.” Did this mean that de Gaulle had become senile and was losing his grip? Brandt said that his impression from recent conversations on his visit to Bonn was that he was not, and he cited several examples of de Gaulle’s mental acuity and firm grasp of the situation. In his judgment we would have to put up with de Gaulle for another two to three years. 8. France and NATO —Secretary Rusk referred to recent evidence that we had heard that France was considering withdrawing from NATO in 1969. He suggested to Brandt the desirability of our discussing this with our NATO allies in order to prepare them for such an eventuality, otherwise, French withdrawal might have a serious effect on the NATO. Brandt discounted the possibility of French withdrawal. He pointed out the assurances de Gaulle had given him during his recent visit to Bonn. Brandt did not react to the suggestions of concerted action. Ambassador Knappstein pointed out the desirability of not taking any action since it might encourage the French withdrawal. 9. German Reunification—The Secretary said he wanted to make it clear to Brandt that we would be glad at any time to consider or support any reasonable move looking toward German reunification. The difficulties that he had had in this respect with Schroeder during his period of Foreign Minister was only that he had insisted that the Western Four be in agreement as to how we proceed and that the Soviets accept a Western proposal to negotiate. In the absence of such prior agreement there was the danger that the U.S. would find itself alone as it did in 1961 and 1962. 10. Soviet Troop Withdrawal—The Secretary advised Brandt that we see no evidence of Soviet willingness to engage in reciprocal troop withdrawals in central Europe. This is probably because the Soviets fear criticism that they had acted against the interests of the bloc, by making it possible for the U.S. to release troops for Vietnam. In fact, however, we have ample troops in Vietnam and in any event would not use troops so released. In recent years the U.S. has taken a different attitude on the question of troop withdrawals from that which we held earlier. Initially we were concerned with the obvious disparity between U.S. withdrawals to America and Soviet withdrawals to the Soviet Union, however, changing circumstances in Eastern Europe perhaps have reduced the disparity. 11. Political Consultation Among the Six—In responding to what had been decided at the recent Summit meeting in Rome concerning political consultation among the Six, Brandt said that the agreement had been only to consider the feasibility of such discussions—not to conduct such discussions themselves. He was very skeptical about the ability to have discussions about the security threat to Europe as provided for under the Treaty of Rome. 226. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Kiesinger Visit. Secret. Drafted by Puhan. The meeting was held at the White House. Washington, August 15, 1967, 2 p.m. SUBJECT President Johnson and Chancellor Kiesinger Report on Their Meeting PARTICIPANTS Americans President Johnson The Secretary of State Walt W. Rostow, Special Assistant to the President Eugene V. Rostow, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs George C. McGhee, American Ambassador to Germany John M. Leddy, Assistant Secretary, EUR Robert R. Bowie, Counselor of the State Department Adrian Fisher, Deputy Director, ACDA Francis Bator, Deputy Special Assistant to the President Edward Fried, Senior Member, NSC Staff Alfred Puhan, Director, EUR/GER Harry Obst, Interpreter Germans Chancellor Kurt Georg Kiesinger Foreign Minister Willy Brandt Heinrich Knappstein, Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany Karl-Guenther von Hase, State Secretary and Press Chief Karl Theodor, Freiherr von und zu Guttenberg, Parliamentary State Secretary Dr. Horst Osterheld, Assistant Secretary, Foreign Office Dr. Johannes Prass, Assistant Secretary, Foreign Office Ambassador Swidbert Schnippenkoetter, Foreign Office Dr. Ulrich Sahm, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Foreign Office Minister Georg von Lilienfeld, German Embassy Mr. Claus Soenksen, Personal Aide to Foreign Minister Brandt Mr. Berndt von Staden, Counselor, German Embassy Mr. Hartmut Schulze-Boysen, Counselor, German Embassy Heinz Weber, Interpreter After expressing regrets for having kept everyone waiting so long,The President and Chancellor met privately at noon. A memorandum of conversation covering the initial meeting is in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 263. the President said that the Chancellor and he had had a good exchange of views. He said that they had talked about our mutual problems and touched on all the important issues which would be taken up in detail during the latter part of the visit. The President said that he had explained to the Chancellor his feeling that our common bond, our unity, our standing shoulder-to-shoulder is unchanged. The President explained that he and the Chancellor were in complete agreement that NATO must be kept sturdy to defend Germany and Europe. He said that complete understanding had been reached on this point. The President said that on the non-proliferation treaty he had asked the Chancellor to review with the Secretary of State and other officials all details of that project. He said he had made it abundantly clear to the Chancellor, as he had to his predecessor, Mr. Erhard, that we would not take any decisions affecting the welfare of Germany without first having had the most candid consultations. The President reported that on the question of the trilateral talks and troop strength, the Chancellor had told him it would not be necessary to reduce the German strength at all; in any event it would in his view not be more than a reduction of some 15,000. The President said he had made it clear we didn't think there should be any reduction. He referred to gallant efforts on our part to avoid any reductions of U.S. troop strength. He stated that if the German people felt it was essential to make reductions in the German military establishment, it would cause us a serious problem here, a problem over which he might not be able to prevail. He said the decision of the FRG on this is one that would be made for both nations. He said we hoped it would not be necessary for us to make reductions. He said we will try to avoid them. The President said that as far as the Chancellor and he were concerned, they had the same objectives: maintain our strength, work to lessen tensions, remain loyal and true to one another, and work for a united Germany and Europe. The President said he and the Chancellor had exchanged views on de Gaulle. He mentioned that the Chancellor and he had talked about bridge building. He said he had given him our views on Viet-Nam and the Middle East. He told him how earnestly we were working to solve that problem. He said we were living in very serious times and were anxious to meet our problems without endangering our security. The President returned, at the conclusion of his remarks, to the possibility of cutting troop strength. He reiterated the view that we should not reduce our troops, but he pointed to the $30 billion deficit we had and his need for getting a tax bill through the Congress. He said if we did not get such a tax bill, we would face serious problems. He might have to make cuts even where he didn't want to. Chancellor Kiesinger expressed full agreement with the President’s remarks. He said his colleague, Minister of Defense Schroeder, had done great damage with the report that German troop strength would be cut by 60,000. Kiesinger said there had been no such Cabinet decision; there had been merely cuts from projections for spending. The Chancellor said he had made it clear the Germans would increase their spending. He referred to the proposal for medium-term financing, a new kind of planning for the Germans, to give them some idea where they were going. He said he had learned that some of the planning in the Ministry of Defense had been highly unrealistic. He referred in this connection to a conversation he had had with General De Maziere, who had told former Defense Minister Von Hassel to come down to earth. Two weeks before Erhard’s fall, Von Hassel finally accepted the General’s recommendation. The Chancellor said he was personally convinced that they could maintain their present troop strength but that if the decision was to cut, it would under no circumstances be more than between 15,000 and 19,000. He repeated, no final decision had been reached. He stated a final decision would be made only after consultations with us. He also assured the President that any of the four plans recommended for the absorption of the reduced projections would not weaken the German military establishment. The Chancellor said he wanted to use this occasion to draw the President’s attention to his Government’s declaration of last December to the effect that the Germans would increase their spending for aid. He said the Germans had done so. He pointed to this sector of the German budg-et in which there had been no cut. He said German aid would increase in 1968 by 26%, in 1969 by 10% and in 1970 by 6%. The Chancellor said he had told the President that according to a public poll taken in Germany this year, to the question, “Do you think close cooperation with the United States is necessary?”, the response had been 42% affirmative in January, 47% in February, 69% in May, and 71% in June. The Chancellor said he wanted to say a word about de Gaulle. He said he had decided to provoke the General and probe his real feeling about the United States. Kiesinger said he had told the General that the Germans regarded NATO and an integrated military system as indispensable and that the Alliance had to be strengthened. He warned de Gaulle that remarks about the U.S. could damage Franco-German relations. Kiesinger said it was interesting that de Gaulle had stated publicly and even more strongly privately that French policy was not directed against the U.S.; that he wanted to preserve French friendship for the U.S.; that he wanted to preserve the Alliance until relations with the East were completely changed; and that he had no objections to the maintenance of U.S. troops in Europe. Privately de Gaulle had told Kiesinger that the presence of U.S. troops was even desirable. The Chancellor said up to a point the Germans could win some ground from de Gaulle. The General had been much more stubborn about U.K. entry into the Common Market, but the Germans continued to show their support for the British. At the same time they had told Harold Wilson they couldn't act as a bulldozer. The Chancellor said that he and de Gaulle agreed that they disagreed on most points. The Germans hope, according to Kiesinger, in the long run to accomplish one big task, to overcome the existing antagonism and to restore normal conditions in Europe. He said there was a natural destiny which linked France and Germany. The Chancellor turned to German efforts in Eastern Europe. He mentioned Foreign Minister Brandt’s trip to Romania and the exchanging of trade missions with the Czechs. He said he had told the Czechs that the Munich Agreement was no longer valid; that the Germans no longer wanted to base their relations with Czechoslovakia on that treaty. The Chancellor, in summing up, referred to reports in some U.S. papers alleging that a reduction of 60,000 men in the German Army had some connection with a new German policy, some new form of cooperation with France, or some new Rapallo. He said this was “sheer nonsense, sheer nonsense”. He said the Germans were determined to continue their close relations with the U.S., adapted to modern requirements. He said he knew that European security could not be assured without U.S. support. He said the Germans would do what they could to make their contribution to assuring that security. The Chancellor asked the President to trust him and not to listen to rumor makers. He said with great emphasis: “As long as I am the Chief of the German Government, you can depend on us going along that way….; we will be honest; we will make sure of your friendship by being your friend.” The President said it was very heartening to all around the table to hear the Chancellor’s remarks. He regarded this a good omen for this visit. He said what had distressed all of us were rumors and reports before decisions had been made. He said he had been very glad to have the Ambassador come to him and inform him of the facts. The President said none of us should take action without full consultations with NATO. He said he was the last to want to dismantle NATO. This is why we had to help the British and the Germans earlier to keep them from starting the unravelling process. The President said he didn't want to mislead the Chancellor. He said he did not know whether he had the strength to keep Mansfield from forcing U.S. troop reductions if the Germans made reductions in their military establishment. The American people would not be able to understand why we should maintain our troop strength in Germany if the Germans themselves felt able to cut their own troops. The President concluded he hoped and prayed that no cuts would be made. 227. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US. Secret. Drafted by Leddy and Obst and approved in S on August 24, by Secretary Fowler, and by Secretary McNamara. The meeting was held at the Blair House. Washington, August 15, 1967, 4:15 p.m. SUBJECT NPT; Liquidity; France and NATO; Offset; Defense Plans; U.S.-FRG Relations PARTICIPANTS Americans Secretary of State Rusk Secretary of the Treasury Fowler Secretary of Defense McNamara Ambassador McGhee Assistant Secretary Leddy Mr. Harry Obst, Interpreter Germans Chancellor Kurt Georg Kiesinger Foreign Minister Willy Brandt Heinrich Knappstein, Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany Karl-Guenther von Hase, State Secretary and Press Chief Karl Theodor, Freiherr von und zu Guttenberg, Parliamentary State Secretary Dr. Horst Osterheld, Assistant Secretary Dr. Johannes Prass, Assistant Secretary Ambassador Swidbert Schnippenkoetter, Foreign Office Dr. Ulrich Sahm, Deputy Assistant Secretary Minister Georg von Lilienfeld, German Embassy Mr. Claus Soenksen, Personal Aide to Foreign Minister Brandt Mr. Berndt von Staden, Counselor, German Embassy Mr. Hartmut Schulze-Boysen, Counselor, German Embassy Heinz Weber, Interpreter Chancellor Kiesinger thanked the United States participants for coming and making their time available to this meeting. Responding to Secretary Rusk’s inquiry, he said that in his meeting with the President they did not get into details on any subject. They had had a general tour d'horizon. Perhaps they would discuss details tomorrow. He had learned some interesting things. He had reported to the President on his talks with General de Gaulle in July. They then talked about East-West problems and European problems. On the nonproliferation treaty they just mentioned the subject without any detailed discussion. Foreign Minister Brandt added that he and Secretary Rusk in their discussions had covered the NPT problem. Secretary Rusk said that in his talks about the nonproliferation treaty with Gromyko he had expressed the opinion that a number of countries would feel that “forever” was a long time and that the duration of the treaty would no doubt be raised. Gromyko had not indicated that a duration clause would be entirely unacceptable, but the Secretary thought the shorter the duration period, the more difficult it would be with the Soviets. We should now see how things develop in Geneva. After all, tabling the draft treaty is not the end of the process, but really the beginning. One hundred countries will have their own views. In his last talks with Gromyko the Secretary had found him not so much concerned with the FRG as with India. He added that we still have no final word from the Soviets as to whether they would be prepared to table the draft treaty or on what day. Perhaps it would be the end of this week or next week. The Secretary then asked Secretary Fowler to present the United States views on the liquidity problem. Secretary Fowler said that, as he had discussed with Foreign Minister Brandt, the United States and the Federal Republic were together embarked on an ambitious but necessary venture in the financial field—to create within the IMF new arrangements to add liquidity to the world monetary system, which would be needed when the United States deficits came to an end and annual additions of gold to the world monetary system were found to be inadequate. Neither national currencies nor gold could in the future be a reliable source for accretions to liquidity. If this joint venture ends in failure, it could usher in a period of restrictionist practices by Central Banks, the adoption of beggar-thy-neighbor policies and the posing of a constant threat of financial crises such as we had had in the 30’s. Dr. Otmar Emminger, Director of the German Bundesbank, had been the leader of a remarkable group of monetary technicians who after a period of two years of intensive work had completed the outline of a plan for establishing a new system to create additional liquidity which will be considered at the September meeting of the IMF in Rio de Janeiro. During the past spring and summer the momentum behind this work had been retarded by the unwillingness of the French to agree to the general framework for a new plan which all of the other major countries want to establish. At the meeting of Financial Ministers in London on July 17, at which Minister Schiller and Dr. Emminger represented Germany, agreement was very nearly reached on the two issues of: (1) voting and (2) providing for the new liquidity in a form which would make it acceptable as reserves to the Central Banks. In fact, with a little give and take, agreement would have been reached at the July 17 meeting if it had not been for the French. The French Finance Minister, M. Debre, who Secretary Fowler thought was personally inclined to go along, simply did not have the authority. Now there will be another meeting in London on August 26 to resolve these two issues but the French problem remained. The others were anxious to go ahead. He knew there was some reluctance on the part of the FRG to leave the French, but in his view if all the rest were determined to go ahead this would be the best way to bring the French along. Secretary Rusk asked if Mr. Fowler had heard from M. Debre since their July 17 meeting in London. Secretary Fowler replied he had not. M. Debre thought it would be in the interest of the world to get this matter resolved but he had no authority to do anything about it. He emphasized that the United States could agree to the compromise on the nature of the new reserve asset worked out by the Italians and the Germans but that the French wanted it all their own way. The United States had gone at least 60 per cent of the distance to meet European views. Chancellor Kiesinger said he was not an expert on this matter but knew that President Johnson was anxious for a solution. He had had the impression from Minister Schiller’s reports that good progress was being made on the matter. Secretary Fowler replied the good progress was among the other participants with France remaining aside. Now the problem was to close the gap between the others and France. The United States had gone as far as it could down the road of concessions. Either of the two compromise proposals made by Italy and by Emminger/Schiller could be acceptable to the United States. But if further concessions were made only a meaningless gesture would result. The United States had gone very far to give General de Gaulle and Debre a political “out”. Chancellor Kiesinger said he believed progress had been made at the Munich Conference of the OEEC Ministers. Minister Brandt suggested the matter be further explored through other contacts between the two governments before their departure on Saturday. Secretary Rusk inquired if the IMF and the proposed plan provided for individual vetoes. Secretary Fowler replied this was not the case. However, adoption of the 85 per cent voting qualification would provide the EEC countries, acting together, the possibility of a veto. Chancellor Kiesinger said he believed de Gaulle had taken a softer stand on this matter during their second meeting. His government could prepare the climate perhaps by talking to Debre before the London meeting. He would discuss the matter with Minister Schiller upon his return to Germany and see what could be done. Secretary Fowler added the technicians had exhausted their possibilities. The matter now called for a political decision. Secretary Rusk then asked the Chancellor’s opinion on rumors that de Gaulle might withdraw from the Atlantic Alliance, i.e. the North Atlantic Treaty. His reference to “blocs” in his last press conference may have pointed in that direction. He was interested in two questions: a) Was it likely that he would withdraw? b) If he did, how could the others best prepare for it? Preparation would soften the shock the news would bring to many. Nobody, for example, would be very shocked to learn today that de Gaulle may want to withdraw from SEATO. But if the news of a French withdrawal from the North Atlantic Treaty came at an inopportune time, and without preparation, it could have serious effects on the Alliance. Chancellor Kiesinger replied he concluded from de Gaulle’s statement during their meeting in July that he wanted to preserve the Western Alliance at least until such time as the relationship with the East had “completely changed”, that he did not intend to pull out of the NAT in 1969, as it was not conceivable that a “complete change” could come about so soon. He would try, however, to find out more on the matter in future talks. Secretary Rusk asked if the Chancellor thought it was all right then to proceed on the assumption that the French would remain? Maybe by raising the issue he would only be putting ideas in de Gaulle’s head. Chancellor Kiesinger assured the Secretary nobody could put ideas in de Gaulle’s head. He, for his part, felt satisfied that the phrasing “complete change” pointed to France remaining after 1969. Secretary Rusk inquired if the FRG had started to think about the June 1968 expiration of the trilateral agreement and if the Chancellor though it might be a good idea to have an arrangement of a more extended nature rather than the previous one-year agreement. Would he prefer to start bilateral talks first or would he like to go into trilateral talks again? Chancellor Kiesinger replied the British Ambassador had taken up this subject with him about two weeks ago. He had spoken of a medium or long-term arrangement. He (Kiesinger) could not make a full statement on this at this time. He was happy this matter was not on the agenda during this visit (said jokingly). Minister Brandt added that before leaving for the United States yesterday he had asked that one man from each side explore the possibility of a suggested (by the British) 5-year agreement. He thought it advisable to have bilateral discussions first. Also, the last trilateral approach had been criticized by other NATO partners. Messrs. McNamara, Fowler, McGhee and Leddy seconded the idea of bilateral talks to be held first and cited other reasons for it. Secretary Rusk asked the Chancellor how he saw the timing of future German decisions to implement recent adjustments in military budget in relationship to the December defense review to be conducted in NATO? Chancellor Kiesinger answered that a NATO questionnaire on this matter had to be filled out by October 6. They couldn't answer all the questions by that time but he felt certain that a clear picture could be presented by December. Secretary McNamara suggested the Chancellor might want to explore a method similar to the United States rotational plan, namely, to offset cuts in his active forces by strengthening his reserves, which now were rather weak. In any adjustment it was important to not give the Soviets the impression that it would result in a weakening of the Allied strength, and it must, indeed, not be weakened in fighting power. He was anxious to meet with Minister Schroeder to discuss this matter. He was at the Chancellor’s disposal to answer any questions he might have. Chancellor Kiesinger replied he basically agreed with McNamara’s comment on the reserves and on maintaining fighting power. As a first-line power near the border the FRG was eager to have as strong a deterrent as possible. Some people were worried that in an emergency rotational forces could not be redeployed quickly enough. This matter should be reviewed again in more detail. Minister Brandt added that some understanding would have to be found in SACEUR about the counting of reserves as a NATO contribution. SACEUR considers “forces in being” as the only acceptable contribution, but this was before the introduction of the new concept of political warning time which resulted from the trilateral talks. But even if there were only 3 to 6 days of warning, Germany could mobilize its reserves. The political-warning theory, which the Germans had been more reluctant to embrace than others (laughter) would have to be reviewed again also. Secretary McNamara agreed with the German Foreign Minister. He said the opinions of the United States, the FRG and SACEUR on warning time should be compared in a study. Secretary Rusk added that if the Soviets were to make proportionate troop redeployments, this would help in giving the West additional warning time. Secretary McNamara said an inspection system also would result in additional warning time. He was aware also of the FRG’s strong interest in sharing more fully in nuclear planning, in knowing more about the nuclear hardware on their soil, and in having a voice in the decision of triggering or not triggering an atomic strike. The United States was anxious to cooperate on these matters and would provide any and all information. The NPG had been created for this purpose, but if desired, bilateral talks could be held first. Secretary Rusk suggested the Chancellor might want to visit Omaha at some time. Secretary McNamara offered to take him there personally. The Chancellor said that might be a good idea but did not commit himself one way or the other. Secretary Rusk added the Chancellor might find Omaha quite appalling. It was another world that he hoped would never be heard from in the future. Nevertheless, it would be quite interesting to come to know it in the context of the common alliance. Chancellor Kiesinger said the important thing in American-German and in Atlantic relations was to create a climate of trust. The people wanted to know where they stood. It would be very beneficial if some of the groundless rumors could be kept out of the papers. The news media were spreading the impression that NATO was slowly but surely disintegrating. Many people were influenced by this in their judgments and willingness to support the alliance. Secretary Rusk pointed to the need for NATO to take a greater interest and play a greater role in areas of the world beyond the immediate borders of the defensive alliance. He cited the Middle East as an example. Chancellor Kiesinger interjected this was bringing up the question whether NATO should be a political institution or just a defensive military organization. Secretary Rusk said he had been surprised to learn during a visit to SACLANT headquarters last year that the people there drew a line at a certain parallel as limiting their field of naval planning. They were not interested in anything below a certain latitude. He could not conceive how the area south of that line in the Atlantic could not be of interest to the security of the Atlantic Ocean. Similarly he could not see how one could really cope with the problem of European security without considering the Middle East, for example. Chancellor Kiesinger said NATO should at least study those matters and have a position on them. Secretary Rusk thanked the Chancellor for the generous amount of time he had allotted for this discussion. The meeting then broke up at 5:27 p.m. 228. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Kiesinger Visit. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Obst. The meeting was held in the White House. Washington, August 16, 1967, 11 a.m. TITLE President Johnson’s Meeting with Chancellor Kiesinger on August 16, 1967 PARTICIPANTS Foreign Kurt Kiesinger, Chancellor, Federal Republic of Germany Mr. Heinz Weber, Interpreter United States The President Mr. Harry Obst, Interpreter After an exchange of pleasantries the talk turned to the question of possible troop reductions: The President expressed his disenchantment with an article in the Washington Post of the same morning.“LBJ Is Cool to Cut in German Troops,” by Chalmers Roberts. He said it was important to make this matter clear to the Press so that there would be no further distortions. He suggested the Chancellor may want to quote to the Press directly from his minutes of their meeting on the previous day.See footnote 2, Document 226. The Chancellor might want to say: No decision had been made; In his judgment a cutback was not now necessary; A decision on such a matter would only be taken after discussing the matter with his cabinet, the United States and NATO. He did not think it would even be good to talk about any figures on maximum cutbacks, like 15,000 or 19,000. The Chancellor said he had even gone beyond that. He had stated that even the MOD and his generals were convinced that any needed cut would not have to exceed 15,000 or so. The President replied it was not good to quote any specific figures. If the Chancellor would quote 15,000, for example, it was almost certain to be expected that other countries would take that figure as a basis for proportionate cuts. The British might say, they would then have to cut back 5,000, the Belgians 3,500, the US 35,000 etc. The Chancellor stated he did not want to go back to Germany and have to say: President Johnson was adamant on this point, and he had to give in. He would say that he personally was not convinced of the need of any cuts at this time. However, should that need arise the cuts would not be substantial. The President said it was better to say “no substantial cuts” than to quote any figures. He did not want to use this as an excuse, but his experts had advised him that Congress may not be willing to allocate the money for the support of US troops in Europe if the FRG made any cuts. Such news would be ill-received on the Hill. The Chancellor said he would stick to the language of “no substantial cuts”. The President inquired if an upgrading of the reserves may be a solution to the problem. The Chancellor pointed to some of the difficulties this would raise. There was a shortage of non-commissioned officers and officers. Relations between the three levels of the service (officers, non-coms, enlisted) were “not sound”. In a crisis non-commissioned officers may have to be supplemented by enlisted men functioning as NCOs. Rotation of reserves may aggravate that situation. Reserves also would have to be provided with periodic training exercises. There might be some merit to the reserve proposal, however, and he would have it examined. The President suggested a sentence in the joint statement on their meeting dealing with Franco-German cooperation might be formulated differently. The Chancellor, in agreeing to the change, spoke again of his intention to play a “harmonizing role” in US-French relations. The President encouraged the Chancellor to be a bridge-builder between the two countries. The Chancellor may want to show de Gaulle notes of the transcript of their Washington meetings. The Chancellor was welcome to relay to de Gaulle the comments of the President on de Gaulle as stated in these meetings. He was anxious to avoid all quarreling among friends and allies. He was convinced, as he had stated before, that in times of real danger de Gaulle would be on our side. The President then encouraged the Chancellor to take a little walk through the grounds. On the way out he showed him the folder with the “hot-line” transcriptsThe notebook of Hotline messages is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Head of State Correspondence, USSR, Washington-Moscow “Hot Line” Exchange. and pointed to one message in particular which the Chancellor read with interest. The President and the Chancellor then talked privately without interpreters in the Rose Garden and while walking. (At one point Mr. Walt W. Rostow was called by the President and joined them for about ten minutes.) 229. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential. Repeated to London, Paris, Berlin, Moscow, EUCOM for General Burchinal, USAREUR for General Polk, USAFE for General Preston, and USCOB for General Fergusson. Bonn, September 9, 1967, 1303Z. 2654. Subject: The current calm in US-German relations. 1. Contrasted with the situation six months ago, German-American relations are presently characterized by a pervading calm—an absence of controversial issues. Offset and related troop rotation problems have, at least pending the German decision on reduction of forces, been resolved. The NPT—while still not a happy prospect for the FRG—has been recast to meet the most acute FRG objections and there are now others who are willing to take the lead in seeking further gains. The emotional resentment against us is substantially reduced. The Kennedy Round and the international liquidity problem have both been settled to our mutual satisfaction. There is no acute concern over US investment—a recent large US purchase of a German firm went unnoticed. The FRG appears satisfied that consultation between us is adequate. The initial delay in a meeting between the President and Chancellor was in itself a source of instability. One could now say that, with the completion of their recent highly successful meeting, a new period in German-American relations—one long in the making—began. 2. The principal characteristic of the present period is a clearer separation—but not necessarily divergence—of German policy from our own. The Federal Govt knows that the FRG remains dependent on the US for defense. There is, however, no present military pressure from the East, and the Germans are therefore in a position to concentrate more of their attention on problems where the US role is less important. For the German Govt and people, the overriding present concern is their economic recession and budgetary squeeze, a field outside the direct influence of the US. During the period of their postwar recovery the Germans made massive contributions to every sort of international endeavor and charity—in order to gain acceptance by the community of nations. Now, deeply alarmed by their first real post-war economic turndown, they are looking out for themselves. 3. In second place among their concerns stands the German problem—or more precisely stated, the development of a more hopeful relationship with the Communist countries and with East Germany. The critical importance of the US in an eventual European settlement is accepted by the Germans, and they wish to work with us toward this goal. In their present efforts in Eastern Europe, however, they appear to have concluded that too close an association with the US can be more of a handicap than a help. They look to the French—their closest European associate—as being a more natural and effective partner in this particular enterprise. 4. The problem of Western security, particularly the German contribution thereto, probably ranks third in the list of current German concerns; and here the position of the US remains of paramount importance. It is indicative that our closest bilateral consultation is presently in this area. 5. It has no doubt been the Chancellor’s objective to remove some of the emotion from German relations—both with France and the US. He has succeeded, in part at least, by insisting that German policy be friendly toward, but independent of, both. He does not hesitate to disassociate himself from French NATO policy—and US Viet Nam policy. As the Chancellor told the Press Club,August 16. For extracts of the significant portions, see Meissner, Die deutsche Ostpolitik, pp. 225–227. the German Govt will no longer look to the US to solve all of its problems. Indeed, it has come to realize that we cannot in all cases do so, even if we wanted to. The result, I believe, will be less closeness in our relations but also, in the long run, less potential tension and recriminations. 6. There are, nonetheless, possible areas of difficulty in the future. I would list the main ones as follows: A. A new European order—We have in the past encouraged the FRG to seek better relations with the Soviets and Eastern Europe, and a more fruitful contact with East Germany. In doing so, we have defined no limits as to how far we think they could safely go without endangering Western security. We showed signs of unease when Kiesinger hinted that a reunited Germany might be neutral—and when Brandt suggested that NATO might disappear. But we have not—I think wisely—tried to say now what would or would not be acceptable to the US in the way of a European settlement. For their part the German leaders do not appear to have thought very clearly of the limits they would set for themselves. On the other hand, they show almost an eagerness for contacts—to wit, Brandt’s recent discussion with Soviet Amb Tsarapkin (Bonn 2555)Dated September 7. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–6)—and Kiesinger’s exchange of letters with East German Chairman Stoph. Should the East show some readiness for movement and the Germans respond, I believe misunderstanding might arise between us as to how far the FRG can and should go without doing harm to the interests of the US and of NATO. This is something we must discuss with the Germans. B. Security—The planned rotation of some 35,000 US troops has caused no serious disquiet in Germany. A more extensive reduction in the US presence would still bring with it, however, a strain in our relations and a further decrease in US influence in Germany. On the German side, some troop reduction seems inevitable, although not more than 19,000 troops for the present, and this probably over three years. Even, this, however, can cause strain on our side—and release presures for further US rotations or withdrawals. We must work closely with the Germans to minimize both their reduction and its impact in the US. The development of an American ABM system could also cause severe problems in our relations, probably more intense than with other less exposed European countries—although the difference would be only one of degree. A potential danger also lies in the possibility of our not reaching the same conclusions with respect to the carrying into the production phase our joint V/STOL and main battle tank development projects. C. The US-Soviet relationship—During the recent past, the main problem for them which the Germans have viewed as resulting from US-Soviet relations has been the NPT. As indicated earlier, this issue has now largely been relieved of its emotional content. This same reaction can occur again, however, if we are able to reach further agreements with the USSR affecting Germany or Europe—without some progress, or visible effort on our part to achieve progress, on the German question. We should, therefore, clearly indicate to the Germans our willingness to consider any reasonable step they can propose which might result in some movement of the German question. D. American investment—Further concentration of US investment in German industry, particularly in petroleum, will entail problems which could eventually reach serious proportions. We must consult closely with our companies on this possibility, pointing out the likely consequences of their actions. 7. Conclusion. It seems to me that we should also take advantage of the present absence of divisive issues in our relations with Germans in the following general ways: A. We should seek to expand the constructive initiatives which have been taken to enlarge cooperation in mutually beneficial projects between our countries. For example, exchanges in the social environmental field initiated by Secretary Udall’s visit—and more recently in transportation—should be pursued. Cooperation in research and co-production in advanced fields such as space technology should be expanded. B. Consultation at all levels should be frequent and comprehensive, concentrating in particular on the fields of most likely future difficulties—in an effort to avoid troubles before they arise. Direct exchanges between the President and Chancellor, with emphasis on the broad world outlook, should be encouraged. McGhee 230. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Moscow, and Paris. Bonn, September 14, 1967, 1407Z. 2416. Subj: Meeting with Brandt. I had a conversation with FonMin Brandt today, on the eve of his departure for what he hopes will be a three week vacation on the Tegern See. The following subjects were discussed: 1. Four-Power FonMin’s meeting. Brandt gave me the background of his own discussions and thinking with respect to a Four-Power FonMins meeting on European security, as proposed by the US, UK and German policy planners. He had talked with British FonSec Brown on this subject while they were both in Norway in early July; however, they had been limited in what they could say by the fact that the conversation was over the telephone. Brown had to go back to London because of the Chinese crisisCommunist-inspired rioting in Hong Kong began on May 6, and attacks on British diplomats in China commenced on May 15. Terrorist bombings followed as the crisis escalated. The British Embassy in Beijing was sacked by the Red Guards on August 22. before he could meet with him personally. Brown had offered to contact Couve with respect to the meeting; however, he doubted the advisability of meeting in New York during the General Assembly because of the publicity that would probably be aroused. Brandt now thinks the best time and place for a meeting would be during the NAC meeting in December, perhaps at the regular Four-Power dinner preceding the main meeting. In the meantime, the respective experts in each country can be looking into the problem further. As regards substance, Brandt “does not know whether this is just the right time for a move on the German question and European security.” It might be wise, however, to have some proposals ready when such a time comes. It would be good for the Soviets to know that the three Western Powers are thinking about the problem. In the meantime the Germans will continue probing the East Germans to see if there is any opportunity for progress. In response to my query, Brandt said that no top-level German consideration had yet been given to the possibility for a meeting between the Chancellor and GDR MinPres Stoph. In Brandt’s view the Soviets would probably not be willing at this time to help create a “Four-Power umbrella” for discussions between the East and West Germans. His own concept of that might be put forward by the Western Allies is a “small package” at best, nothing like the “large packages” involving German reunification which have been put forward in the past. If, for example, a proposal could be made for the withdrawal of 50,000 Soviet troops—and accepted—it would at least help provide us additional warning time in the event of a crisis. Brandt emphasized that he did not believe we should aim at something that would engender a lot of publicity. 2. Franco-German study of European defense in the 70’s. Brandt’s description of German thinking on how to proceed with the proposed Franco-German study corresponded to that of Carstens in my discussion with him on Sept 1 (see Embtel 2404).Dated September 2. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6–12 US) The French had proposed at one time that both sides appoint high-level military personage to head their respective missions, suggesting for their part Gen de Brebisson. This created a problem for the Germans since they had no one comparable. Present German thinking is that there should be one group on each side headed by a political representative—in their case a FonOff man. He did not indicate whom he had in mind. He has recently heard that the French have changed their view and are now preparing to send someone from the Quai d'Orsay. I asked Brandt about the significance of the memorandum “Concepts of a Future European Security Agreement” prepared by the French unofficial Center for Strategic Studies, which had been released by the German Federal press agency (Bonn A–296).Dated August 28. (Ibid., DEF 1 EUR) He replied that he was aware that the document had been widely distributed; however, he disclaimed that the Germans would accept its premises as a basis for the study. 3. NPT. I asked Brandt his views with respect to the prospects for an NPT. What was the status of their proposal that they become permanent members of the IAEA board? Brandt said that this was not yet clear; however, this was only one possible solution to the problem of mandatory acceptance of amendments under NPT. Since several other nations have indicated unwillingness to accept such a provision, the pressure seems to be off the Germans on this point. He understood that it would take some time before it could be determined whether or not an NPT is possible. In the meantime Germany would be happy to meet with EURATOM countries on the NPT, assuming France will join. He did not know what the French attitude was; however, he would expect that they would prefer to wait until after it had been determined whether or not the treaty would be signed. In the meantime, the initiative in the matter lay with the Belgians. 4. Letter from Mayor Albertz. I referred to the letter dated August 24 from Mayor Albertz of Berlin,Not found. advising of the creation of a viability commission for Berlin on which the Berlin representative would be Ber-thold Beitz—and requesting Allied participation. I referred Brandt to our previous conversation on this subject (Embtel 15393).Dated June 29. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 GER) Although we did not have a final US Govt or Allied position, my own thinking was still as we had discussed at that time. This should be a Berlin responsibility, to which we and the other Allies would perhaps be willing to lend experts and provide liaison officers. We would also be willing to discuss the work of the commission as it progressed, and receive its final recommendations. I did not believe, however, that we should accept formal representation on the commission. Brandt agreed that this was his concept. I emphasized the potentially serious damage to Berlin’s reputation—even its economy—which could result from the present student unrest. So far, however, it had not reached such proportions as to require the intervention of the Allies. It was a problem that could best be resolved by the city itself. 8. Bundesrat Presidency. I said that I was looking forward to a new relationship with the Governing Mayor in his capacity, beginning in November, as President of the Bundesrat (Bonn 2401).Dated September 1. (Ibid., POL 15–2 GER) Without specifically mentioning Berlin voting rights, I said that we were sure he would keep the distinctions in his function as Governing Mayor and as Bundesrat President fully in mind. McGhee 231. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Moscow, London, and Paris. Bonn, September 22, 1967, 1220Z. 3177. NATUS. Pass to White House. Subj: Meeting with Kiesinger. Following the briefing of Chancellor Kiesinger yesterday morning [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] on ChiCom nuclear capability, which is being reported separately,Telegram 3237 from Bonn, September 22. (Ibid., DEF 12–1 CHICOM) the Chancellor took me aside for a talk. We were alone. 1. German-US relations—I went over with the Chancellor my own concept of the current state of German-American relations as I had reported to the Dept in Embtel 2654. Document 229. In doing so I paid particular tribute to his personal success in Washington and the high degree of rapport he had reached with the President. We should take advantage of the present state of calm and stability in our relations to go forward with joint endeavors. If any question should ever arise which he felt might be a potential source of discord between us, I hoped he would call it to my attention or write a letter to the President. I mentioned the question of our ABM deployment (referring to Sec McNamara’s speech of Sept 18For text, see Public Statements of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, 1967, vol. VII, pp. 2545–2570. which I had sent him), NPT and troop levels—as being issues which could, but I hoped would not, result in differences between us. 2. ABM, NPT, force levels—The Chancellor expressed similar satisfaction with the Washington meeting. He was writing a letter to the President bringing him up to date on events which have transpired in the meantime.The next letter from Kiesinger to Johnson, December 8, 1967, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspondence, Germany. He was not concerned about our limited ABM deployment. (At the earlier meeting he had asked about the probable effect of our ABM deployment on the Japanese willingness to sign an NPT—and whether the ABM might not some day be accepted as a defensive weapon and excluded from treaty control.) His principal concern about the NPT was to avoid giving the Sovs a basis for future political pressure or blackmail against Germany. If a limited duration could be agreed upon for the treaty, and he had gathered from what he had been told in Washington that this was not beyond the realm of possibility, it would be most helpful. He did not refer to the current German objections to the Sov draft Article III. As far as force levels are concerned, he could assure me that any reductions would be less than the 19,000 maximum figure he had mentioned in Washington. In fact, it might not be necessary to announce any reductions at all. He expressed bitterness over DefMin Schroeder’s stubbornness in injecting a possible 60,000 man reduction into the public debate on this issue. I emphasized the importance, from the standpoint of the American reaction, to the form of the announcement. We hoped there would be no reduction. If there is, we hope it will not be necessary to announce specific quantitative reductions which are only contemplated several years hence. 3. Initiatives to the East—I asked the Chancellor what significance he attached to the recent proposal made by FonMin Brandt to Sov Amb Tsarapkin (Embtels 2681, 2737, 2964).All three telegrams reported details of the Brandt-Tsarapkin initiative. Telegram 2681 from Bonn, September 11, is in Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–USSR. Telegram 2737 from Bonn, September 12, is ibid., POL GER W–USSR, and telegram 2964 from Bonn, September 18 is ibid., POL 38–6. The Chancellor displayed a feeling of impatience with the whole affair—saying that the proposal was of no consequence. (We have learned that he was not informed in advance.) Brandt had merely advised Tsarapkin of some of the points made in the German Govt’s policy statement. In his own discussion with Tsarapkin, Tsarapkin had made no reference to the proposal. He had merely gone over the usual three Sov conditions for improved relations with the East and asked the Chancellor whether Germany could accept the bloc security proposals made at Karlsbad. In the Chancellor’s view the Sovs are determined to maintain the status quo and have no desire for improving their relations with Germany—unless the FRG would agree to accept the status quo. This is impossible. Any improvement in German-Russian relations is a very long-range affair. He is worried about excessive hopes that have been aroused by people who have spoken publicly “out of hope rather than fact” (obviously referring to Amb-at-Large Bahr whose unauthorized statements have evoked unauthorized widespread expectations from Brandt’s proposal to Tsarapkin). The possibility of Germany becoming an ally of the Sov Union does not exist. There is too deep a background of distrust. In the Chancellor’s view nothing useful could now be derived from a European security conference or an initiative on the German/European security question on the part of the West. In response to my query, he said that he did not think a visit by FonMin Brandt to Moscow was likely, nor did he think anything useful could come from such a visit. In fact, the word that he had gotten indirectly from Sov officials was that they would only be interested in seeing him. In answer to my query he made clear that there had been no official suggestion of this nature coming from the Sov side, moreover, he did not think that any good could come from such a visit in view of the present Sov attitude. 4. Eastern policy—In the Chancellor’s view his govt now has a well-balanced Eastern policy, which lies between the extremes as represented in the FonOff by Bahr-Lahr, i.e., the conservative State Sec for Econ Affairs Lahr and the liberal Amb Bahr. It is a position that he can hold with the rank and file of his party. He saw no advantage in Germany’s giving up anything on the Oder-Neisse at this time merely to assuage the Poles. It would only result in a stabilization of the status quo. In response to my query as to the likely effect of German concessions on Polish dependence on the USSR, he replied that it was not a question of what the Polish people wanted but the position of the Polish regime—who presumably had no desire for decreased dependence. In the Chancellor’s view the present German task is a long-range effort requiring great patience to establish confidence on the part of the East Europeans, as they have attempted to do with their Western Allies. Sooner or later the East Europeans, who would like to have close ties with the West Germans particularly for economic reasons, will be willing to take steps in this direction despite the position of Ulbricht—who is not popular with the Eastern European leaders. 5. Stoph letter—I asked the Chancellor what he made of the last Stoph letter. Would it lead anywhere? Would he be willing to meet Stoph under suitable conditions? The Chancellor replied that the Stoph letter, in his judgment, was calculated to put an end to the discussion of meetings and improvement of relations between East and West Germany. He would however, make some sort of response. Had Stoph been clever he would have proposed a meeting with the Chancellor without conditions. Although the Chancellor’s counter-proposal would probably have been to demand an agenda, it is quite possible that a meeting could have been arranged. All Stoph had to do then would have been to meet, demand recognition of East Germany and—when this was not accepted—go back and make political advantage out of the fact of the meeting itself. McGhee 232. Letter From the Ambassador to Germany (McGhee) to Secretary of State Rusk Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential. Bonn, October 12, 1967. Dear Mr. Secretary: I wish to bring to your attention a study prepared by the Embassy on the subject, “To What Extent Should We Be Concerned about German Dealings with The East?”The paper was transmitted in airgram A–459 from Bonn, October 12. (Ibid.) As is pointed out in the airgram, the United States Government has generally endorsed German initiatives in this field and has so far attempted to set no limits on them, in regard to either procedure or substance. At some point, however, there is a possibility of misunderstandings arising if the Germans, in pursuing contacts with the East, were to enter into areas of discussion—or agreement—which affect US and NATO interests. It would therefore seem to be prudent to attempt to define those areas where we would make it clear that we expect advance consultation and coordination. You may recall that I touched on this matter briefly in an earlier telegram (Bonn 2654). Document 229. To summarize our conclusions, we find no presently foreseeable difficulties in regard to the FRG’s pursuit of expanded or improved bilateral relations either with East Germany, the other small countries of Eastern Europe or with the USSR. These activities, as a rule, do not appear directly to affect US or Western interests. Indeed, they are fully consonant with and should serve to support our own objectives. The existing consultative procedures are believed to be adequate. In regard to multilateral affairs, however, it is believed that there lie potential misunderstandings. This is particularly true of European security arrangements, in which the Federal Government under Kiesinger and Brandt has shown a particular interest. The various proposals in this field generally affect US interests—as well as those of NATO as a whole. As a rule, our views coincide with the current German attitudes. However, at some future date, the Germans might feel compelled to push ahead faster than the circumstances call for—on such proposals as a mutual reduction of foreign troops in Germany, which we both endorse in principle, or to consider communist proposals such as the Rapacki Plan, which under foreseeable circumstances would be disadvantageous to the West. On appropriate occasions, we should make our views on these problems clear to the Germans in order to avoid pitfalls of misunderstanding. I am sending copies of the enclosed airgram to the Under Secretary, John Leddy, Foy Kohler, Tommy Thompson, and Harlan Cleveland. I assume that John Leddy will coordinate the Department’s comments, which we would be very interested in receiving. On the basis of this reaction we will prepare a recommended plan of action.In an October 27 reply to McGhee, Under Secretary of State Katzenbach stated agreement with the points made in the letter and added: “It is terribly important, however, that when we talk with the Germans about limitations on their freedom of action we do it without leaving the impression that we stand in the way of progress toward reunification.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US) With all good wishes. Sincerely yours, George C. McGhee 233. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 14. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Bonn, October 19, 1967, 1320Z. 4358. Subj: Soviet memorandum on European security. Ref: Bonn 4342.Telegram 4342, October 18, forwarded a translation of the text of an October 12 Soviet memorandum handed by Tsarapkin to Brandt. For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944 -1985, pp. 964–966. 1. The Soviet memorandum, while businesslike and free from polemics, is rigid in substance. 2. It is not surprising that the Soviets selected from the various topics suggested by the Germans for discussion the proposal for an exchange of non-use-of-force declarations, for they had been given an opening to exploit. This proposal dates back to the FRG’s peace note of March 25, 1966.See ibid., pp. 914–917. However, the Kiesinger government added an attractive nuance to the original proposal by indicating, in various pronouncements including the original government declaration of December 13, that the GDR could in some way be included under the mantle of the exchange of non-force declarations. 3. By offering this come-on, the Germans did not have in mind exchanging declarations with the GDR, but rather some formula whereby the FRG’s pledges of non-use of force would apply to its border with the GDR. However, the Soviets have come back with the rigid condition that “the Soviet Union can give its consent to negotiations about the exchange of statements renouncing the use of force only if the Federal Republic, for its part, expresses its readiness to exchange respective declarations with the German Democratic Republic …” 4. The Germans will not want to accept this condition, and so the Soviet-German exchanges on this proposal do not seem likely to lead anywhere, unless the Soviets were unexpectedly to lower their demands. However, the Germans will probably want to respond with a counter-offer in order to further probe Soviet intentions and to give the impression of some motion in German-Soviet relations. 5. An interesting sidelight of the Soviet memorandum is the fact that it ignored completely the German offer to discuss mutual force reductions. This omission would seem to confirm the Department’s judgment (State 52708)Dated October 2. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 NATO) that the Soviets are not interested in such an arrangement under present world conditions. However, according to a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] report [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], Tsarapkin mentioned the possibility of preparatory talks on this subject. The same report also indicates that Brandt and Tsarapkin had a more extensive exchange of views than was suggested by Sahm. The report—which we commend to the Department’s attention—[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] may not be accurate in all its details. McGhee 234. Special Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency Washington, October 20, 1967. SC No. 00792/67B [Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 14. Secret. Extract—2 pages of source text not declassified.] 235. Memorandum From Edward Fried of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow)Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 14. No classification marking. Drafted by Richard Ullman. Washington, November 3, 1967. SUBJECT Germany and the NPT From Embassy Bonn’s reports, and from the observations of Al Puhan, who has just returned from three weeks in the FRG, it is possible to state: 1. The NPT is not now an issue with much salience for German public opinion. The problem is too complicated to capture popular attention, and no politician has yet thought it worth his while to “simplify” it in a manner that would lend it salience. Puhan compares it with the MLF: few Germans really roused themselves to much concern about the MLF. In his travels about the country he noted that even people with considerable political sophistication did not often place the NPT high on their list of concerns. 2. Nevertheless, among the 50 or 60 top politicians and officials, Puhan says, there is not one who supports the NPT. Attitudes range from total hostility, represented by people like Stoltenberg, Strauss, and the Springer press, to distaste but grudging acceptance, represented by Kiesinger and now by Brandt. There is a general feeling that we have knowingly misled them by retreating from the position which we worked out in the NAC. 3. The principal source of dissatisfaction is no specific article, but rather the view, propagated by Strauss and many others, that the NPT symbolizes a U.S.-Soviet “deal” made behind Germany’s back and at her expense. Puhan noted that even left-wing student leaders with whom he talked, essentially pacifists and nuclear-disarmers, strongly objected to the NPT as a U.S.-Soviet “diktat.” 4. Article IIIThis article of the draft treaty dealt with safeguards. has become an issue in part by default: because objection to the treaty in principle would be internationally awkward, German objections have focussed on Article III. Puhan attributes this in large degree to Schnippenkoetter himself, who is remarkably influential in shaping German attitudes at the highest levels on this issue. 5. The greatest danger we face is that a politician such as Strauss will choose to blow the NPT up into an explosive national issue, as the Springer press has been trying without much success to do. It is conceivable that Strauss could use opposition to the NPT as a means of splitting the CSU off from the CDU, and in so doing provide a much more “respectable” focus towards which nationalist Germans could rally. 6. The Germans do not place much faith in the tactic of threatening not to ratify the NPT as a means of assuring a satisfactory agreement between Euratom and the IAEA. They fear, with some reason, that the other four non-nuclear-weapon members of Euratom would not stand by them, leaving them isolated. Puhan believes that the chances of German ratification, even with a draft acceptable to them, are not much better than even. 7. We gave the Russians a revision of their draft Article III yesterday. It picks up some key language from the “illustrative” draft the Germans presented in the NAC. It is important, now, that our people at Geneva should dig in their heels on this version, and not give way to what will surely be a good deal of Soviet pressure. We should also put a lot of emphasis now on close and high-level consultation with the Germans. Ed 236. Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning CouncilSource: Department of State, Policy Planning Council Files: Lot 71 D 273, Division of Europe and Germany. Secret. Drafted by Brzezinski. A note on the source text reads: “This paper was prepared by a member of the Policy Planning Council as background for discussion of the German problem. It was discussed within the Council and in the Interagency Planning Group. It is now being distributed to a limited number of interested officials in Washington and in several embassies abroad.” Washington, November 6, 1967. THE DIVISION OF GERMANY This memorandum tries to develop a broad perspective on the problem posed by the division of Germany. It does not prescribe specific policies but does draw some general longer-term guidelines. The following factors make timely another look at the division of Germany: a) significant changes are occurring in the German outlook; this includes the Coalition’s new Eastern policy, some disillusionment with the US and the Atlantic Alliance, and growing ambivalence about de Gaulle’s concepts; b) de Gaulle’s policy—including the growing speculation that he may leave NATO—is pushing the Germans towards a re-examination of the relationship between Western unity and their national position; c) the Soviet Union is currently pursuing a policy designed to isolate Bonn; however, this could be a preliminary to an eventual initiative designed to exploit German frustrations by direct Moscow-Bonn approaches. 1. Bonn’s New German Policy in Historical Perspective FRG policy on the German question is, for the first time, in a state of flux. The possible implications of this condition emerge more clearly when viewed in a historical perspective. Since 1250, except for a few years under Hitler, all Germans have never lived together in one unified state. On the contrary, they have always been divided by religion, traditions, and outlooks. Bismarck’s Reich, a relatively recent historical phenomenon, became so powerful and expansionist that international politics until 1945 were largely dominated by its neighbors' struggles to prevent Germany from dominating Europe, if not the world. Twice this proved possible only through the involvement of non-European powers, the United States and (in World War II) the Soviet Union. 1919 brought amputation from Germany of what is now Central Poland. Moreover, Germany was forbidden the annexation of Austria and the Sudetenland (i.e., the unity of all Germans). 1945 brought the loss of what is now Western Poland and (after 1947) the present division of the remaining German-settled territory. In short, all-German unity was brief, and unacceptable to its neighbors. Moscow never intended, at least after 1955, to permit the unification of Germany under any but its own terms—if then. Rather, Soviet policy has remained determined to consolidate and perpetuate an East German state under Communist rule and Soviet hegemony. German hopes die slowly; but the 1961 Berlin Wall and President Johnson’s speech of October 7, 1966, have helped to convince West Germans that reunification in the foreseeable future is just not in the cards. While it is difficult to gauge the depth of German national sentiment, the experience of having had a national state, as well as the obvious fact that most other nations live in nation-states, makes the Germans feel that their partition is unjust and should be undone. Their current pessimism about reunification does not mean acceptance of permanent division; rather, it focuses national attention on what seems to be more realizable, given present international realities: improving the lot of their countrymen in the East. The Kiesinger-Wehner Grand Coalition translated this changed mood into the new official West German policy of active engagement toward the East, including East Germany. The underlying factors which led to this adjustment have been: (1) Rising German nationalism: the desire to translate rising German economic and financial power into a more independent foreign policy; (2) German youth’s lack of guilt for Nazi Germany; (3) Germans' disillusionment with the standstill on European unity, and their consequent search for other inspiring goals; (4) their belief, arising from the post-Cuba US–USSR détente and rising differentiation in Eastern Europe, that now something could also be accomplished on the German question; and, above all, (5) their frustration with the post-Berlin Wall cut-back in contacts with East Germany and from the lack of liberalization there, in the context of growing disillusionment with the likelihood of reunification; (6) the increasing feeling that East Germany, with the passage of time, is becoming more viable. Thus greater West German pressure for movement on the German question has confronted Soviet determination to be rigid. The result has been the deflection of the rising West German pressures for reunification toward a different strategy: a policy of active engagement with the East European states, the Soviet Union, and East Germany itself. This policy seeks the only goal now viewed by most West Germans as a realistic one for the near future: humanization of conditions in East Germany and gradual re-establishment of West German contacts with it. Not that most West Germans have given up reunification as the eventual goal. Many Germans continue to hope that at some unforseen point the Soviet Union may find itself in disarray or unable to control developments in Eastern Europe. At that stage, the two Germanys could come together through a fait accompli, and this is why keeping German national sentiment alive is so vital. But this hope apart, most Germans have, reluctantly, recognized that reunification is not an attainable goal in the near future. 2. Alternative Futures The change in the German attitude is a realistic one. German reunification, in the sense of recreating a Bismarckian Reich, is not in the cards. It is not likely to be achieved either through Western unity or through dissolution of alliances. In the rather unlikely event that it could be achieved through the latter method, it would not be in the West’s interest. a. Reunification Through Western Unity This involves essentially two variants: i) Reunification Through Cold War The first—the cold war approach—requires relatively little discussion. To the extent that anyone ever seriously believed that Germany could be reunited in the context of a hostile East-West confrontation, the events of the last fifteen years have clearly proven this approach to be unrealistic. German reunification is no closer—indeed, it is even less likely—today than it was when Stalin died or when NATO decided to permit West Germany’s rearmament. No Western government today subscribes to the notion that there can be no détente unless there is first progress on the question of German reunification—not even the Government of FRG. Unless suddenly and unexpectedly the Soviet Union collapses, this approach is dead. ii) Reunification Through Western Integration This brings us to an alternative approach, involving the absorption of East as well as West Germany into, and their containment by, an integrated Western European community. Since Moscow would hardly ever accept both a continuation of the present bilateral political and defense arrangements between Bonn and Washington and absorption of East Germany into an integrated Western European community with close defense ties to the US, and since, conversely, most of Western Europe, including West Germany, will probably increasingly wish to adopt a less dependent stance vis-à-vis the United States, it is possible that a Western Europe so integrated, and visibly less dependent on us, would satisfy European (including German) and Soviet security needs. This could be so, even though the Soviet Union has strongly opposed Germany’s integration into Western Europe and would still like to minimize it. There can be little doubt that an integrated Western Europe is bound to cause an important evolution in Communist perspectives. Eastern European trade with West Europe is the primary source of hard currency for Communist economies, and thus the development of established, normal commercial relations with a prosperous European Economic Community will become an increasingly important factor in the further economic development of the Communist states. In time, such a changed economic perspective could lead to a changed perspective in politics. Eventually, the Communist elites may come to see an integrated Western Europe, one which absorbs German energies and ambitions, as something in their interest as well. The development of greater appreciation in the East for the common European stake in West European integration would be furthered if such a more integrated West were consciously to strive, bilaterally and multilaterally, to develop cooperative East-West relationships. Participation of the Communist states especially in a wider multilateral framework of East-West cooperation, pointing towards the economic reunification of Europe, would be bound to have a Europeanizing impact on the Communist elites themselves. It would help to develop in the East a European-minded technical and economic elite, and eventually to encourage also the appearance of a more broadminded, less parochial attitude within the political elite itself. Moreover, since multilateral cooperation is incompatible with a high degree of internal state-controlled and centralized planning, pressures for domestic liberalization would be intensified. Thus greater involvement of the East European states in institutional and multilateral forms of cooperation with an integrated Western community would help the internal processes of evolution in the East, all of which cumulatively would promote the emergence of a new political attitude. Eventually, the Communist elites could become less inclined to see their security as dependent on the maintenance of the present European status quo. With the political evolution slowly reducing the doctrinal Communist stake in a Communist East Germany, the division of Europe could become more susceptible to peaceful change. But even then, it is most unlikely that the Communist side could consent to East Germany joining a politically, economically and militarily integrated Western Europe with close Atlantic ties. The Soviet Union could have no conceivable reason for permitting East Germany simply to slide over into a Western community that—from its point of view—could become easily dominated by a powerful and rearmed West Germany. In this connection, one should not underestimate the depth of popular fears in Eastern Europe and Russia of West German access to nuclear weapons. Moreover, the absorption of Eastern Germany would mean a fundamental shift in the balance of power, not to speak of the loss of Soviet control over the industrial resources of East Germany, very important to the economic development of the Soviet Union. Even with ideological erosion, the absorption of East Germany by the West would be tantamount to a major ideological setback for Communism. b. Dissolution of Alliances German reunification is also not likely through a dissolution of alliances, although a plausible case can be made that the Soviet Union would be more likely to countenance the reunification of a neutral Germany, either detached from the West or in the setting of an East-West dissolution of alliances. Essentially two variants can be envisaged: i) Reunification Through Dissolution of Alliances This approach—the dissolution of alliances school of thought—is quite popular today. It is easy to see why. Many are tired with the cold war. NATO appears old-fashioned—primarily an agency of the cold war. There is a facile simple-minded attraction to the Ceausescu-de Gaulle argument: abolish the cold war by abolishing the blocs, or vice versa. Yet this argument is not only deceptively attractive; it is dangerously wrong. A politically fragmented Western Europe would be a Europe incapable of steering in a common direction on behalf of commonly shared goals. Détente for the sake of détente could be the only common denominator of a policy that would be tantamount to Western rivalry in seeking to improve relations and to develop advantageous trade with the East. Accordingly, it is probably true that a loosely organized Europe, primarily as a free trade area, lacking an integrated political and defense structure, not tied closely to the United States, could more easily reach a détente with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. For the East, accommodation with such a Europe would not require any substantial ideological evolution, especially since no special concessions or adjustments in the Eastern position would be required. The Communist elites, not fearing such a Europe, would probably be quite responsive to Western overtures because they could thus have their cake and eat it too: they could savor the tangible benefits of closer economic contacts with the West without any substantial change in the over-all political situation, including that of Germany. In this connection, it is important to bear in mind that the present Communist elites, especially the East European ones, are still in the early stages of post-peasant political awakening. By and large, their political attitudes are a curious mixture of some Communist formulae and of rather intense nationalism. Their general outlook is basically parochial and conservative. A détente that perpetuates their domestic dictatorships and leaves the European political map unchanged would thus be for them the ideal solution. Whether a détente of this kind would be stable is another matter. There are strong reasons for skepticism. It would mean a re-creation of a Europe based on the old principle of state supremacy, with a major European nation, the German one, probably condemned to indefinite division. In those circumstances frustration in West Germany would almost certainly ensue. Having attained neither any major progress toward national unity nor fulfillment in a larger European community, the Germans could be expected to seek accommodation with the Soviet Union. Irrespective of original Soviet motives—even if it is assumed that Moscow was sincerely seeking a stable détente in Europe—the temptation to exploit German frustrations could well become too strong for Moscow to resist. Finally, if Germany was reunited in the setting of a less united Europe—assuming Moscow agreed to it—the result would be to re-create many of the instabilities that have plagued the European order since 1870. That, given present trends, the dissolution of alliances could be the most likely sequence of events does not obviate the point that a stable solution for the German problem is not to be found in the re-creation of the pre World War II European system of nation-states. It is difficult to conceive reasons how this could be in the interest of the West. ii) Reunification Through a Soviet-German Deal A variant of this approach involves the reunification of Germany through a Soviet-German deal. Such a deal would require a standstill in European integration, very intense German frustration with the country’s division, and a US divorce from Europe. These are all conditions over which some control can be exercised: the West can, if it wishes, move towards greater unity; German frustration can be diminished both by greater involvement in Europe and by some progress in inter-German relations; a US-European divorce is not inevitable. Moreover, the fact that the East Europeans, particularly the Poles and the Czechs, would oppose such a Moscow-Bonn (Berlin) deal, cannot be entirely disregarded. In addition, granting the obvious Soviet interest in disrupting Western unity by such a deal, the Soviet leaders would probably think hard before embarking on a policy that would mean the loss of East Germany in exchange for a neutral Germany in the setting of a suddenly destabilized Europe. The Soviet stake in European stability is not insignificant. This does not mean, however, that the Soviet Union will not hold out the prospect of a deal, in the hope of loosening German ties with the West, but without the intention to consummate the deal itself. Nonetheless, obviously the possibility that Moscow and Bonn could decide some day to strike a deal cannot be excluded altogether. At some point, the Soviet Union could decide—rightly or wrongly—that its interests would be best served by a neutralized Germany, arranged by a bilateral agreement. Some Europeans might also favor that solution. Precisely because that possibility exists, it is important to reiterate that such a sudden and basic reversal in the structure of post World War II European political politics could not help but introduce a new phase of European instability, new international rivalries, new tensions. 3. More Palatable Division It is in the West’s interest that the Germans remain committed to Western unity, even if reunification is not realizable. Hence, if the issue of the division of Germany cannot be solved, it is important to maintain the impression of progress towards a solution of the German problem while at the same time prompting, to the extent possible, an abatement of German interest in the problem of the division of Germany. This points towards a policy that makes progress towards reunification the equivalent of making the division more palatable. This objective is to be sought in the context of broader East-West conciliation. Such reconciliation will not be achieved by a single act of settlement, nor will a resolution of the German problem be an event isolated in time; a gradual process of growing together of the East and the West and of the existing two German entities will be required. This proc-ess will have economic, cultural, political and security aspects. It is likely to involve gradual expansion in all-German contacts, in a setting of related changes in the West, in the East, and in the nature of East-West relations. All these changes have to be viewed in a dynamic perspective; a rigidly divided Germany can only endure in a divided Europe, while ending the division of Europe requires simultaneously a transformation of divided Germany into something less prone to tensions and more acceptable to the Germans. How long the East-West process of reconciliation will take is difficult to predict, and conflicts in the Third World could cause major setbacks in Europe. Moreover, the Soviet and East European Communist leaders are likely to obstruct a real reconciliation, fearing its impact on their domestic position. Nonetheless, the process of change in Europe has been moving considerably more rapidly than anyone would have predicted a decade and a half ago. What follows is a summary of the kind of changes that would have to take place for the process of reconciliation to result in a new relationship between the divided parts of Germany. It is not asserted that these changes will happen; it is asserted that they are desirable, that they are all sufficiently possible to be worth serious attention, and that some of them can be encouraged by the West. a. Related Changes in the West As already noted, West European unity is a factor of stability and contributes to positive evolution in the East. More specifically the following points should be reiterated: (1) An Integrated Context: A more united Western Europe promises to dampen and ultimately submerge German nationalism and reduce the danger that a change in the division of Germany would upset the peace of Europe. Hence it will be important for Western European integration and political unification to move forward, both to enhance the prospects of détente and to discourage the tendency toward fragmentation noted above. (2) UK Entry: UK entry into Europe would help greatly to offset the Eastern fear of Europe’s domination by a unified Germany, a fear which inhibits even modest progress on the German issue. (3) German Nuclear Abnegation: Western European defense and security arrangements—including perhaps a European defense force—should not include West German access to nuclear weapons: Hence any defense community should include a special clause providing for self-imposed German abstinence in the nuclear field, relating that abnegation to progress toward the eventual goal of German reunification (perhaps allowing a lapse in, say, ten years, if no acceptable progress towards humanization of conditions in East Germany and closer East-West ties has been made). Such abnegation is no longer viewed by all Germans as involving discrimination: The SPD is already moving towards such a nuclear abnegation by the FRG; also the cost of deploying Poseidon missiles and ABMs makes it less likely that West Germany or, indeed, Western Europe, will want to deploy credible national or multinational nuclear forces. In addition, of course, the UK and France remain adamantly opposed to German access to nuclear weapons. (4) Somewhat Looser Atlantic Ties: Declining US military presence in Western Europe, matching both greater West European efforts to assure their security and gradual reduction in Soviet presence in Central Europe, would be in keeping with the trend away from the post-1945 two blocs-confrontation, provided that the general US-Soviet strategic balance does not become unfavorable to the US. b. Related Changes in the East (1) Ideological Evolution: The erosion of the more militant aspects of Marxism-Leninism would permit the Communist leaders to view greater unity in the West not as a threat to themselves but as a logical and even positive development, inherent in modern economic and social organization. The Sino-Soviet dispute and domestic pressures in the Soviet Union both conspire to bring on such a changed perspective, although it will not happen rapidly. (2) Political Moderation: Although for a long time to come the Soviet Union and most of the East European states will remain single-party dictatorships, their systems could gradually become more tolerant of political and intellectual dissent, thereby also weakening the role of ideology. Yugoslavia is a pioneer in this respect. Czechoslovakia may be the next to follow. The evolution of single-party dictatorships in Mexico and Spain—mutatis mutandis—may serve as an example. (3) Internal Economic Reforms: Progressive decentralization of the Communist economies would facilitate international economic cooperation, hitherto handicapped by centralized national planning. It would also facilitate the emergence of a more independent, technologically oriented economic elite, likely to have a strong interest in economic cooperation with Western Europe and the United States. This would be the more true since the technological gap between the West and the East may be expected to widen rather than narrow. (4) Regional Economic Cooperation: CEMA would abandon its efforts at economic integration of Eastern Europe and even Mongolia with the Soviet Union. Rather, it would concentrate on the promotion of trade and exchange of technological know-how. Clearing and convertibility would be arranged. More important would be the proliferation of more specialized subregional arrangements among the East European states, such as Intermetal. Closer industrial and energy cooperation is to be expected among East Germany, Poland, and Czechoslovakia, thereby stimulating greater recognition of the merits of regional cooperation. (5) Alliance: The Warsaw Pact would not be formally disbanded, but Soviet combat troops would be withdrawn from Poland and Hungary. The Alliance would serve as a symbol of political interdependence: for the Soviet Union as a guarantee of minimal political loyalty, for the East European Communist elites as a safeguard against the eruption of domestic pressures into revolution and, in the case of Poland and Czechoslovakia, as an assurance of Soviet support for their territorial integrity. Otherwise, the East European regimes would be quite independent, and their own estimate of their interest would be determining in their foreign relations—i.e., they would move toward the present foreign policy of Romania. c. East-West Relations The process of growing together in part will be a spontaneous one: in part, it will have to be stimulated by deliberate initiatives designed to undo gradually the partition of Europe. It is to be expected that the Soviet Union will try to exploit these to its ends. Nonetheless, the broad trend, it may be anticipated, favors an improvement in East-West relations. Extensive development of East-West bilateral ties began in the late fifties and early sixties. It is to be expected that during the next generation there might be an expansion not only in these bilateral relationships but a significant development in East-West multilateral economic cooperation. During this period the ECE might become more active in developing East-West economic and technical cooperation. OECD might also become involved in assisting East-West scientific and technological collaboration. Some kind of special East-West economic assembly, perhaps sponsored by OECD, ECE and CEMA, or the Council of Europe, eventually could be created. It would foster joint East-West ventures and communications, technological cooperation, etc. It could make special studies of the difficult problem of arranging multilateral cooperation between free market and state-controlled economies. Surplus labor force might be permitted to flow Westward from the East, with considerable social-cultural impact on its return home. (This is already the case with Yugoslavia.) Most of the East European states and the Soviet Union would become associated with GATT and IMF, in addition to perhaps negotiating special agreements with EEC. (Yugoslavia may well become an associate member of the EEC within the next five to ten years.) The next decade might see some movement towards the creation of an East-West Political Assembly, for the purpose of discussing directly, and on a continuing basis, East-West issues. It could also become a forum for the development of a common US, European and Soviet attitude towards the problems of the Third World. Even more rapid might be the gradual involvement of the Communist states in the specialized functions of the Council of Europe. Although the security issue remains the hardest nut to crack, gradual progress in this field would probably also develop. Given sufficient Western initiative, a European Security Commission based on the two alliances (hence including both the US and the Soviet Union) might be established, for the purpose of monitoring troop movements in Central Europe and for making periodic inspections of troop postures. Reciprocal troop withdrawals from Germany might take place even earlier, as well as some discussions concerning the definition of mutually acceptable limits on military development in Central Europe, compatible with German non-nuclear defense commitments to Western Europe or NATO. d. Closer Relations Between the Two German Entities The basic ingredients of a new relationship between the two Germanys can be only sketched out in a tentative way: (1) Its principal feature would be the joint administration of utilities and services such as waterways, railroads, electric grids, posts, telegraph, etc. From such a base economic and technical cooperation might gradually spread to other economic sectors, with both German entities surrendering some of their economic sovereignty to each other. Starting as literally joint bodies, representing the two sides, mixed administrative commissions could be transformed gradually into more independent all-German regulatory agencies. (2) Eventually, East Germany might acquire association status with EEC, especially if internal economic reforms bring it to at least the stage already reached by Yugoslavia. At the same time, since withdrawal of the GDR from CEMA would make a shambles out of Eastern European cooperation, continued GDR participation in some forms of Eastern European economic cooperation and CEMA would be expected. For example, there would be no inherent incompatibility between a GDR relationship with the EEC, and GDR participation in Intermetal. This is shown by current Yugoslav efforts to develop a working relationship both with the EEC and CEMA. Moreover, Austria at some point may also have such multiple links. (3) An internationally more secure East German Government would be more likely to tolerate a wider margin of internal freedom, thereby alleviating the lot of the East German population and eliminating one of West German objections to two states. Moreover, the Soviet Union, having thus made progress toward one of its major European objectives, the stabilization of East Germany, would be more inclined to put pressure on East Berlin for liberalization, inter alia to bring East Germany more in line with the (by then) more liberalized East European states. (4) The intractable problem of Berlin and the Wall would be perhaps the most difficult and sensitive aspect of the whole problem. Either the Wall would have to stay until improved East German economic conditions make flight unattractive, or the FRG would have to agree to regulate the entry and residence of persons from the GDR in a manner acceptable to the latter. Hence this might have to involve a mutually regulated though more liberal flow of people between both parts of Germany, especially in view of closer economic ties. (5) Formal commitment by both FRG and GDR that a reunified Germany will not seek to alter existing external German frontiers would be especially important in overcoming Polish and Czechoslovak fears of any move towards closer all-German ties. We should recognize that both sides would participate in the proc-ess with conflicting objectives: FRG hoping to erode the division and GDR to perpetuate it. Whether the process of change would lead to confederation and later go beyond it is dependent on unpredictable changes in the external environment and in the German psyche. 4. US Policy Implications Taking our lead from West German policy on the German issue, the United States should place increasing stress on the process of German reassociation, in the context of broader East-West peaceful engagement. This would be in keeping with the increasingly widespread German feeling that closer East-West German ties are a necessary stage on the way towards self-determination. A greater sense of shared allied purpose would thus be stimulated. At the same time, East German, or Soviet obstructions to the development of such closer ties would have the effect of reducing the effectiveness of Communist efforts to portray both the USA and the FRG as the principal obstacles to a European “détente”. The overall effect would be to re-emphasize to the European public an important political point: for the East, an improvement in East-West relations is merely a device for freezing the status quo, in spite of all its inadequacies; for the West, it is a means for creating gradually and peacefully a more stable and secure order, acceptable to both West and East Europeans. 237. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential. Drafted by Johnpoll; cleared by Katzenbach, Kohler, Leddy, and Stoessel; and approved by Rusk. Also sent to USNATO for Ambassador Cleveland and to Moscow for Ambassador Thompson. Washington, November 7, 1967, 1355Z. 65712. From Secretary for Ambassador McGhee. Ref: Your Airgram A–459.See footnote 2, Document 232. Subj: German Relations with Eastern Europe. 1. I have read with great interest your airgram and accompanying letter. Senior officers of the Dept have studied both papers and agree with me that they are excellent and timely. We feel that with a few relatively minor changes the airgram would serve admirably as a basis on which you could recommend a plan of action as suggested in your letter. 2. Re question of FRG relations with GDR (Section 2A, A–459) not clear to me precisely what you mean by de facto recognition of GDR, or how this would differ from present situation in which FRG acknowledges existence of an authority in East Germany and has some quasi-official relations with it. Would de facto recognition as you visualize it affect Allied access to Berlin? Could we continue to exclude East German regime from any participation in these arrangements? 3. I agree entirely with your views on bilateral FRG-EE exchanges of declarations on non-use of force. However, our view as to utility of Soviet proposal for a NATO-Warsaw Pact non-aggression treaty would be governed by many other factors in addition to the FRG view; e.g., wisdom of equating the two organizations, degree of progress toward European political integration, general state of East-West relations, our reading of trends in Soviet international policy. 4. Would be difficult to maintain U.S. troops in Germany if FRG should wish us to withdraw them. We would also, of course, want to avoid giving the Germans any justification for claiming we were responsible for lack of progress toward reunification. I hope we could at right time make point to FRG leaders that FRG cannot commit U.S. in advance to any bilateral FRG-Soviet understanding on withdrawal of foreign troops; but that such proposals, whatever their origin, would be appropriate subjects for close bilateral FRG-U.S. as well as NATO consultations. Subject of German neutralization is particularly difficult. I wonder whether we can assume its acceptability to us without knowing the situation in which it might arise as a serious proposal. 5. I share your view that we will have to move with considerable circumspection in discussing with the Germans the limitations we see in their freedom to enter into agreements with the Soviet Union; we would wish to avoid arousing resentment and suspicion. Your views on timing and techniques could of course be incorporated in your recommended plan of action. Rusk 238. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 14. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Repeated to Moscow for Ambassador Thompson. Bonn, November 11, 1967, 1330Z. 5081. Nodis for the Secretary. Subject: German relations with Eastern Europe. 1. I will be guided by your thoughts contained in Dept’s 65712; Document 237. however, I assume that you do not wish to exclude US views on East-West issues as developed in our recent exchanges from the continuing dialogue which I and the Embassy conduct with the German FonOff and high German officials. The basic intention in our original proposal (A–459) was to reassure the FRG, in a low key, that their Eastern approach was within certain limits in harmony with our own—and to give them encouragement for the future. I do not see how such discussions if properly handled could have the opposite effect. That this is currently an active subject in Germany may be seen from Bonn’s 5077,Dated November 12. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 GER W) describing Brandt’s press conference of Nov 10. There will undoubtedly be further discussions between Brandt and Tsarapkin here in Bonn—indeed a reply to Tsarapkin’s démarche on non-force declarations can be expected any day.The German reply was delivered on November 21. For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 966–971. 2. The differences between Brandt and Kiesinger to which you refer hinge, on the surface, on different estimates of prospects for progress in discussions with the Sovs—rather than on the substance of discussions. The basic cause of the differences, however, is believed to be rivalry in the conduct of foreign policy.The Embassy reported on tensions between Brandt and Kiesinger in telegram 5066 from Bonn, November 9. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 GER W) This means, I believe, that we must maintain parallel contact with Kiesinger and give him full advantage of our views. The existence of a rival channel for European security issues between yourself and Brandt through Bowie to which Kiesinger is not a party could, I believe, be misunderstood by Kiesinger. 3. I now have an appointment with Kiesinger for next Tuesday, prior to his departure for a trip to South Asia. It would seem the normal thing for me to discuss East-West issues with him. Indeed, he will unquestionably raise it. There is moreover little in our recommended course of action that I have not discussed with Kiesinger before. I am sure that the French, in particular, discuss such matters freely with the Germans. Our failure to do so will, in my judgment, give the Germans the impression that we have no ideas concerning Eastern policy or that we are disinterested as a result of preoccupation elsewhere. It would also lead to misunderstandings on our side, such as that which arose from the Brandt-Tsarapkin 14 point discussions, which was the principal reason why we raised this issue in the first place. McGhee 239. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL EUR E–GER. Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Paris, London, Moscow, USNATO, Belgrade, and Warsaw. Bonn, November 15, 1967, 1900Z. 5213. Subj: Meeting with Chancellor Kiesinger, East-West relations. 1. The present telegram summarizes the discussion of Germany’s relations with the East which took place during the call I paid on Chancellor Kiesinger today at my request. Other subjects discussed are reported in septels. McGhee reported on their discussion of NPT in telegram 5211 from Bonn, November 15. (Ibid., DEF 18–6) 2. I queried the Chancellor on his press statement made on Nov 3For text, see Meissner, Die deutsche Ostpolitik, pp. 230–231. when he had, after repeating the standard German line that there can be no final agreement on the Oder-Neisse border except through a peace treaty, said: “That does not exclude, for example, that joint discussions of such a solution acceptable to both peoples could be arranged before such a peace treaty.” The Chancellor replied that there was in his view nothing to prevent such discussions, the purpose of which would be “just to build up a little more trust.” He is aware that the Poles do not, at the present time, consider the question a subject for discussion. The Poles are not willing even to accept the German offer for mutual declarations against the use of force. Apparently they feel that this would weaken their case in building Germany up as a threat. In response to my question, he elaborated on what he had in mind in making his statement—that he might tell the Poles that, although a final decision could only be made by a united Germany, “We could imagine, however, a solution along the lines of (blank).” Kiesinger did not appear to be fully informed as to Polish FonMin Rapacki’s reported statement in Luxembourg on Nov 4Not found. to the effect that Poland would be willing to normalize relations with Germany if the Oder-Neisse issue could be settled. After discussion with his aides he did not believe, however, that too much credence could be attached to this report. The fact is, he said, that the Poles do not believe the Germans when they offer assurances. He knows the Poles very well. They are suspicious by nature as a result of their unhappy contacts with the Prussians over the years (which was not the case in their contacts with southern Germans). The Poles tend to react in the light of what they would do if they were in the German position. 3. According to Kiesinger, German East-West efforts must be directed not just to the Communist countries. They must seek to convince the whole world that although they will exercise their rights, they are seeking solutions in a responsible way on the basis of justice for all. In doing so they recognize fully that the first step must be the creation of a détente. Unification cannot be expected to precede détente. In his judgement, they should have moved more quickly in the beginning of his administration to establish relations with Hungary and perhaps other countries before Ulbricht made his counter-attack. In response to my query about the rumors that they might move toward establishing diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia, he replied that the majority of the CDU/CSU is not yet prepared for such a step. He, himself, is not so worried at such an apparent breach of the Hallstein Doctrine, although he admitted that it would be a great defeat if India—for example—should as a result establish relations with East Germany. 4. Kiesinger was pessimistic as to overall prospects for improvement of East-West relations. However, he thought the Germans must continue to try. Many changes will take place within the next 5–10 years which might be favorable to their cause. The Chancellor spoke of his conversation of the evening before with the Hannover industrialist Philipp von Bismarck, himself a refugee from East Germany. Bismarck had advised him that for the first time the refugee groups in Germany are taking Eastern policy seriously—and on a realistic basis. There are those who argue that the govt’s Eastern policy involves risk, Kiesinger continued—that there will be no immediate success and that in the end the people will accuse the govt of having raised “illusions” and having ended up in a “dead end.” He fully supported the policy which he and FonMin Brandt had developed, which was based on the desire to move forward but without expectation of immediate success. This policy, which had the official backing of the CDU/CSU, was not seriously contested within the party (this was confirmed by a group of CDU Parliamentarians at lunch-eon today, as is being reported separately). 5. I advised the Chancellor that we had followed the efforts of his govt in East-West relations closely, and that we had found nothing to take exception to. His policy was consistent with that of our own in attempting to build bridges to the East, although we were in the present circumstances handicapped in our own efforts. The Chancellor commented that he did not think there was much we could do under the circumstances. The Chancellor assured me that Germany would of course not undertake any action with the Sovs which affected the US without first consulting fully with us. I said that we appreciated this and that this was particularly important where US forces were involved such as proposals for mutual force reductions. McGhee 240. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Confidential. Drafted by Hirschfeld; cleared in GER, FBX, and L; and approved by Stoessel. Repeated to Berlin, London, Paris, Moscow, and USNATO. Washington, December 2, 1967, 0020Z. 78192. NATUS. Ref: Bonn’s 5716.Telegram 5716, November 29, made recommendations for dealing with possible French obstructionism. (Ibid.) Subj: Dealing with French Obstructionism on Berlin and All-German Matters. 1. Department agrees with your assessment of French obstructionsim on Berlin and All-German matters. We also agree that we may have to move independently on important cases when we meet French intransigence, to the extent of acquainting FRG Foreign Office with our view. We think that from past experience in such cases we have, at least, demonstrated to the Germans where the obstacle lies. 2. We have some reservations, however, in agreeing with you that this be done by a general review with Duckwitz. There seems to us to be some danger that we might give FRG impression we are seeking to cause difficulties between Bonn and Paris or forcing Germany to choose between friendship with France and friendship with the United States, a danger which you pointed out in your A–553.Airgram A–553, September 3, reported on the high priority Germany gave its relations with France. (Ibid., POL FR–GER W) There would be little likelihood of creating such an impression if we support Germans on specific cases, on an ad hoc basis, in which they are interested and involved. 3. Finally, we think it would be useful for you to review this matter with UK Ambassador, and would of course, be glad to hear your further views. Rusk 241. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,NATO 3 BEL (BR). Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to Bonn, London, Paris, Moscow, and Berlin. Brussels, December 13, 1967, 1630Z. 1020. Secto 024. NATUS. Subject: NATO Ministerial Meeting: Quadripartite dinner. 1. Brandt opened meeting by suggesting discussion of Soviet note to the Four,Dated December 8; for text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 972–977. and of the “inner” German situation (FRG-GDR relations). On the Soviet note Brandt said he was not alarmed since the Soviets often operate at two levels. Thus when they fear attack from inside their own camp they build up a smoke-screen. He believed the note was connected with Gromyko’s recent visit to Warsaw and GDR Foreign Minister Winzer’s visit to Belgrade, Soviets wanted to remove suspicion of Allies as to what was involved in Brandt/Tsarapkin talks. The note was also probably intended to influence attitude within the FRG. 2. For his part, Brandt believed talks with Soviets should continue without publicity to see what they mean. Soviet note should not be left unanswered. The FRG will give Soviets a short reply rejecting allegation against his government, but will also pick up last part where the Soviets seem to offer openings for further talks. Brandt believed Soviet allegations should also be rejected as soon as possible by British, US and French. He said replies need not be identical. 3. The Secretary referred to press reports concerning heavy Soviet pressure to avoid reestablishment of Yugoslav/FRG relations. He said we were prepared to reply briefly and offered to provide a draft for consideration. Foreign Minister Brown had no comment, but Mulley on British side agreed answer was called for. He wondered why Soviets sent note; he suggested usual coordination in Bonn would be best. Couve said he had not studied the Soviet communication nor had he discussed it. He did not know whether answer should be made or not. He agreed matter could be discussed in Bonn. Replies did not have to be identical since it is more difficult to get agreed text and we could spend weeks and weeks on that task. Secretary thought notes of Three Powers should be as close to identical as possible and prepared as promptly as possible. It was finally agreed question of sending response to Soviet statement would be coordinated in Ambassadorial Group in Bonn. 4. Brandt mentioned recent conference of FRG Chiefs of Mission from Eastern Europe. He said FRG was making some progress in the trade and cultural fields and some even in the political field. The next step is to resume relations with Yugoslavia. He pointed to the coincidence of Soviet statements attacking the FRG and the establishment of relations with Romania earlier this year, the agreement on trade missions in Prague in the summer, and now when the Soviets know Yugoslavia may be next. He said that up to now Kiesinger had had problems with the CDU on Yugoslavia, but now there will be no objection to negotiations. As a matter of fact, most of the problems have already been discussed informally. 5. Brandt said Tsarapkin had originally insisted on renunciation of force agreement between FRG and GDR as condition for progress in talks. Situation had changed at November 21 meeting. Tsarapkin now foresees bilateral between FRG and USSR which would be open to other socialist states, including the GDR, on basis of equality of treatment. Tsarapkin had also queried Brandt on Kiesinger statement that talks would not lead to much. Brandt reminded Tsarapkin that Chancellor Kiesin-ger’s second letter to Stoph had not been answered. In the letter, Kiesin-ger had offered renunciation of force to East Germans. Brandt agreed the conditions for each party to these agreements should be equal but that the circumstances of each might differ. According to Brandt, Tsarapkin confirmed that it was not necessary for the FRG to recognize the GDR. In discussing framework of an agreement, the Soviets threw in every demand they have had against the FRG except issue of FRG membership in NATO. Tsarapkin was specifically interested in assurances on inviolability of frontiers (FRG-GDR), Oder-Neisse Line, Munich agreement, non-interference by the FRG in West Berlin, renunciation of nuclears and suppression of Nazism. 6. Tsarapkin said: (A) The Potsdam Agreement is the basis for relations of the USSR and Germany and the Three Powers; (B) Articles 53 and 57 of the UN Charter are still valid; (C) Referred to the WEU of 1954 and the Settlement Convention.For text, see ibid., pp. 430–431. 7. Brandt said the FRG had not thoroughly studied the implications of the Soviet approach. Meanwhile Duckwitz will feel out Soviet intentions shortly with Tsarapkin. Brandt had impression that Soviets are now interested in a bilateral declaration. Once agreement is reached thereon it would be open to the other socialist states on an equal basis. The FRG and Soviets are still far apart but Brandt saw renunciation of force as formula for bilateral exchange of views which would lead to reduction of tensions. 8. Brandt stressed that to be successful, discussions with Tsarapkin must be held quietly but if there were new developments or information the Three Powers would be informed through their Bonn Ambassadors. Such information should be closely held. 9. Secretary asked whether anything was said by Soviets about special status of Berlin. Brandt replied question was not discussed but only mentioned. Secretary asked for Brandt’s reactions to points required by Tsarapkin for a renunciation of force agreement. Brandt was of the opinion that renunciation of force was a heading, under which many issues would be considered. 10. There ensued an exchange between Brown, Brandt and Couve as to the meaning of a renunciation of force agreement, the main thrust of which, as summarized by Brown, was that the FRG was being asked for a lot for the privilege of renouncing force. 11. Brandt, in response to the Secretary’s question, confirmed that in his opinion the Soviets did not expect the FRG to leave NATO. After reviewing with Brandt the origin of the Brandt/Tsarapkin talks the Secretary expressed his concern that FRG efforts might lead to further Berlin problems. He recalled that if we had gone all the way on accepting existing frontiers, etc. in 1958–62 we might not have had a Berlin crisis. The Secretary was especially concerned lest anything happen that would cause another crisis in Berlin. He said we certainly cannot say no to these talks but we should know where we are going. He recalled that when the question of reopening the reunification question arose two or three years ago the FRG was unwilling to talk about the somewhat unpleasant things that go with it. He wanted to be sure that the Four would be there together if trouble occurred. It was inevitable that unpleasant issues would arise. It was possible the Soviets wanted to improve relations but the case to date is not persuasive. On the other hand they may be returning to the issue of Berlin and insist on changes in the status of the city. To Brandt’s query as to whether he had any evidence of such an oncoming crisis, the Secretary replied in the negative. 12. The Secretary said that if the frontiers of the GDR were frozen and renunciation of force agreement was signed, reunification might be considered finished. In reply, Brandt sought to reassure the Secretary that little new was being done, indicating FRG had already undertaken not to use force, and that he would not sacrifice the interests of Berlin. 13. Couve felt that except for (1) boundary between East and West Germany; (2) Oder-Neisse Line; (3) Berlin’s special status and (4) nuclear weapons the Three Powers had no concerns. The boundary and Oder-Neisse questions were not important and the nuclear issue is not relevant for the Three Powers. He was skeptical on outcome of the negotiations but believed them to be a good thing even if they led to nothing concrete. 14. Brandt gave assurances on protecting Allied prerogatives, pointing to FRG refusal to negotiate with the Soviets for Aeroflot use of the Berlin corridors. 15. Brown wondered whether you can protect the Berlin situation if you comply with Soviet demands. Brandt replied that he was not speaking of what the FRG would do but what the Soviets would want. The question is, would the Allies trust him to do what they had already done. He was not asking for permission but informing them and asking for their confidence. 16. The Secretary said there was no problem of giving our confidence but a problem of transferring to the FRG in the dark the rights of the US. We must stay very close when Allied rights are involved. He found the Soviet approach of the FRG somewhat objectionable. Should not the FRG consider some points on its side which should be involved in a renunciation of force agreement? If the Soviets really take seriously a renunciation of force, Soviet forces could go home and there could be a normal movement of people. 17. Brown wondered whether a mutual renunciation of force agreement could not be widened out in such a way as to help with the British BAOR offset problem. Brandt said the mutual withdrawal of troops was another problem and a time may come to take it up in the future. He considered his renunciation of force agreement similar to Brown’s friendship treaty. Brown said that the friendship treaty and other proposed arrangements were dead and he wondered why the Soviets were switching their attentions to the FRG. Brown said the Soviets were picking a fight on every front. He referred to difficulties with them over the Brooke case,Reference is to the 1965 sentencing of British citizen Gerald Brooke to 5 years in prison for “anti-Soviet activities.” Wilson brought up the issue without a successful resolution during his January 22–24 visit to the Soviet Union. and mentioned particularly fact that KGB had increased its activity in the UK. 18. At the end of the pre-dinner session, it was generally agreed that the FRG would go ahead with talks with the Soviets, but would proceed carefully and keep the Three Powers informed when their interests were involved. 19. Governing Mayor Schuetz joined the Foreign Ministers at dinner and made a report on the situation in Berlin. He said things were not so bad as some people thought. The student situation was better and he had been talking to West German businessmen, British businessmen and French businessmen to get them interested in the city. He would also be talking to American businessmen. He saw no signs of an oncoming crisis of any kind in the city. He was pessimistic on passes for this year but hopeful for 1968. 20. At the conclusion of the meeting the decision was made to issue no statement or declaration. Agreement was, however, reached on a common statement to be used for press background briefing, which being repeated separately. Rusk 242. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Berlin, Geneva, USNATO, USUN, Paris, London, Brussels, Rome, and Moscow. Bonn, December 20, 1967, 1230Z. 6447. NATUS/BUSEC/DISTO. Subj: Meeting with Kiesinger—NPT. I called on Chancellor Kiesinger yesterday evening for a final tour d'horizon prior to my departure later in the week for Washington. Several subjects were discussed. McGhee reported on the other portions of his conversation with Kiesinger in telegram 6496 from Bonn, December 20. (Ibid.) The following concerns NPT. 1. The Chancellor said that he greatly appreciated the President’s “friendly” letter of Dec. 11,For text, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XI, Document 222. in response to his own letter of Dec. 8,Not printed. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of States Correspondence, Germany) and the assurance that the President had given him regarding the NPT. He was concerned, however, about one sentence to the effect that the NPT must not hamper the free flow of nuclear materials “between nations who enter into the treaty and carry out its obligations in good faith.” Since it was a fundamental German aim to preserve the European Community through EURATOM, he hoped that this did not mean that France would, as a non-signatory, be excluded. I told the Chancellor that I was confident that the President’s statement had not been intended to exclude France, which as a nuclear power would have a special position under the treaty. I pointed out, however, that the Swedish draft and, indeed, an earlier German draft, had language which would have excluded even the nuclear powers from nuclear imports—if they did not submit to IAEA inspection. We would not desire to interrupt supplies to France under our present EURATOM arrangements. We would, however, not be willing to revert to a purely bilateral arrangement with France. 2. The Chancellor expressed another concern about NPT. He quoted from a statement that Amb Foster had made in Geneva on Dec. 15 to the effect that the best way to overcome the present impasse on Article III was perhaps to negotiate with the Soviets in the same way that we had successfully negotiated Articles I and II.For text of the U.S. proposal, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XI, Document 216. The Chancellor reminded me that the principal German concern over the NPT in the early days derived from the fact that we had negotiated Articles I and II before consulting Germany and our other Allies. He hoped that this was not what Foster had in mind. I stated that I felt sure it was not. I quoted from the results of Foster’s last meeting with Roshchin on Dec. 15, in which he had expressed to Roshchin the firm view that Article III could be based on nothing less than the US draft of Nov. 2—which the Chancellor knew had been supported by our Allies in the NAC meeting of Dec. 6. It was my understanding that, in comparing Article III with Articles I and II, Foster merely argued that, in Article III, we should deal with “the heart of the matter” and “avoid politically unacceptable labels” (such as IAEA safeguards), and had no intention to imply that we should not continue close consulations with our Allies. 3. The Chancellor, who apparently had heard of our adverse reaction to the German aide-mémoire of Nov. 20,Not found. said that he wanted to be very clear that the Germans would not make proposals with respect to the NPT for purely tactical reasons. It was far too serious a matter. He seemed to be admitting that this had been done in the past and apologizing for it. The German NPT proposals had, through the intervention of technicians, often been uncoordinated and misleading. In response to my query, he confirmed that he considered that his own letter to the President of Dec. 8 superseded the aide-mémoire. Germany was now concerned only with the issues of (A) verification, (B) preservation of the European nuclear community, (C) duration and (D) security from nuclear blackmail. I advised the Chancellor of the additional results of the Foster and Roshchin meeting Dec. 15 on the question of safeguards, duration and security issues. McGhee 243. Letter From the First Secretary of Embassy in Germany (Imhof) to the Director of the Office of German Affairs (Puhan)Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US. Secret; Nodis. Bonn, January 10, 1968. Dear Al: I am giving you below a brief account of the conversations which Professor Henry Kissinger had here during a brief stay. Henry asked me to send a copy to Ben Read with whom he will discuss the matter further and requested that this account be closely held. Henry was here on January 9 and left at noon on January 10. He said that during this period he saw, at his request, Finance Minister Strauss, All-German Affairs Minister Wehner, Parliamentary State Secretary Guttenberg, and, at their request, Chancellor Kiesinger and Defense Minister Schroeder. Chancellor Kiesinger left the Cabinet meeting on January 10 for 3/4 of an hour in order to see Henry. Guttenberg, whom Henry had seen earlier separately, was present during the meeting with Chancellor Kiesinger. The NPT. Mr. Kissinger said that both Strauss and Guttenberg remained adamantly opposed to an NPT in any form. Strauss said that he had once written to the Chancellor that he would resign from the Cabinet if an NPT was signed and that he continued to adhere to this position. If it came to that, there would then be the beginnings of a conservative party. Strauss observed that the opponents of the NPT and conservative elements in general were simply waiting for the moment when a nationally known figure would take the lead. Barring such a development, Strauss said that he would adhere to his tactics of remaining silent on issues outside of his direct field of responsibility. He said he was frequently being chided by his adherents for maintaining silence but he was convinced that these tactics were sound. He observed that given Chancellor Kiesinger’s age and temperament the question of succession would eventually arise. It was clear that Strauss believed that by remaining silent his chances to become Kiesinger’s eventual successor would improve. Mr. Kissinger said that Chancellor Kiesinger was more cautious on the NPT. He stressed that German views must be taken fully into account and that he would have to see the full text of the treaty before he could reach a final decision. Mr. Kissinger reported his impression during his talks in Moscow that the Soviets appeared interested in signing an NPT and were hinting at the possibility of a compromise. Since he had not been there in any official capacity it was difficult to evaluate the significance of these hints. Chancellor Kiesinger appeared to be somewhat concerned by this and emphasized again the need for German views to be taken fully into account. Mr. Kissinger said that Wehner was the only minister with whom he had talked who had been positive with regard to the NPT. Europe. Strauss made it clear that the FRG would not undertake any cooperation with the UK and the other five that would antagonize the French. He said this was also the Chancellor’s position. Chancellor Kiesinger later confirmed this. Both the Chancellor and Strauss said that in the next round of discussions with de Gaulle in February an attempt would be made to explore whether progress on greater European political unity could be made, presumably along the lines of the Fouchet plan. Strauss will accompany the Chancellor on this trip. Schroeder, on the other hand, continued to be in favor of a tough line toward the French and cooperation between the FRG, the UK and the other five. The Offset. Strauss said that “not a cent” could come from the budget. On the other hand, it would be possible to make arrangements through the Bundesbank for the purchase of about 1 billion worth of medium, preferably short term, but under no circumstances long term bonds. Mr. Kissinger was not sure whether Strauss, when mentioning the 1 billion figure, was talking in terms of dollars or DM, but he believed it was the latter. Schroeder said that regrettably no funds could come out of the defense budget. The situation had been easier when the FRG was still making massive arms purchases but this was now no longer feasible. Vietnam. The Chancellor told Mr. Kissinger that Foreign Minister Brandt had written to the Secretary about the recent SPD statement on Vietnam.Not found. The Chancellor said that he would be writing separately to the President, assuring him that the Federal Government had no intention of criticizing, or interfering with, US actions in this area and that the Government’s position remained as he had outlined it in his press conference after his return from his Washington visit. Mr. Kissinger said that it was erroneous to believe that a premature US withdrawal from Vietnam would lead to an increased US presence in Europe; the same forces which were advocating a withdrawal from Vietnam were also in favor of a reduced US role in Europe. The Chancellor took note of this. Wehner expressed a certain degree of impatience with the SPD statement on Vietnam which he considered the result of short-sighted local politics. Miscellaneous Observations. Mr. Kissinger said that he was struck by Chancellor Kiesinger’s repeated references to German independence. The Chancellor had said at one point that he understood his role to be to “protect German interests rather than to execute Atlantic policies.” The Chancellor apparently made this remark when discussing attempts to turn NATO into an instrument for détente about which be showed some irritation. Mr. Kissinger said that the Chancellor showed much interest in ABMs and wondered why Germany could not have such a system. Mr. Kissinger said that Schroeder looked physically fit. It was obvious from Schroeder’s remarks that he was strongly opposed to the Grand Coalition and the SPD, to whom he always referred to as “The Left.” I think it was of particular interest that Strauss continues to adhere to the position that he will break with the Chancellor if the NPT is signed. The Chancellor is looking for a broad consensus within the CDU/CSU on this issue and would, I believe, not let it come to a break with Strauss over the NPT unless there were massive counter pressure from the SPD which cannot be taken for granted. With all best wishes. Sincerely, Hans 244. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B. Confidential. Drafted by Puhan and approved in S on February 7. The meeting was held in the Secretary’s office. The source text is marked “Part I of V.” Schuetz also met with Vice President Humphrey and had a non-substantive talk with President Johnson. Memoranda of these conversations are ibid., POL 7 GER W. Washington, February 1, 1968, 5:15 p.m. SUBJECT Soviet Interest in Berlin PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Alfred Puhan, Director of German Affairs Governing Mayor of Berlin Klaus Schuetz FRG Ambassador Heinrich Knappstein FRG Minister Georg von Lilienfeld FRG Counselor of Embassy Berndt von Staden After an exchange of amenities, the Secretary raised the question of current Soviet interest in the status of Berlin. Schuetz said he believed the Soviets were not really interested in changing the status of Berlin. They looked at Ulbricht and his efforts to get a new constitution which might want to do away with the vestiges of World War II. There were other possible explanations of current Soviet interest in Berlin. Schuetz saw a fear on the part of the Soviets that Schuetz coming to Berlin, keeping in mind his past job in the Bonn government, signified an effort by the FRG to change the status of Berlin. In other words, in Soviet minds there was concern that the FRG was introducing new salami tactics in changing the status of Berlin. He saw in the Soviet MemorandumFor text of the January 29 Soviet note, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 984–986. a warning rather than a new policy. He anticipated no crisis in Berlin. The Mayor asked if there was any evidence available to the Secretary pointing to a possible crisis over Berlin. The Secretary said there was nothing of substance. Our Watch Committee had found no indicators. The Secretary could imagine that seen through the eyes of a Russian General, Berlin might appear to be a tempting and vulnerable object. He reminded the Mayor that he had pointed out to Gromyko in 1961 that Berlin was no more vulnerable than New York because of our presence there.Reference is presumably to 1961 discussions in New York; memoranda of their conversations are in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XIV, pp. 431–433, 439–441, and 456–461. Schuetz agreed, and added that while there appeared to be no evidence for any crisis, one would have to be watchful. The Secretary asked how the Mayor interpreted the Soviet action in addressing themselves to the Germans alone on the question of Berlin. Schuetz said this was puzzling since the Soviets must know that the Germans would inform the Americans as well as the British and French. He mentioned in this connection that Abrasimov had spoken to him recently of international obligations regarding Berlin which could only mean all of Berlin. The Secretary referred to remarks he made to Foreign Minister Brandt in BrusselsReported in telegram Secto 16 from Brussels, December 13. (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 242) on this subject which had been interpreted as being rather negative. He assured Schuetz that he did not mean to be negative, but that out of his first 1–1/2 years of experience as Secretary of State with a Berlin crisis he only wanted to warn his colleague of the explosive nature of this problem. He said it was extremely important that all, the three Western Powers, as well as Bonn and Berlin stay very close on this. Schuetz agreed that this was necessary and that as far as Berlin was concerned he would make sure that this was done. 245. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 14. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Berlin for McGhee. Bonn, February 13, 1968, 0948Z. 8270. Subject: Rostow meeting with the Chancellor. 1. During Under Secretary Rostow’s meeting this afternoon with Chancellor Kiesinger, the Chancellor was primarily interested in providing information and views concerning German Eastern policy, the NPT, relations with France, and the state of his coalition government. These are reported in this telegram. The Chancellor requested that his remarks be transmitted to the Secretary and to the President. The portion of the conversation devoted to the US balance of payments problem is reported by septel.The Embassy reported on the portion of the talk dealing with balance-of-payments issues in telegram 8265 from Bonn, February 12. (Ibid.) 1. [sic] Eastern policy—The Chancellor said that the SPD is currently having serious internal trouble. The party membership feels increasingly that they are going to lose the next election. The Wehner school of responsible and constructive participation in the grand coalition has lost out. Real divergencies within the party have developed particularly on the subject of Eastern policy. The Chancellor said that he had talked directly to Brandt, Wehner, and Helmut Schmidt and all three agreed that it would be highly dangerous for the FRG to talk directly with the Sovs concerning Berlin. There is, however, a strong group in the SPD that feels otherwise. The Chancellor expected that within the coalition it will be necessary to “have it out” with the SPD on Eastern policy in general and that this will be done over the next two weeks. Under Secretary Rostow assured the Chancellor of US support for German efforts to improve understanding with the USSR and with the Eastern European countries. He said that we are quite willing to see the German side go ahead with talks with the Soviets as initiated by Brandt and Tsarapkin. Rostow made clear that we are now quite satisfied that there is no difference of view between US and the Federal Govt on the handling of the Sov memorandum concerning Berlin. The Chancellor, while making clear that real trouble was to be expected in the coalition concerning Eastern policy, stressed that he did not wish us to think that it would cause a real coalition crisis. 2. NPT—Still in the context of differences between the SPD and the CDU/CSU, the Chancellor turned to the subject of NPT. He said that the treaty still presents problems. Rostow commented in this connection that it was a good letter which Brandt had just sent to the Secretary on the subject.Dated February 9; the letter was transmitted to the Embassy in Bonn in telegram 113607, February 10. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18–6) The Chancellor, after consulting with the interpreter said that he thought the letter was “a little softly formulated.” He suggested that this latest letter should be read in the context of Brandt’s earlier letter to the Secretary concerning the NPT.Apparent reference to Brandt’s letter of Oct 13. A copy is in Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 14. 3. Relations with France—The Chancellor said that de Gaulle obviously poses a very serious problem for him. He had heard that concern may exist in the US about the possibility of some secret understanding between France and Germany. The Chancellor could assure us that this was not the case. He noted that a recent public opinion poll showed that 75 percent of the Germans consider the German alliance with the United States as the most important element of German foreign policy. The Chancellor said that he has explained to de Gaulle in the past and will do so again that by pursuing a strong anti-American line de Gaulle is only antagonizing German opinion against France. The Chancellor added that it is nevertheless of the utmost importance for a positive German-French relationship to be preserved. If new antagonism again arises after this “second effort” to overcome it (the Chancellor was presumably referring to Adenauer’s efforts and his own) this would be a most grave development for the two countries and for Europe. Kiesinger thought that de Gaulle too understood this point. On the question of UK-EC entry, the Chancellor repeated his well-known views that de Gaulle could not be forced to change his opinion. Under Secretary Rostow told the Chancellor that the United States fully understood the importance of the French-German relationship. He said that the last thing which we wanted was to force Germany into any kind of choice between Paris and Washington. This telegram was not cleared with the Under Secretary. McGhee 246. Telegram From the Mission in Berlin to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Confidential. Repeated to Bonn, Paris, Moscow, London, USNATO, CINCUSAREUR, CINCEUR, USELMLO, and USAFE. Berlin, February 15, 1968, 1700Z. 956. Subj: Abrasimov’s February 13 letter to Ambassador McGhee. Ref: Berlin 951.Telegram 951 from Berlin, February 15, transmitted the text of the Soviet note. (Ibid.) For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 986–988. Begin summary. 1. Abrasimov’s letters to the US and British Ambassadors are virtually identical. The French were sent a copy of the letter to Ambassador McGhee with a brief accompanying letter. This stated the Soviets and French have an interest in relaxation of tension, France has responsibilities in West Berlin, and that letters have been sent to British and US Ambassadors about Bonn’s “illegal activities” in West Berlin. 2. Abrasimov’s letter is similar in many respects to the Soviet January 6 memorandum, but contains noteworthy differences. The letter contains no implication that if Bonn continues its “illegal activities” in West Berlin the Soviet Union will find it necessary to take measures to protect its rights, as did the memorandum. In making the letter public, the Soviets are on record regarding any steps they might plan to take in connection with the March Bundestag committee meetings. The letter carefully avoids mention of these meetings and any specific threats. 3. The Mission concurs in Ambassador McGhee’s viewTelegram 8431 from Bonn, February 15. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 USSR) that any reply should reaffirm Allied rights and responsibilities in Berlin, and that without attempting to justify FRG activities the reply should indicate that we follow carefully activities here to see that they are consistent with the legal status of the city. We also believe some reference should be drawn to the extent of East German steps to incorporate East Berlin into the GDR. End summary. 4. Although Khrustalev told us yesterday, in response to question, that as far as he knew the Soviets did not intend “at this time” to publish the letter, the East German press carries on February 14 the text of the letter to Ambassador McGhee (Berlin 951). The East German press makes no mention of letters being sent to the British and French Ambassadors. The British here received a letter the text of which is identical to ours. 5. The French were handed a copy of Abrasimov’s letter to Ambassador McGhee, with a brief accompanying letter from Abrasimov. The letter notes the USSR and France have a great interest in relaxation of tensions in Europe. It adds that France also has responsibilities for the establishment of a normal situation in West Berlin. In this connection, Abrasimov states he has sent letters to the US and British Ambassadors on the subject of Bonn’s illegal activities in West Berlin which create tension in Central Europe. 6. While the text of Abrasimov’s letter to Ambassador McGhee is in many respects similar to the January 6 Soviet memorandum to the FRG Government, there are noteworthy differences. The letter lists many of the same “illegal activities” of the FRG in West Berlin as the memorandum. However, it makes no reference to the recruitment of West Berlin youth for service in the German armed forces, and to the holding of a Bundestag Defense Committee meeting in West Berlin. The letter asserts that Bonn is attempting to change the status of West Berlin in its favor, and that this is a “highly risky course.” The memorandum contains no such statement. It warns instead that Moscow will not tolerate the incorporation of West Berlin into the FRG, and that if Bonn holds to its course of conducting “illegal activities” in West Berlin, the USSR will find it necessary to take measures to protect its rights and interests. 7. It seems likely that Abrasimov, in his desire to meet with one or more of the Western Ambassadors in West Berlin in the second half of February (Berlin 917),Dated February 4. (Ibid., POL US–USSR) would have raised FRG activities in West Berlin as his major topic. His letter presumably is intended to take the place of such meetings. In releasing the letter to the East Germans for publication, the Soviets have now put themselves on record for any steps they might plan to take in connection with the March 4–8 Bundestag committee meetings in West Berlin. It is to be noted, however, that the letter carefully avoids both mention of these forthcoming meetings and any specific threats. Its contents and fact that it was immediately published suggest that the Soviets have sent the letter primarily for propaganda purposes. 8. In view of the fact that the Soviets have addressed similar letters to the British and US, we believe it would be preferable to coordinate any possible reply. The Mission concurs in Ambassador McGhee’s view, expressed here, that any reply should be brief and reaffirm our concept about Allied rights and responsibilities in Berlin, as well as those responsibilities which have been assigned to the FRG. Without attempting to justify FRG activities about which the USSR has complained, our reply should indicate also that we keep a careful watch on activities here from the standpoint of their consistency with the legal status of the city. We believe any reply should draw attention also to the degree to which the Soviets have permitted the incorporation of East Berlin into East Germany in violation of post-war agreements with respect to Berlin. One example would be East German claims that East Berlin is the capital of the GDR. 9. The separate treatment accorded the French is a reflection of current Soviet policy toward France. We would hope that the French will agree to identical Ambassadorial replies or, failing this, coordinated replies. We hope we can avoid a situation in which the French follow the same procedure used by the Soviets. Morris 247. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, Brussels, USNATO, Geneva, and USUN. McGhee summarized and commented on this telegram in At the Creation of New Germany, pp. 243–245. Bonn, February 20, 1968, 1930Z. 8568. CEDTO, BUSEC. Subj: Ambassador’s call on FonMin Brandt. I called on FonMin Brandt today at my request. It was my first opportunity to see him—or for that matter any high official—since the German-French meeting in Paris on Feb. 15 and 16. Brandt departs on Feb. 22 for a four-day visit to Morocco. The following subjects were discussed. UK entry will be the subject of a septel.Telegram 8569 from Bonn, February 20. (Department of State, Central Files, EEC 6 UK) 1. US balance of payments and offset—I reviewed briefly the presentations made by Under Secretaries Rostow and Deming and Amb Trezise during their recent visits on the US balance of payments and offset problems. I stressed the importance that the US Govt attaches to the success of the President’s program, announced Jan 1,For text of President Johnson’s announcement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1968, Book I, pp. 8–13. to redress our adverse payments balance. We were considering in this connection a number of measures in the general area of border tax adjustments. It is our sincere desire that this be accomplished without restriction of trade, however, our ability to do so and at the same time to stave off the protectionist measures proposed in our Congress will depend in large degree on the assistance given us by our trading partners. In particular it is our hope that the surplus countries, including Germany, will as agreed in the OECD take appropriate measures to increase imports and encourage the flow of long-term investment capital abroad. In connection with the offset, I expressed appreciation for the reception accorded our reps. The meetings in Bonn had revealed no serious difference of views between us on this issue, and Under Secretaries Rostow and Deming had been well received by Pres. Blessing of the Bundesbank. We had made clear that our objective during fiscal 68/69, which can be achieved largely through purchase of medium-term securities, is a full neutralization of our foreign exchange losses resulting from our forces in Germany—$775 million. Although the final negotiation, which lay ahead, would be between the Bundesbank and the US Treasury, I hoped that the German Govt would support our objectives with the Bundesbank in whatever way was appropriate. In response, Brandt said that the Chancellor himself had, in their recent meeting, raised with de Gaulle the possible acceleration of the Kennedy Round tariff concessions. However, the French reaction was totally negative. French FonMin Debre had advised de Gaulle that such action would be “illegal”. German EconMin Schiller had difficult discussions on this point, to no avail, with his French opposite members. 2. East/West issues—I told Brandt that we are concerned by allegations recently made in the press of American misgivings over German Eastern policy. I assured him that this was not the case. We had stressed the importance we continued to attach to Four-Power responsibility in Berlin—and the risks of any bilateral Soviet-German negotiations on Berlin. However, Brandt had himself assured us quite adequately on this point. Apart from this issue we welcomed direct discussions between the Germans and the Soviets on issues outstanding between them, as well as continued German efforts to improve relations with the EE countries and the recent establishment of relations with Yugoslavia. We had every confidence that the Germans would continue to keep us advised of their discussions with the Soviets and would consult with us in connection with any matter involving Allied interests. I pointed out that I had in my contacts with German officials detected some uncertainty resulting from the article by Zbigniew Brzezinski, former member of the Dept’s Planning Council, in the January Foreign Affairs.“The Framework of East-West Reconciliation,” Foreign Affairs, January 1968, pp. 256–275. I assured Brandt that this article did not reflect State Dept policy and that Brzezinski was no longer associated with the Dept. Brandt expressed appreciation for the assurance given him on the American attitude toward German E/W policy. I asked Brandt what new moves he contemplated in the E/W arena, in particular what answer the German Govt proposed to make to the Soviet memo of Jan. 29 on mutual force reduction. He said that there is a draft reply to the Sov note with the Chancellor. They hope to discuss it in the Cabinet meeting tomorrow, after which they will contact the three Allied Ambassadors. In discussing the content of the reply, Brandt said that there was a view within the German Govt that they should in effect say: “Since there are so many issues on which we do not agree, we must exchange mutual renunciations of force in order to avoid conflict.” His own view and that of the FonOff is more to the effect that: “Because we disagree we must discuss the areas of our disagreement with a view to reaching some solution—not necessarily in the short-term but in the long-term.” The Germans should, in his view, give the Sovs a complete and lengthy document giving reasonable German positions on all Eastern subjects. (Not, however, necessarily at the time of the German response to the Jan. 29 Sov memo.) There was always a danger that the Sovs might publish, with a view to making propaganda, their own interpretation of their exchanges with the Germans on E/W issues. If the Germans had presented them a paper giving reasonable positions, they would in this event be protected. The paper, moreover, could provide a basis for further exchanges of views. Brandt pointed out that he considered it significant that Sov Amb Tsarapkin had in their talks never made it a condition for mutual force renunciation that all of the issues raised by the Sovs in their note be first resolved in their favor. Brandt thought that there was an opportunity for progress which could, even in the absence of an over-all agreement, reduce the potential danger of existing differences. For example, he thought it possible that the Germans might be able to tell the Poles they would accept the present western Polish border, until the matter could be considered in connection with a peace treaty. I informed Brandt that such an approach certainly seemed to be in the right direction. 3. Berlin—I reminded Brandt that, in addition to the note they had received from the Sovs on Berlin on January 6, the three Allies had also received notes on Feb. 16.The January 6 Soviet note is summarized in The New York Times, January 17, 1968. For text of the February 14 note handed to the United States, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 986–988. The French note, however, was quite different from that given the Brit and ourselves. Indeed, the Sovs appeared to consider the French to be on their side. I hoped that Brandt would help urge the French to join with the Brit and ourselves in making a reply along orthodox lines, otherwise there would be a considerable strain on the excellent Three-Power solidarity which has existed in Berlin. Brandt advised that the draft FRG reply to the Sov memorandum on Berlin was now before the All-German Affairs Committee of the Cabinet. Approval was expected tomorrow, and the text would be shown to the three Allies immediately. Brandt hoped that we could give our reaction quickly, since he considered it important to get the reply to the Sovs before the Bundestag committees begin their Berlin meetings on March 4.For text of the March 1 German note, see ibid., pp. 988–989. I asked Brandt if a final decision had been made as to whether the Defense Committee would meet in Berlin. He raised his hands in obvious disapproval. He had raised this issue with Bundestag Pres Ger-stenmeier and found that the decision that it would meet had already been made. The committee would, however, meet only during the day and would not discuss military matters, which would be reserved until they returned to Bonn. He did not like this decision and assured me that this would not happen again. I pointed out that, although we had not advised the Germans not to have the meeting since we as well as they would not wish to appear to be backtracking in the face of Sov threats, I thought his own attitude toward the matter was a wise one. 4. NPT—I referred to the Sec of State’s letter to Brandt of Feb 17 on the NPT,Transmitted in telegram 116563 to Bonn, February 16. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18–6) which had been in response to his own letter of Feb 9. Did he feel that this letter was sufficiently responsible. I also asked what if anything the French had said about NPT in their recent meeting in Paris. What were the next moves the Germans proposed to make on the NPT? Brandt replied that he considered the Secretary’s letter to be quite positive. They themselves had favored the Swedish proposal to which the Secretary’s letter referred. His inclination is not to answer the Secretary’s letter although State Sec Duckwitz will raise the NPT issue when he is in Washington next week. Some of his assistants in the FonOff are in favor of forwarding a paper to the ENDC with the full German position on NPT. He is aware, of course, that any such paper will probably be included with the ENDC report made to the UN. He would, therefore, like to show it to us first. State Sec Duckwitz will bring it with him to Washington, and they would appreciate any suggestions we might have. The German side had raised the nuclear issue with the French during the recent meetings only in connection with EURATOM. French FonMin Couve had (not to Brandt but to someone else a day or two before) criticized French DefMin Messmer’s negative public position on NPT (reported Bonn 7612).Not found. Brandt appealed to the French to “agree or at least to acquiesce” in EURATOM to discussions between IAEA and EURATOM on verification. Couve had made no comment other than to say that, “he saw the problem.” The Quai Political Director Beaumarchais had said, however (in a separate conversation with FonOff Asst Sec Ruete) that although the French would not support such a move he presumed they would “let it go”. I advised Brandt of the contents of the first para of Moscow’s 2843Dated February 19. (Ibid., TP 7 UK) regarding Sovs consultations on NPT. Brandt indicated, however, that he was already informed. McGhee 248. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Filed by Johnson Library. Confidential; Sensitive. Drafted by Obst. A note on the source text reads: “Not verbatim; approximate account from interpreting notes.” Washington, February 23, 1968, 5 p.m. Memorandum of conversation between Messrs. Walt Rostow and Rainer Barzel at the White House, February 23, 1968, 5 p.m. Mr. Barzel: We have the impression the other side is marshaling all their forces in one concerted offensive all over Vietnam and should have little left to strike with when this is over. Is that how you see it ? Mr. Rostow: Yes, the war has entered a climactic period. We have experienced the first wave of that offensive. Though it brought a great deal of human suffering, it has failed in its objective to bring down the South Vietnamese government and its army and to leave the U. S. alone to defend the country. The enemy has yet to commit one-half of its forces and may employ them to force a major battle in the Khe Sanh-Quang Tri area and perhaps at Saigon. This may well put the war into its decisive phase. Mr. Barzel: Have you heard of Kiesinger’s statement on Vietnam last Tuesday? McGhee reported on the statement in telegram 8682 from Bonn, February 23. (Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US) We had a meeting of the executive committee Tuesday morning. We thought it was high time to speak up on Vietnam in view of some of the growing anti-U. S. feelings. Mr. Gerstenmaier and myself made a strong plea in that direction. The Chancellor then made a declaration in which he stressed Germany’s gratitude to the U. S. for its valiant defense of good causes around the world. He denounced anti-American sentiments as “stupid.” Germany and others had much to be thankful for to the United States. German policy was sympathetic of the U. S. effort in Vietnam. He sent Prince Botho (himself an M.D.) to Vietnam to check on the performance of the German assistance program there. I myself have sent telegrams to our people in Vietnam, voicing appreciation for their efforts there and urging them to stay on at this difficult time. President Johnson has told Chancellor Kiesinger he would be glad to talk any matter over with him, as long as the Press could be kept out of the discussion. The Chancellor was happy about that suggestion and would like to take advantage of it from time to time. Did you receive McGhee’s telegram on his talk with Kiesinger regarding the Chancellor’s meeting with de Gaulle? McGhee reported Kiesinger’s summary of his talks with de Gaulle in telegrams 8667, 8682, 8683, 8692, 8693 from Bonn, February 23. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 14) Telegram 8667 is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 292. Mr. Rostow: I have not seen it yet. Mr. Barzel: Let me try to summarize the five major points from my notes. As you know, Mr. Johnson had urged Mr. Kiesinger to play the role of “harmonizer.” This is what he is trying to do. (1) With regard to Britain’s entry into the EEC, Kiesinger was able to move only a small step further, but it was a step in the right direction. (2) On NATO, de Gaulle said, as matters were standing now, he felt he could say that France will remain in NATO. (3) In the area of the dollar discussions, Mr. Kiesinger is trying to get the Kennedy Round moved up. This is our policy now. I don't know how you feel about it. Mr. Rostow: We are in favor of it. It would provide us some compensation for the losses we have taken from the “harmonization” of the border taxes which, in effect, represented a devaluation of the mark vis-à-vis the dollar. Mr. Barzel: (4) de Gaulle said this twice to Kiesinger and with emphasis: He (de Gaulle) had reason to believe that if the U. S. should resort to tactical nuclear weapons in Vietnam, the U.S. could expect that an atomic bomb of unknown origin would hit a city in the United States. (5) On German policy towards the U. S., de Gaulle said, he would make no move to oppose it and would not put pressures on the FRG in this regard at this time. You see, the Chancellor is doing his best to play the part of the harmonizer. As you know, we had a huge pro-American demonstration in Berlin this week in response to a demonstration against the U. S. Vietnam policy there earlier. 150,000 people demonstrated their goodwill for the United States. I had a meeting with Mr. Kiesinger on February 16, and he asked me to relay the following thoughts to you: There could be a political crisis coming on in Germany if the following four matters should become acute at the same time: 1. the offset and dollar question 2. the NPT 3. the UN move to forbid legal time-limits on persecution for genocide and mass murder 4. a quarrel between the CDU and the SPD-FDP on Eastern policy. A convergence of these four factors would result in a strong political tremor that could possibly bring down the government. However, the fact that reelections now would benefit the CDU and the fact that the SPD-FDP together command more votes in the Bundestag speaks against the likelihood of toppling the government now. But there could be a severe political crisis. The SPD and FDP are united in their stand on Eastern policy and in their stand against the war in Vietnam. It is impossible to get money appropriated for the offset agreement without the help of the SPD, and some people in that party contend it amounts to an indirect subsidy of the Vietnam war. As it stands right now, the majority in the CDU is against signing the NPT before additional clarification and assurances are obtained from Washington. Should there be a political crisis, it would arrest or reverse the modest economic upturn we are now experiencing. This in turn would make it harder for the Bundesbank to come up with the money for offset, etc. I do not know if there are solutions to all these problems. But I thought it best to come here and tell a friend about these possible difficulties, as they might in turn affect the U. S., particularly in an election year. Mr. Rostow: I appreciate your coming here and informing me on your problems in Bonn. I know enough about politics to know I should not advise someone from another country about his politics. Moreover, I cannot respond substantively to your points with any new U. S. policy formulations. But I can comment. I do not know the status in the UN of time limits for genocide, etc. But I shall look into the issue. As far as offset is concerned, I think we clearly have an arrangement here which favors Germany. We are maintaining strong military resources in Germany for the joint defense of Europe and this is being offset by bonds which bear interest. This means that in addition to holding the Central Front with our resources we help Germany accumulate additional surplus in its balance of payments. Any thinking politician can recognize the imbalance in this arrangement. This helps to buttress the arguments of those people who say we should bring our troops home from Europe. The argument that the German offset finances the war in Vietnam is nonsense. It could only be made by Germans who, in fact, wish the U.S. to withdraw its forces from Europe. As regards the NPT, the difficulties we experienced at one time on consultations resulted from the timing of the change in the German government. Ever since then, I believe our NPT consultations have been a model for what such consultations should be between friends. We have reviewed with you intensively and we have defended vigorously the German national interests. We managed to clear up a number of small matters. Then remained the Chancellor’s two big demands: (1) to find an acceptable formula for Euratom (2) the matter of a time limit on the treaty. Despite the fact that NATO was not united on this matter, we pressed the German Euratom formula and essentially the Soviets took the idea. On point two, where you have said eternity is too long a time and you want a less rigid clause on duration, I think we are making some headway, too; and the Soviets may meet that demand. I know the arguments of the opposition, and I can understand what makes some men feel so deeply about this matter. At the time of the Adenauer funeral, I spent a good deal of time conferring with Strauss and von Guttenberg.No record of these conversations was found. I know this is a difficult issue for some Germans; but it is a great issue for the entire world. Important common interests are at stake. I am sure there is no group in Germany that wants to manufacture nuclear arms. Reliance on a system of collective security appears to be the common interest—including the German interest—as opposed to the fragmentation and danger of further nuclear proliferation. On the matter of German contacts with the East, we have always regarded this as a matter for Germans to settle. We did not press you to take up such contacts in the past when you were hesitant to do so, and we shall not stand in your way now if you want to pursue them further. I, personally, always thought that it was right of you not to take up these contacts years ago, as I did not think it promising for you to negotiate out of a sense of uneasiness and weakness. Such talks should be held from a basis of strength and confidence, such as you now possess. But that is for you to judge. Our problem is that we have profound commitments towards Berlin and Germany including their defense against nuclear arms. This is a heavy responsibility. I lived through the '61–'62 crisis when we had to honor our pledge to defend Berlin, and I remember that we did not get much support from the rest of Europe then. Offset and cooperation on monetary matters are intimately locked to our security commitments. It would be viewed as intolerable here to fulfill our security commitments and subsidize German foreign exchange at the same time. Mr. Barzel: We do not really fear too much that the government may fall if what I mentioned happens, but we fear that a strong political tremor might result with an adverse impact on the economy. I know that offset and the state of the Alliance are closely interlocked. I have discussed this in detail with your brother Eugene. In the arena of Eastern policy there is much illusion, in my opinion, and little reality. As regards Berlin, you can rest assured that we will not stray from the path of virtue. Is it true that the NPT is scheduled to go to the UN as early as March? If this is the case, I should like to say a few more words about it. Mr. Rostow: (after inquiring on the telephone) It is scheduled to go to the UN about March 15 and to the individual governments shortly afterwards. A special session of the General Assembly should be called about April to debate the treaty. We would hope that the debate would end some time in May so that the treaty can then go to the individual governments for ratification. This is how the people that work on the NPT see the time schedule. Mr. Barzel: I do not think we would sign the treaty before some other matters are made clear, like the Euratom question, for instance. We are grateful to you for getting the 18-month verification provision into the treaty. But what if Euratom and the IAEA cannot reach an agreement? Our American friends tell us, “Do not worry, everything will continue like in the past.” But then the Soviets tell us something else again. What if we shall find ourselves unable to procure peaceful nuclear fuel? Mr. Rostow: Do I understand that you are worried about being supplied with fuel for peaceful nuclear purposes? Mr. Barzel: Yes, exactly. We now get our fuel from you via Euratom. If Euratom bows out or collapses one day, which is quite possible, as the French do not want to sign the treaty, we would have to turn to the IAEA, and if we apply there the Soviets are bound to say: “Now, wait a minute. Don't you know what the Germans would use this fuel for?” Mr. Rostow: I don't know a specific answer to your question offhand, but I would say, since we have found answers to the other questions in the past, we should find a solution here also. Some countries have said they will sign the treaty but delay ratification until a Euratom-IAEA accord has been reached. We understand their concern. However, in some countries the pressure to ratify is strong. What, then, if they ratify and later no accord is reached? The outcome would depend on the nature of the difficulty. If it were a serious political matter it might hold up application of the treaty; if it were a question of technical details, perhaps the 18 months might be extended. I can tell you that those who work on this matter do not see great difficulties in the EEC-IAEA negotiation. The scientists are not half as worried about this as are the lawyers and politicians. If Euratom should dissolve for some reason, bear in mind that past history shows the generous attitude of this country in the supply of nuclear fuel for peaceful purposes to others. We recently passed legislation increasing the amounts of fuel for foreign consumption. We make fuel available to countries that are not very friendly to us, because there is a certain responsibility involved in being a nuclear power. After signing the treaty, our responsibility for supplying for peaceful purposes would become even greater. Your question about fuel supply in the event of a Euratom collapse is fair. You understand you and I cannot settle it here. But if your government wishes to pose the matter, it should be discussed in the spirit of the Chancellor’s talks with the President. The history of the Johnson-Kiesinger meetings has shown that the President listens to these questions with attention and sympathy. To summarize: I think you should clearly define the specific questions that still concern you. Then you should bring them before us or raise them in a multilateral forum. Then we can work together to find answers. Mr. Barzel: I understand and I will pass along your advice. We want to remove the uncertainty. We do not want to sign any treaties, con dolus (in bad faith) as we did after World War I. We have to worry about the security of Europe in the '70’s, in the post-de Gaulle nuclear period. You say the double-key system will not be touched by the treaty. The Soviets refuse to confirm that to us. We know what the situation is in Scandinavia. These questions are hotly debated in my party and must be cleared up to have the majority endorse the NPT. Mr. Rostow: Surely the Soviets tried in the first phase of the NPT talks to bring about the destruction of NATO, to do away with the McNamara committee and the double-key system. We made it clear to them that we would have none of that. We agreed in the second phase, about September 1966, after the Rusk-Gromyko talk, that the treaty would narrowly concern what was required to avoid nuclear proliferation. What it didn't forbid was not forbidden. That is not just our understanding, that is the Soviets' as well. They know that they cannot raise the double-key question or the question of nuclear consultation. That is fundamental to our understanding. We will tell that to our Congress and you can say that to the Bundestag. Mr. Barzel: This interpretation is all right for the present situation, but what may happen 5 or 10 years from now? The situation may be different then. Scandinavia, Greece, Turkey may then be unreliable or the U.S. may turn its interests away. Mr. Rostow: First, you know that in our constitutional system any treaty that passed the Senate is binding on all subsequent administrations. Vietnam illustrates this point. President Johnson was prepared to honor President Eisenhower’s commitment on the Gulf of Aqaba. Second, if you were faced with a critical situation where your national security would be at stake—should the U.S. move its nuclear arms out of Europe, for instance—I assure you we do not intend to do that—then you would be able to denounce the treaty under the supreme-national-interest clause. So you have one check against your fear in our constitutional system and another in the supreme-national-interest clause of the treaty. We understand that the position of the non-nuclear-weapons countries is vital for the future of the world; and we intend to find solutions that allow these countries to live in dignity with this treaty. We understand that we assume grave responsibilities with this treaty. Mr. Barzel: Let me bring up one more point before leaving one of the busiest and most important men in the world. In the military area I have few doubts, but I have one political worry. You know we have a very progressive nuclear institution in Karlsruhe. In some small areas we may even be ahead of you. One day, maybe when we file a fuel application in Vienna, the Soviets will denounce our efforts as military research. They have constantly tried to get at us in the past and would not be likely to pass up such an opportunity. You know we deliver reactors to other countries. We are living on a small area and have to make a living from technology. At this time when ABMs and FOBs are already realities, we are supposed to have our hands bound. This could put us into enough of a predicament one day that it may cause some type of explosion. Mr. Rostow: There are two separate matters here. First, there is nothing in the treaty that prevents peaceful research. The treaty is concerned with non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Second, of course, the treaty cannot prevent the Soviets from mounting a propaganda attack against Karlsruhe or anything else. Nobody here at the White House believes that the Soviets wish either of us well. I think I know how the President feels with regard to the defense of Europe. With all the heavy pressures from Vietnam, and with not a damn bit of help from Europe, he has not withdrawn any of our troops from Europe. In 1961 he was at the Wall in Berlin when it went up. We may have to stand together against propaganda attacks on Karlsruhe, or worse. Under pressure, our defense is not the NPT. It is that we remain partners that trust each other. To quote from Benjamin Franklin, “We must all hang together or surely we will all hang separately. “ The simple fact is that Germany depends, and must depend, on collective nuclear defense. If you would not sign, and decided to defend yourself with your own nuclear weapons, you would (a) tear apart the Alliance (b) face a very difficult period during which you might well be destroyed. We need a free and secure Germany. It is in our interest and yours. So let us find the answers to these specific questions together in the spirit of Benjamin Franklin. This spirit has prevailed between President Johnson and Chancellor Kiesinger so far. I see no salvation any other way. We have now lived together as friends and partners successfully for 25 years. So let us take these questions one by one and find common answers to them. Mr. Barzel: I agree with you. No agreement or treaty will be any good unless we can trust each other. Just one final point before I leave. A lot will depend on the manner in which the NPT report is presented to the UN. Will it be a case of “Bird eat or die!” (Vogel friss oder stirb), as we say in Germany, or will the birds be offered the food with an option to eat or not? Will there be a chance for any changes at the UN in the package sent up by Messrs. Foster and Roschin? Mr. Rostow: (after consulting on the telephone) I am told that the debate in the UN will not be just pro forma. I do not see how it could be, anyhow. There will be some opportunity for changes at the UN level. Mr. Barzel: I want to thank you, Walt, for giving me so much of your precious time. You may take the fact that I made this long trip solely to talk with you as a sign that we regard these questions with great seriousness. 249. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Paris, London, Moscow, Brussels, and USNATO. Bonn, February 28, 1968, 1825Z. 8855. Dept pass White House. Subject: Franco-German relations in the light of the Paris visit. Ref: Bonn’s 8568, 8569, 8667, 8682, 8683, 8692, 8693.Telegram 8568 from Bonn is Document 247. Regarding telegram 8659 from Bonn, see footnote 2 thereto. Regarding telegrams 8667 through 8693, see footnote 3, Document 248. Begin summary: The Feb 15–16 Paris visit of Chancellor Kiesinger and FonMin Brandt, and the subsequent German reaction to the outcome are believed to provide evidence of: A) The continuing importance which the Fed Govt, and particularly Chancellor Kiesinger personally, attribute to relations with France; B) The extent of agreement and disagreement in German and French top-level thinking on the future shape of Europe; and C) The wide acceptance in Germany of the FRG’s policy of determined friendship toward France despite disillusionment over the past months with de Gaulle personally. The Germans appear reasonably satisfied for the present with the limited “progress” made with de Gaulle on enlarging the CM, but were not able to “smoke out” the French position on NPT and in particular on negotiations between EURATOM and IAEA on a verification procedure. Kiesinger’s thinking on the future role of Europe now seems to place more emphasis on the European, than on the Atlantic focus, but he is very firm that the Europe of the future must act in friendly agreement with the US. His concept, therefore, does not seem necessarily in conflict with that of an Atlantic partnership. While the depth of his commitment to France has been shown to be even greater than we earlier anticipated, he seems determined that it will not interfere with German vital interests, nor relations with us. End summary. 1. The Feb 15–16 Paris visit of Chancellor Kiesinger and a good part of his Cabinet, is being interpreted in quite different ways in the various European capitals. I have had an opportunity to discuss the visit both with the Chancellor and the FonMin (reftels), and we have also talked extensively with other German officials who were members of the party. This, together with the reaction of German politicians and the German press, has enabled us to reach certain conclusions concerning the significance of the visit, which I am setting forth in this message. 2. Gen de Gaulle had prepared the stage for the German visit by a very unfair exploitation of the false report of Brandt’s Ravensburg speech. A cloud seemed to hang over the visit, which when it happily disappeared, made the sun of French friendship seem all the brighter—as perhaps was de Gaulle’s intent all along. This was a matter of atmos-pherics, however, which can change again in the future just as they did before and during the visit. In assessing the present trend in Germany’s relations with France, it is considered more important to examine the actual substantive agreements and disagreements apparent during the meeting. 3. The greatest attention, in Germany as elsewhere, went to the British CM entry issue. From Kiesinger down, the Germans treated the outcome as a modest success in the continuing German efforts to find a solution which will lead to eventual British admission without a crisis within the CM. Although the view is widely held elsewhere, including in France, that the FRG “caved in” under French pressure, neither the German media nor any important German politicians have seriously suggested that this is so. 4. The Germans had much earlier considered but never defined a concept of British entry “by stages.” This may permit temporary accept-ance of the contention that what was agreed in Paris was in line with prior German ideas—even though State Sec Lahr, who is perhaps the most influential man in the German Govt on Common Market questions, was undoubtedly thinking in larger terms than those agreed with the French. It remains to be seen whether there can be any real advance on the question of British entry, however, the Germans have for the time being at least produced evidence that the door to British entry is not entirely closed and that opportunities exist for progress—if the British will take them. This was important from the German internal point of view and has been accomplished for the present to the general satisfaction of the German public. This can, of course, be changed if the Brussels meeting Feb 29 results in either the French backing out of their understanding with the Germans or strong opposition to the German-French understanding by the other CM countries. 5. A most interesting aspect of the Chancellor’s account of his talks with de Gaulle was the indication it provided of Kiesinger’s present thinking on Europe. He emphasized to me that he is seeking a Europe which would follow a European policy, but in harmony with the US. Whereas de Gaulle sees the future Europe as a third force between the two super powers, Kiesinger sees it as a bridge between them—a means of “distancing” them and helping relieve tensions between them. He opposes, as does de Gaulle but for different reasons, what he refers to as the “imperium concept” which would bring a tight Atlantic alliance up to the border of the Communist world, because it would put Germany at the point of contact between the two—and create a constant threat to peace. 6. This concept permits Kiesinger, in long-range terms, to find as he undoubtedly wishes—a fairly wide area of philosophical agreement with de Gaulle, since both place emphasis on a Europe of the future with a European policy. A part of Kiesinger’s thinking embraces the idea that Europe “should put its house in order” so that it can achieve an independent role—which is, of course, what de Gaulle also demands. 7. There are, however, important differences between the German and French views. The Germans still, in principle, seek a greater degree of European political unity than de Gaulle, although Kiesinger’s faith in its achievement may be wavering. The Germans wish to maintain the Alliance at least until a new European order is achieved. I think the essential difference, however, is the point which Kiesinger made three times to me—that Europe as it goes forward must act “in friendly agreement” with the United States. It is also noteworthy that he made this point very clear in public, immediately after the Paris meeting. 8. Implicit in the bilateral agreement reached between France and Germany on broad questions affecting Europe’s future is the suggestion of an emergent German-French leadership of the CM. This was put into words by French Amb Seydoux at a large dinner here last week, when he spoke of the comforting fact that the Paris talks had shown Europe now to be under outstanding leadership, i.e., that of de Gaulle and Kiesinger. We detect a good bit of satisfaction in German quarters at this prospect, and less concern than in the past over the predictably adverse reaction in the smaller European countries who tend to equate French-German “leadership” with French-German domination. Germans perhaps derive some satisfaction in being, for the present, even second man in such a combination. They are increasingly sought out by those who wish them to use their influence with de Gaulle—i.e. by US in trade and monetary talks, the UK for CM entry, and the Italians on various CM issues. 9. The German side considered NPT the second most important topic to be discussed in Paris, and they certainly hoped to achieve a clarification of the French position on NPT and in particular on negotiations between EURATOM and IAEA on a verification agreement. They appear, however, to have made no real progress on these questions. The French, as in the past, repeated their disapproval of the principle of the treaty. Franz Josef Strauss, in a television interview from Paris, suggested that the French had no interest in the Germans signing the treaty, since the Germans were already committed under the WEU not to manufacture nuclear weapons. The FonOff, however, has categorically denied to us that the French in any way suggested that the Germans should not sign the treaty. We think it is fair assumption that the Germans were told again by the French that the treaty is an iniquitous example of Soviet-American power politics, but that the decision to sign is their own. They did not follow this to the logical conclusion, however, in giving insight into their own future course of action on matters of vital importance to the German decision. Thus, elements in the German Govt opposed to the treaty such as Strauss returned from Paris strengthened in their opposition. Those like Brandt and possibly Kiesinger, who were seeking some sign of French intentions in EURATOM which might permit the German side to move forward toward acceptance of the treaty, unfortunately returned without much satisfaction. 10. From the point of view of US interests, I realize that the vague French-German proposal for an enlarged free trade area without foreseeable political unity is disturbing. We can only take comfort in Kiesinger’s assertion to us that this must lead to UK entry, and in the still doubtful prospects of success of this approach. If it does gain momentum, however, I frankly doubt that there is much we can do about it, unless we have a demonstrably better alternative to offer the British. Our Western European allies view this problem as essentially European, and I believe we shall have to accept the solution they find. Active intervention by us on this issue now would give de Gaulle an excellent pretext for claiming that the “Americans” wrecked the chances for any progress on UK entry. 11. In light of all of the evidence, I do not believe that Kiesinger’s concept of the future of Europe is in conflict with our Atlantic partnership concept. There is no evidence that such a Europe will, for a long time, be willing to make an important contribution toward the world’s “trouble spots.” If, however, the Europe Kiesinger is speaking of can eventually build the capacity to defend itself without the indefinite presence of US forces this would, as Kiesinger suggests, permit us to be relieved of an unwelcome burden. Moreover, a Europe which would no longer be a direct scene of the Soviet-US confrontation might indeed move more easily toward friendly cohesion. Certainly, the concept is broad enough to permit the Germans to work on it constructively, both with France and with their other allies, including the US. This seems to me to be in our interest, even if some adjustment in our concept of Europe’s future role may be required in the process. McGhee 250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 7 GER W. Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Puhan, cleared by Leddy and EA, and approved by Rusk. Also sent to Saigon. Washington, March 5, 1968, 0210Z. 124590. Ref: Bonn 9053.Telegram 9053, March 4, reported on the plans of three SPD Deputies to visit Hanoi. (Ibid., POL 7 GER W) For Ambassador from the Secretary. 1. I believe it would be worthwhile for you to go and see Brandt and tell him that with regard to the proposed visit to Hanoi by an official SPD delegation (reftel), the decision is one of course to be taken by Brandt and his party. Brandt should, however, be aware of the fact that the SPD by authorizing an official delegation is in effect associating the Government of the Federal Republic with this trip. Hanoi is sure to interpret the trip this way and so it would be seen here too. While it would not be the first visit by individual Parliamentarians from a non-Communist country, a trip by a group of German Parliamentarians approved by the leadership of the SPD would be interpreted as lack of support for the U.S. on the part of the government of one of its principal Allies. I believe it would not be out of order to suggest to Brandt that such a visit to Hanoi would be seen in much the same light as many Germans would view the visit of an official US Congressional delegation (made up of one of our two major parties) to East Germany.In telegram 127694, March 9, the Department of State transmitted the text of Brandt’s letter to Rusk clarifying the status of the SPD delegation and its mission. (Ibid.) In telegram 127761, March 9, the Department of State transmitted the text of a letter from Rusk to Brandt expressing the Secretary of State’s thanks and appreciation for the information contained in Brandt’s earlier message. (Ibid.) Rusk 251. Memorandum From Nathaniel Davis of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow)Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Secret. Also sent to General Robert Ginsburgh. Washington, March 8, 1968. SUBJECT Eastern European Support for Berlin Crisis You asked whether it might now be harder for the Soviets to start something in Berlin than in 1961. Would there be less support from Warsaw Pact allies? Would this effectively slow down the Soviets? There are three obvious ways a Berlin crisis could come: (1) as a clear decision, after consultation with Warsaw Pact allies; (2) as a Soviet decision with little consultation (perhaps only with the East Germans and the Poles); or (3) as an East German initiative (taking advantage of an ambiguous Soviet attitude). In any case, the crisis might well start with harassments, East or West German police shot, or other incidents where the fault and the initiative were not clear. Probably the West Germans would initially be the ones involved—not the occupying powers. If there were prior Warsaw Pact consultation, there would be strong voices opposing a Berlin move. All the allies except the East Germans and Poles would be unhappy. The Czechs realize that their economic troubles are partly the result of the military readiness they had to maintain during the recurring Berlin crises of 1959–1961. Their imports from West Germany have doubled in the past half dozen years (I am sending you a separate paper on this) and they have a strong interest in trade with the West. The Romanians would almost surely dissociate themselves from a Berlin initiative, and oppose it furiously. The Hungarians and Bulgarians would be most reluctant. It is more likely the Soviets would engineer it without giving their allies a chance to object. It is only too easy for a crisis to grow of itself in Berlin, and no Warsaw Pact ally would be in a position to withhold public support. This would be all that would be required (except from the East Germans and the Poles) in the initial stages. The southern tier allies might later be asked to mobilize, curtail trade with Bonn, and close down diplomatic and trade missions. By that time, however, the Berlin crisis might really have taken on a momentum and life of its own. There is a real possibility that Ulbricht might sense an ambiguity in Soviet attitudes and start slicing salami slices off the Berlin status quo. Polycentrism in Eastern Europe has not left Pankow untouched, and it gives Ulbricht a weight and maneuverability which he once did not have. There is an idea floating around the Intelligence Community that the Soviets might initiate a Berlin crisis in order to weld together the Warsaw Bloc. This is a minority view. Most analysts believe the Soviets are essentially cautious—particularly the current collective leadership—and not anxious to sacrifice their gains in Western Europe, their developing relationship with DeGaulle and the exploitable fissures in the West German coalition. While a Berlin crisis might force a degree of Eastern European solidarity, it would be bitterly resented. Conclusion: Moscow’s Eastern European allies south of Poland and East Germany would no doubt try to restrain the Soviets from initiating a Berlin crisis. However, if a crisis of ambiguous origin comes along, they are not in a good position to influence its development. With the possible exception of the Romanians, they would not be able to put themselves in the position of saying, “we won't support you.” A crisis might, in fact, force the Czechs and others to pull in their horns. It would also produce deep resentments at being manipulated once again by Moscow. ND 252. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspondence, Germany. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Text received from the White House. Washington, March 15, 1968, 1713Z. 130816. Deliver following message from the President to Chancellor Kiesinger as soon as possible: “March 15, 1968 Dear Chancellor Kiesinger: By now you will know that the Bank of England has acted to close the London gold market and that the governors of the central banks, active in the Gold Pool, have been invited to meet in Washington this week end. It is plain that we have at hand the means to overcome the dangers caused by the disorder in the gold market. The speculators are banking on an increase in the official price of gold. They are wrong. We can act together through the central banks to contain the speculative movements of funds that will almost surely occur in the next few weeks. Above all, we can act promptly to ratify and implement a plan for Special Drawing Rights as a means of replacing the reserves destroyed by speculation since the devaluation, and of meeting our needs for growth in reserves. But it remains true that these financial disorders—if not promptly and firmly overcome—can profoundly damage the political relations between Europe and America and set in motion forces like those which disintegrated the Western world between 1929 and 1933. That is why the meeting in Washington this week end—and the cooperation it must organize—is of extraordinary importance to us both. I hope that we can remain in close touch as our bankers and ministers work to devise means to overcome these dangers.In a March 17 reply, Kiesinger pledged to cooperate to the best of his ability. (Ibid.) Sincerely, Lyndon B. Johnson” Rusk 253. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. McGhee summarized this telegram and commented on it in At the Creation of a New Germany, pp. 249–250. Bonn, March 22, 1968, 1310Z. 9894. For the Secretary. Pass to the White House for the President. Subj: Kiesinger disturbed over reports from Washington. 1. I called on Chancellor Kiesinger yesterday to accompany Amb Schaetzel whom the Chancellor received, as an old friend, on the occasion of his current visit to Bonn. With some emotion, the Chancellor turned to me and said that he had been disturbed to hear reports from “recent German visitors to Washington” of “worries and doubts around the President” with respect to him and his govt. It was the form in which these doubts were expressed, as well as their content, which worried him. “Evidently our recent actions have not been understood in Washington.” German visitors were told “by someone close to the Pres” that “the Pres feels cheated (by Kiesinger)”. He would like to repeat that “as long as I am Chancellor I will steer the course that I discussed with the Pres when I met with him last year.” 2. Moreover he has not, as alleged in Washington, engaged in any conspiracy with the Communists. It is true that he is trying to improve relations with the Eastern countries; however, he was not trying to “woo the Reds” as had been charged in Washington. It had also been said that he had knowledge of and had acquiesced in “certain conversations” which had taken place. (I refer that he referred to conversations between SPD officials and rep of the Italian Communist Party (PCI) reported in Embtel 3682,Dated October 4, 1967. (Ibid., DEF 4 NATO) which Kiesinger appears to have discovered only in mid-February, see Embtel 8934.)Dated February 29. (Ibid., POL 12 GER W) He had also heard the reproach that the “SPD was the real master” of coalition Eastern policy, and that the Chancellor merely followed. He wanted to make it clear that the govt’s policy was his policy. He was not moving to the left; the SPD was moving to the right. There were forces in the SPD trying to push the govt into a different policy; however, he had intervened to block this. The FonMin himself had given him to reason for doubt, although he did not like the SPD attitude toward Viet-Nam. He was not in favor of being “a school master to Americans.” 3. Kiesinger continued that he had also heard from German visitors to Washington accusations that he was following a Gaullist policy. He had been accused of making a secret agreement with de Gaulle in their last meeting. As he had told me when he returned from the meeting (Embtel 8667), Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 292. he was unhappy that France had left the NATO. de Gaulle had assured him, however, that he would not leave the Alliance and that he welcomed US troops in Europe. He had told de Gaulle that de Gaulle underrated the Sov danger and had criticized de Gaulle for having said that “the US could not help but dominate.” He had pointed out to de Gaulle that his anti-American feeling was losing him support in Germany, whereupon de Gaulle had explained to him that he had to take this attitude for domestic reasons. 4. de Gaulle, said Kiesinger, knows the FRG’s opinion about currency and balance of payments problems—the FRG rejection of his efforts to create a new gold standard. He regretted that despite Germany’s efforts de Gaulle would not accept an accelerated KR. He and de Gaulle differed on UK entry, and some have accused him of not talking forcefully enough to de Gaulle on this issue. He had not done more because he knew de Gaulle would not agree. Since he had no effective way of putting on pressure, he had to be content with a modest step forward. He had purposely left the arrangements made in Paris regarding UK entry vague; otherwise all of his efforts would have failed. The French have since pressed for a narrow interpretation of what was agreed in Paris, whereas the Germans have sought a liberal interpretation. President Johnson had told him in their meeting last year that he must be “the harmonizer” between the US and de Gaulle. He had made no secret agreements with de Gaulle. He had nothing to hide. He still believed, however, in the Franco-German treaty. Any rupture between France and Germany would be the end of efforts to build Europe. Indeed, he hoped in the future to come closer to de Gaulle in Eastern policy. 5. With respect to his views toward Europe, he had told de Gaulle of his belief in an “independent Europe in friendly partnership with the US.” He corrected himself to say that “independent” was not quite the word—that what he sought could be better described as a “Europe that stood on its own feet.” This was his firm decision. Any discussion with de Gaulle was a struggle—“A heavy battle.” He knew, however, that de Gaulle cannot realize that role that he has in mind for himself and France. 6. Kiesinger referred to his “Atlantic imperium” concept, which he outlined on March 11 in his speech to the Bundestag.For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 990–997. There appears to have been a misunderstanding of his remarks on the part of certain sections of the American press, and certain American individuals. For example, Birrenbach has heard that Mr. McCloy was disturbed. Perhaps his use of the word “imperium” was a bad one. Some people might as a result consider what he had said Gaullism. He had hesitated, however, to use the word community, since he did not feel it was descriptive. 7. Amb Schaetzel commented that the views as reported to the Chancellor did not accord with those he had heard during his recent visit to Washington. Quite to the contrary, there was widespread appreciation for the Chancellor’s support which had been particularly helpful during the recent gold crisis. He stressed that, during the present unsettled period when both of us are under great tension and pressure, we must make a particular effort to avoid misunderstandings. 8. I assured the Chancellor that the views which he reported did not conform with those that I had encountered in my recent visit to Washington, nor with any reports from this Embassy nor comments in messages from my govt. I had reported fully what he had told me about his last meeting with de Gaulle, and my interpretation that he had not let us down was to my knowledge the view in Washington. As I had under instructions told him in our meeting on Feb. 22 we had no concerns with Germany’s Eastern policy. Indeed, it is wholly in line with the President’s views as expressed in his speech of Oct. 7, 1966.For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1966, Book II, pp. 1125–1130. I thought I knew what he was referring to when he spoke of conversations with the Communists. We knew that he was unaware of these discussions at the time and of his reaction when they were later reported to him. No one suspected him of collusion with the Communists. I had repeated to Washington his full views on the future of Europe, as he had expressed them to me on Feb 22 (Bonn 8692).See footnote 3, Document 248. Apart from his use of the word imperium, which could create some ambiguity, his views were in full accord with our wellknown European unity-Atlantic partnership approach. Nothing that I had heard from Washington had indicated any concern over his remarks. I expressed doubt that any responsible US official could have made any considered remarks of the nature he described. Certainly they did not reflect the views of the Pres or the SecState. Particularly in time of tension and under informal circumstances with old German friends, it was possible that loose remarks could have been made which could be misinterpreted. 9. The Chancellor appeared somewhat assuaged by Amb Schaetzel’s and my remarks. However, it is clear that he believes in the authenticity of the reports of German visitors which have upset him. Naturally, he did not volunteer nor did I question him on the personalities involved. 10. Comment: I feel sure that whatever was said in Washington—if it was said—has been badly misquoted and misinterpreted to the Chancellor. The reports are obviously irresponsible, and I do not exclude the possibility that they constitute a deliberate effort to cause trouble. In addition to German visitors, it is conceivable that members of the German Emb are involved. We are not able, however, from what we know here, to pin the matter down further. 11. The important thing, however, is that the Chancellor is disturbed over false rumors, at a time when we need him most. We must be absolutely sure that nothing is done to upset the excellent relationship of mutual confidence between Kiesinger and the Pres. We must reassure Kiesinger that we do not doubt him. 12. Particularly in the light of the important contribution which Germany made through Bundesbank Pres Blessing to the success of the monetary meeting held in Washington on March 16–17, I strongly recommend that the Pres send a letter to Kiesinger expressing our appreciation for this assistance. At the same time I believe it would be appropriate, without referring to the present conversation, for the Pres to add a few remarks expressing full confidence in the Chancellor in his relations with de Gaulle and in his Eastern policy.In a March 27 letter to Kiesinger, transmitted in telegram 136964 to Bonn, President Johnson praised the “contribution” that his exchanges with the German Chancellor were having in creating progress in trade, finance, and security for Europe. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspondence, Germany) 13. In the future I hope that all high officials will be most cautious that their remarks do not cast doubt as to our own attitude toward the Chancellor or Germany—or suggest that we suspect any disloyalty or change in their attitude toward us. McGhee 254. Telegram From the Mission in Berlin to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential. Repeated to Bonn and Moscow. Berlin, March 25, 1968, 1810Z. 1176. From the Ambassador. Subject: Ambassador’s talk with Governing Mayor Schuetz. 1. I called on GovMayor Schuetz today accompanied by Minister Morris. We talked for about forty minutes on several topics. Schuetz and I had a private conversation about Senat-Allied consultations, which I shall be reporting separately.Telegram 1177 from Berlin, March 26. (Ibid.) 2. Student demonstrations. I complimented Schuetz in the way the Senat and police had handled the March 23 Vietnam demonstration. I remarked that we are sorry that demonstrations against our Vietnam policy have recently caused German officials extra work. Schuetz said that he felt his government and the police were doing better recently in finding the right degree of flexibility in responding to demonstrations. The March 23 episode was not significant; police estimates (3,000 participants) actually were quite high. The disappointing thing was that despite the unimportant size of such demonstrations compared to Berlin’s population, they continued to receive extensive press and TV coverage. 3. Soviet Trade Center in West Berlin. I told Schuetz that in view of the increased Soviet aggressiveness and the rash of spurious complaints that they had been making recently, the US Government was not inclined to favor increased Soviet presence in West Berlin at this time. The things SovAmb Abrasimov and the East Germans were saying about rampant Nazi activity in West Berlin were clearly exaggerated. Abrasimov’s March 13 letter outlining charges regarding the NDP was forwarded to the Department of State in telegram 1109 from Berlin, March 13. (Ibid., POL 28 GER B) The Department of State provided a response in telegram 134324 to Bonn, March 21. (Ibid.) Their protests about Federal German activities here seemed an attempt to turn back the clock. We see nothing wrong with such activities as the Federal Republic has been carrying on in West Berlin, although we would be happier if the Defense Committee did not meet here again (Schuetz indicated full agreement on this point). I said I would be seeing Abrasimov for lunch and would tell him as well that we are displeased with the present aggressive Soviet attitude toward West Berlin. Schuetz said he understood our view, but he still thought there might be value in having a Soviet trade representation in West Berlin—under German law, not Allied aegis—since the Senat felt that for businessmen to conduct business through the Soviet Embassy in East Berlin implied that the Embassy was competent for all of Berlin. I repeated that we were not inclined to accept such increased Soviet presence at this time. 4. Soviet flights over West Berlin. Schuetz raised the subject of recent Soviet overflights as another possible example of a harder Soviet attitude. I recapitulated for him the recent incidents and the unsatisfactory Soviet replies to our protests. The overflights seemed clearly to fall into the category of harassment. I said I would also speak to Abrasimov about this matter as well. 5. Berlin economy. I remarked that the Schering Company’s plan to build a large new laboratory in Berlin was a gratifying example of industry’s support for the Berlin economy. Schuetz agreed and said that despite some initial difficulty in acquiring the property necessary for the new plant, the project now seemed well underway. He still had the impression, however, that Berlin would have to keep up pressure on German industriallists to increase their interest in investing here. Berlin also hopes to achieve some results with US businessmen through the help of the German Consulates. I said I was sorry that our balance of payments deficit would restrict US investment here, but that we would still encourage US firms to invest locally-acquired funds in Berlin. Schuetz agreed that this course offered good possibilities. He had received the impression in Washington that despite the moratorium on investments, Berlin might still be able to get US consideration of important specific projects which could not be financed locally. I told him that I could not give him any encouragement on this point. 6. University reform. I noted that the public hearings on the draft Berlin University reform law were beginning March 25, and asked Schuetz what progress he expected. He replied that some politicians still hoped to pass a new university law by the end of 1968, but that most experts were less optimistic. Strangely, the students themselves were now urging that a new law not be passed too quickly. The most important change being considered would be the replacement of the Rector by a professional president, after the American pattern. Since this would bring a significant change to the traditional privileges and powers of professors, the new law would meet with criticism from all sides. 7. Berlin morale. Schuetz said that there still seemed to be a general uneasiness in Berlin about the future of the city. Berliners fear specifically that the Federal Government may be growing less concerned about their problems, “especially since that business at Nuernberg” (referring to the SPD Congress).For text of the portion of the March 21 SPD Congress statement dealing with foreign policy and Berlin issues, see Meissner, Die deutsche Ostpolitik, pp. 245–247. I said that we wanted to help as much as possible, and that we would support efforts to have the FRG Berlin aid law extended indefinitely. Schuetz said that extension of the aid law would be a psychological boost for the city, as well as a material benefit. 8. Problems in the Berlin SPD. Schuetz was not too forthcoming about problems in the Berlin SPD. He summed them up by saying “the left wants to dominate the party.” He said personal ambition was mostly to blame, as was the left’s “tradition” of fighting the party majority. There really is little dispute on substantive issues, with the possible exception of policy toward student demonstrations. 9. RIAS. Schuetz raised the subject of RIAS personnel cuts, saying that he had just written a letter to Minister Morris (not yet received) and also had written to USIA Director Leonard Marks stressing the importance of avoiding any hint that the US was reducing its presence in Berlin.The text of the letter was transmitted in telegram 1184 from Berlin, March 27. (Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US) I told Schuetz that we felt it imperative to reduce our costs in running RIAS, but that this did not mean we were reducing our presence or interest. We had discussed the problem with FedRep Minister Wehner, who was now investigating other possible sources of additional funds. We hoped also to streamline RIAS staffing inter alia by means of the normal attrition rate. Schuetz said this was reassuring. He had been very concerned lest a noticeable change in RIAS spark public speculation about lessening US interest in Berlin. Morris 255. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Stoessel, cleared by Leddy and Walt Rostow, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Brussels for USEC. Washington, March 26, 1968, 0454Z. 136255. Reference Bonn’s 9894. Document 253. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. 1. I read your message 9894 regarding Kiesinger’s state of mind with amazement. We have reviewed the list of recent German visitors to Washington and whom they saw. It is in our view inconceivable that any accurate report of these meetings could have resulted in the kind of conclusions Kiesinger came to, as reported in your telegram. 2. Since receiving your message, we have had further confirmation of Kiesinger’s concern via Walther Casper. Latter saw Walt Rostow informally, March 24,No record of this meeting was found. and said that Kiesinger had recently received a circumstantial document in English alleging that Rostow had expressed strong criticism of Kiesinger along lines reported in your cable. It was also alleged that Katzenbach had made similar remarks, although less strongly stated. According to report received by Chancellor, President feels that Kiesinger has “betrayed” the United States on a whole series of questions, including making “secret agreements” with de Gaulle, selling out the UK on the Common Market, approving secret contacts between German Socialists and Communist politicians, passing on to East Germans knowledge derived from contacts with President Johnson, taking a weak position on Viet-Nam, and subverting the Atlantic partnership. 3. Rostow made clear to Casper that views of this kind had not been expressed by him and were not views of US Government. Rostow noted that he had recently seen only two German visitors, Duckwitz and Barzel (latter was here on unannounced and unreported visit),A memorandum of conversation of the Rostow-Barzel meeting is Document 248. Duckwitz visited Washington February 28. No record of this meeting was found. to both of whom he had expressed quite different views. Rostow told Casper that he could advise Chancellor that reputed views were not his nor those of US Government. 4. Casper had informed us that he was in touch with Chancellor by telephone morning of March 25 and that latter was much relieved to hear his report on talk with Rostow. Chancellor told Casper he would abandon further efforts to seek clarification of alleged views of US Government but that he would attempt to track down source of misinformation, since it was clear that someone was trying to make trouble between our two countries. 5. This whole episode strikes me as very dangerous business indeed and both President and I feel we should get to the bottom of it, if possible. It would appear that report received by Chancellor represented effort to mislead him intentionally about our attitude and we would like to know who was responsible. 6. I believe you should call on Kiesinger and tell him that I was dismayed at the report which he mentioned to you and Schaetzel and which Casper discussed with Rostow. You can assure him that we know of absolutely no grounds for suspicions and that we hope the assurances received via Casper will put his mind at rest. It would appear, however, that someone is deliberately trying to harm the relations of our two countries and we feel it is important to bring this out in the open and find out who is doing it. You could add that if, in the future, there are any rumors which could have the effect of dividing us, we should promptly run them down so that we can clear the atmosphere of any misunderstandings whatsoever. Rusk 256. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Brussels. Bonn, March 27, 1968, 1840Z. 10118. BUSEC. Subj: Inaccurate report of US views received by Kies-inger. 1. I called on Chancellor Kiesinger today to advise him of the replies received from Washington (State’s 136255 and 136706)Telegram 136255 is Document 255. In telegram 136706, March 26, Under Secretary Katzenbach instructed McGhee: “I want to add my own personal note to the message the Secretary has sent you on Kiesinger’s state of mind. I was appalled to learn of the report that I had been critical of Kiesinger. The charge is totally untrue and I hope you will so state to the Chancellor. I have great respect for him. At no time have I spoken about him in any other vein.” (Department of State, Central File, POL GER W–US) with regard to the disturbing rumors which had been reported to him (Bonn’s 9894). Document 253. Since I considered it the most convincing way of reassuring him, I showed him the reftels which he read with interest. Although the Chancellor admitted that he had been somewhat disturbed by Erhard’s interview of today in Echo der Zeit (Bonn’s 10062)Dated March 26. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 EUR E–GER W) which repeated some of the same American criticisms of FRG policy, he said that he fully accepted the forthright statement made by the Sec and Under Secretary, which confirmed what Walther Casper had advised him from Washington following his talks with Walt Rostow. 2. The Chancellor said that he agreed with the Sec as to the importance of finding out precisely who was responsible for making such false and malicious reports. In this case, he did not know the individual involved personally. It was not Duckwitz nor Barzel nor Berg nor any of the recent prominent visitors. All he could tell me is that it was a man who had been recommended to him by others as having been quite an accurate reporter in the past. Predictions he had made in the past had pre-sumably been confirmed by subsequent events. He promised that, after he had looked into the matter further, he would tell me who the individual is so that we may be forewarned. The Chancellor then repeated much of the same ground as I reported in Bonn’s 9894, defending himself against the accusations allegedly made against him. 3. I assured the Chancellor of our desire to trace down and eliminate all possible sources of false rumors. I was pleased that he accepted at face value the response which the Sec had made. I was sure that he had noted that Erhard did not say he was reporting criticisms made by US Govt officials, but as views which he attributed to the American people. Subsequently, in response to the Chancellor’s request, I provided him with a written paraphrase of the messages from the Sec and the Under Sec. McGhee 257. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to the Secretary of Defense and USCINCEUR. Bonn, April 3, 1968, 1838Z. 10380. In my first official call on Ministry of Defense State Secretary Von Hase, on April 1, we spent an hour discussing several subjects of current interest: 1. Vietnam—Von Hase made the obvious observation that the bombing cessation now puts the matter of negotiation and peace squarely up to Hanoi. He alluded to the Stern article re the alleged pronouncements of Vice President Ky and indicated interest in what we may discover as to the accuracy with which Ky was actually quoted.The article, which appeared in the April 7 issue of Der Stern, pp. 24–25, 251–253, carried the title “Ja, ich bin Korrupt aber woher haben denn die Kennedys ihr Geld?” (Sure, I'm corrupt but how did the Kennedys make their money?) Separate verification action is underway. 2. Stockholm financial meeting—Von Hase indicated that the German Government has no reservations with the conference resolutions and the communiqué. 3. Neutralization of troop costs— A) German postponement of financial talks—Von Hase was not familiar with the recent delay proposed by the German side. In response to my statement that we could not understand it and that if additional governmental meetings were required the Embassy stood ready to conduct them. He volunteered to inquire into the matter with the Foreign Ministry and advise. B) Long-term solution—Min Schroeder, in a recent speech, alluded to the desirability of a “long-term solution” to the problem of neutralization of troop costs. Von Hase said that Schroeder had no specific solutions in mind; rather, he recognized the disadvantage of annual airings of the problem and simply felt it would be to everyone’s advantage to work out a long-term solution—all of this seemingly with full recognition of the necessity of facing the problem of neutralizing our troop costs. 4. German procurement decisions— A) Multi-role aircraft 1975 (MRA–75)—Germany needs one strong partner to develop and produce the MRA–75 (This is the new title given to the Neues Kampfflugzeug—NKF). This is necessary because all of the German aircraft industry together is to the French aircraft industry as 1:3, to the British 1:6 and to the US 1:35. The Germans require this strong partner not only to help in the development of the aircraft but also to participate in selling it. The MRA–75 aircraft, being down the road, leaves a void in work for the German aircraft industry in the meantime. Filling this void is one of the main considerations involved in the F/RF 4 vs. F/RF 104 “gap filler” decision. B) Aircraft buy decision—Decision on the “gap filler” aircraft is expected in May, with Parliamentary deliberations to begin after Easter. Acceding that the F/RF 4 is the best aircraft from the military point of view, Von Hase personally obviously leans to the F/RF 104 from the standpoints of German industry, politics, logistics and cost. C) Helicopter decision—The Germans have firmly decided that helicopters are required to enhance the mobility of their ground forces. Parliamentary deliberations on the helicopter decision will go hand in hand with those on the “gap filler” aircraft. D) Pershing 1A—The Germans definitely intend to buy the improved Pershing 1A missile system—perhaps not the full 72 but close to it. 5. Main battle tank 70—Von Hase expressed satisfaction with the recent main battle tank 70 developments which insure the continuation of the joint development program, including the solution to the funding of the program. He mentioned the psychological and combat advantages which will accrue if our forces who are standing ready side by side in Germany, have the same tanks. 6. Forthcoming SecDef/Minister of Defense meeting—Von Hase placed great importance on the two Ministers getting to know one another. He agreed that the meeting now being arranged for The Hague should be quite informal, a “get acquainted” meeting, however, he is anxious to see the resumption of the semi-annual SecDef/Minister of Defense meetings. For the first semi-annual meeting with Mr. Clifford the Germans did not intend to be “protocol conscious” and would be quite amenable to conducting it in Washington in consideration of plans for Secy Clifford’s present responsibilities. He hoped that the plans for the first of these semi-annual meetings could be firmed at the Ministers meeting in The Hague. 7. Mutual force reductions—Von Hase affirmed that the Germans continue to have a keen interest in the general subject of mutual force reductions. They tend to look on our troop rotation as “advance reductions”—to eventual mutual force reductions. He agreed that such actions create a rationale for the Soviets to take comparable actions. There is a German group under the chairmanship of Gen Heusinger studying this subject. Von Hase promised to provide us with a summary of their conclusions up to this point. McGhee 258. Letter From the Ambassador to Germany (McGhee) to Secretary of State Rusk Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential. A notation on the source text reads: “Weekend. A copy of this letter has been sent thru S/S to EUR (copies to U and M) for information.” Bonn, April 11, 1968. Dear Mr. Secretary: You will recall that we have submitted in airgram form analyses of German relations with France and with England, of Germany’s Eastern policy and of the problem of reunification. I am now enclosing for your information the final analysis in this series, this one devoted to our own relations with the Federal Republic.Not printed. It was entitled “Principal Issues in US-German Relations,” and transmitted as airgram A–1207 from Bonn, April 11. (Ibid.) On the whole, our analysis is an optimistic one. We conclude that there is no conflict in German and American interests now or in the foreseeable future. The problems and tactical objectives of the Federal Republic have shifted in order to meet the changing circumstances of the late sixties, including the increase in the Federal Republic’s own influence and importance. We have had to take this in account in American policy, and it is our conclusion that, generally speaking, this has been successfully accomplished. We have recognized sensitive areas in our relations and have eliminated the most direct causes of contention. We also conclude, however, that there has been some deterioration of the American image in Germany which has begun to alter the nature and extent of American influence. The major causes of this are Viet- Nam, the social unrest in America and our balance of payments problem. On the German side, while the political situation is stable, there has been an increase in radicalism both on the right and on the left, and both exploit anti-Americanism. We believe nonetheless that we can have confidence in the future of our relations as an important factor in the stability and security of the western community. What we need is to keep in the closest possible contact with the Germans at all levels to ensure that our policies are mutually understood, and to be willing to adjust our concepts of European security and European economic and political organization to those developed by the Germans, in cooperation with the other Europeans, insofar as these do not genuinely prejudice essential American interests. I hope that you will find time to read the airgram in its entirety, since US-German relations are, and will continue to be, of such central importance to the success of American foreign policy. I am also sending copies, as I have of the other airgrams, to Nick Katzenbach, Gene Rostow, John Leddy, and in the field, to David Bruce, Harlan Cleveland, and to Woody Wallner in Paris. Sincerely, George 259. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to Berlin, Paris, London, Moscow, USNATO, USAREUR,EUCOM, and USELMLO. Bonn, April 24, 1968, 1640Z. 11203. Subject: GDR interference with Berlin access. Ref: Bonn 11159; Bonn 11202.Telegram 11159 from Bonn, April 23, reported three instances of East German interference with access to Berlin. (Ibid.) Telegram 11202 from Bonn, April 24, reported on the German presentation to the Quadripartite meeting regarding access. (Ibid.) 1. I am convinced that the succession of East German measures aimed at interfering with German access to Berlin poses a serious challenge which we must meet. Otherwise the East Germans will be encouraged to escalate their pressure on West Berlin and, as FonMin Brandt has stressed, the psychological effect in West Berlin could jeopardize the city’s viability. 2. It seems to me that we face two requirements. First, we must show sufficient public reaction to prove that the three Allies and the FRG are actively defending free access. Otherwise there will be increasing media criticism—particularly if instances of access denial recur—and the United States in particular will be singled out for refusing to take a firm position with the Sovs concerning Berlin for fear of prejudicing our relations with the Sovs in other areas. Publicized protests however will not be effective unless accompanied by effective measures designed to persuade the Sovs and the East Germans to bring about cessation of access harassment. 3. With this in mind we are proposing the following steps in a Quadripartite meeting this afternoonThe Embassy reported on the meeting in telegram 11259 from Bonn, April 25. (Ibid.) A statement by the three powers was released following the meeting. The text was transmitted in telegram 11338 from Bonn, April 26. (Ibid.) Subsequently, the three Ambassadors addressed a letter of protest to Abrasimov. The text of this letter was transmitted in telegram 11339 from Bonn, March 26. (Ibid.) The Mission in Berlin reported on its démarche to the Soviets in telegram 1352, March 29. (Ibid.) in the hope of achieving agreement on recommendations to be made to capitals for approval: A. In order to clarify the policy being followed by the GDR the FRG should arrange for several probes in which FRG officials of varying ranks should attempt to drive to or from Berlin. B. A formal protest should be drafted from the three Ambs to Abrasimov covering the specific instances which can be documented of persons denied surface access to Berlin as the result of the latest East German order. C. In accordance with Ruete’s suggestion, the American Amb in Moscow should make a quiet approach to the Sov Govt in behalf of the three Allies pointing to various recent steps taken by East German authorities such as the ban on NPD travel, the East German citizenship law and the present ban on FRG official travel, noting that a certain escalation of East German pressure is apparent and emphasizing the seriousness with which we view these developments. He could inquire what the Soviet intentions with regard to Berlin are, noting that in our view nothing is to be gained by an increase in tension in connection with the city. D. Agreement should be reached among the three Allies and the FRG on countermeasures against the East German harassments. A list should be prepared which must include German as well as Allied and NATO-wide counteractions, since otherwise the required Allied cooperations cannot be expected. E. As soon as agreement is reached on such a list NATO should be briefed in detail on the Quadripartite assessment of the threat to free Berlin access and on the various actions, including countermeasures, taken or proposed by the three powers and the FRG. If increased TTD restrictions are proposed, NATO agreement on this will be sought. In NATO the German Rep might be given the responsibility for the general presentation. 4. The recommendation for a further protest to Abrasimov is not in accord with the thinking expressed by Ruete yesterday (first reftel). However, I am convinced that some further publicized move by the three Allies will be required to meet press criticism here and eventually in the US alleging an inadequate Tripartite response. 5. In the event that the British or French do not wish to go along with a quiet approach in Moscow I believe that we should give serious thought to a unilateral US démarche. We shall [have] further recommendations on this when the outcome of today’s meeting is known. In the meantime I have just learned that I will be seeing Abrasimov for a final call on May 3. I would expect to use this occasion to raise the access issue with Abrasimov. This conversation could be publicized or kept confidential, depending on the circumstances at the time and Abrasimov’s response. McGhee 260. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Confidential. Repeated to Bonn, London, Paris, USNATO, Berlin, USAREUR, EUCOM, and USELMLO. Moscow, April 25, 1968, 1227Z. 3651. Subj: GDR interference with Berlin access. Ref: Bonn 11202.See footnote 2, Document 259. While I am quite prepared to wade in with the Soviets here on GDR interference with Berlin access, it seems to me this should be last step and not the first, since this involves serious confrontation of two great powers and directly engages Soviet prestige. It seems to me it is typical of Federal Republic always to expect us to take action while such matters as interzonal trade are kept sacrosanct. If we are to be successful in facing down East Germans on this issue, we must find some means of retaliation which really hurts them. While restriction on TTDs is useful, I doubt that this is enough unless we stop issuing any until this issue is resolved. As minimum I should think that before any action taken here, we should have firm agreement on what our next step should be if Soviets ignore our protest. We have a certain amount of capital here but constant tendency to run to Soviets on every issue diminishes effectiveness of each subsequent démarche. I would therefore urge that Federal Republic be made to face up to this issue. I strongly suspect that Soviets tend to ride with punch under pressure from East Germans unless or until Federal Republic and Allies show that East German action is not in interest of Eastern powers.In telegram 153417, April 26, the Department of State indicated its preference for avoiding further public statements on the issues and for a “quiet approach” to Moscow. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B) In telegram 156717, May 2, the Department of State outlined plans for calling in Ambassador Dobrynin for a discussion of Berlin-related issues with Secretary Rusk. (Ibid.) Thompson 261. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B. Confidential. Drafted by Bohlen. Washington, April 29, 1968, 4:30 p.m. SUBJECT Access to Berlin PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR Deputy Under Secretary Charles E. Bohlen During his call on me today, I told Ambassador Dobrynin purely privately that I was somewhat concerned over the situation created by the events of the East German authorities to bar the travel to Berlin of the West German Mayor. I said this could create all sorts of unpleasant complications since we regarded it as a violation of the agreement for access to Berlin. Dobrynin said that he had not been informed recently of this development but understood it was not as Mayor of Berlin that Mr. Schuetz had been refused. I laughed and said I thought it was impossible even in East German parlance to divide an individual in two. Dobrynin agreed but repeated that he was not fully informed of the situation. 262. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource: Department of State, NSC and Cabinet Papers: Lot 72 D 318. Confidential. An attached memorandum indicates that the paper was prepared for a May NSC meeting. Subsequently, the meeting was postponed to May 15 and then May 22. Page 8 of the paper and page 2 of the summary were revised to reflect the results of May 9–10 U.S.-FRG talks on military cost neutralization. (Memorandum by Benjamin Read, May 10, 1968; ibid.) The revised version of page 8 is printed here. The summary is not printed. The summary notes of the discussion at the May 22 NSC meeting is Document 266. Washington, May 5, 1968. I. Germany in Perspective The advent of the present Bonn Government in December 1966 marks a turning point in German-American relations. The Adenauer-Erhard years were years of German dependence upon the United States, with the FRG accepting U.S. tutelage in return for our security guarantees and our support for German efforts to rebuild a prosperous and respected nation. The fall of Erhard late in 1966, and the creation of the Kiesinger-Brandt government, signalled the evolution of German policy toward greater emphasis on the pursuit of reunification of their divided nation. The relative absence of crisis in Europe and the public belief that Soviet aggression had become somewhat less likely; the growth of a détente psychology; the passage of years since 1945 and the erosion of the post-war fears and sense of guilt; de Gaulle’s rekindling of nationalism first in France and then elsewhere in Europe; all contributed to a greater German sense of independence from tutelage, and more active efforts to lay the groundwork for eventual reunification. In Germany, however, this has taken place without serious strain on FRG ties with NATO, and without rupturing cooperation and partnership with the U.S.NATO and the U.S. are still regarded in Germany as the basis of security on which German efforts to pursue reunification rest. The Kiesinger-Brandt government’s main single policy innovation has been the pursuit of a more flexible Eastern policy aimed at opening a dialogue with the Soviet Union, improving relations with the Eastern European states, and seeking to extend the FRG’s ties with East Germany (short of recognition). The FRG regards improved relations with the East as a contribution to European peace and stability; but, at least equally important, it is a necessary prelude to progress toward reunification. The results of this policy up to now have been modest. This is not surprising. The German leaders have been aware that they are pursuing difficult and long-range goals with their Eastern policy, and that results will be slow at best. II. U.S. Policy Objectives We seek, in the framework of a stable and secure European community, a friendly unified peaceful and democratic Germany. With these goals in mind, our specific objectives are to 1) maintain the excellent and confident bilateral relations we enjoy with the Federal Republic at all levels; 2) encourage continuing German support of European integration; 3) promote continuing German confidence and participation in maintaining the security of the West within the NATO framework; 4) promote German cooperation in meeting global economic and financial problems; 5) assure the continued freedom and viability of Berlin; and 6) help promote the eventual peaceful reunification of Germany. III. Problem Areas A. Berlin—Our policy is to seek to preserve access to the city; maintain the confidence of the Berliners in our ability to keep the city free; and maintain Allied solidarity to the degree possible in the face of serious problems with France in matters external to Berlin but occasionally affecting Berlin directly. We must assure that our relations with Berlin officials are kept harmonious; and support the principle of close political and economic relations between Berlin and the Federal Republic but avoid allowing serious confrontations with the USSR over Berlin to develop, as far as this can be done without abandoning our responsibilities and rights. The Soviets have given the East German regime a certain amount of latitude on Berlin access matters. On March 10, the East Germans issued a “decree” banning members of the right-radical NPD party of the FRG from traveling to and from Berlin. This was followed on April 13 by a ban on the travel of FRG cabinet members and other high FRG officials through East Germany. The Three Allies (U.S., U.K. and France) protested this action in a statement delivered to the Soviet Embassy in East Berlin on April 19. To date, there are only three confirmed cases of GDR authorities turning back FRG officials on the basis of this ban. Two were relatively minor officials; the third was the Governing Mayor of Berlin, Klaus Schuetz, who is also currently President of the Bundesrat (Federal Council), the upper house of the FRG parliament this month. GDR officials indicated that it was the latter position that resulted in the refusal to let Schuetz travel on the Berlin-Helmstedt autobahn to the FRG on April 26. Identical letters protesting the illegality of this GDR interference with Berlin access were sent to the Soviet Ambassador in East Berlin by the three Allied Ambassadors in Bonn. These letters reminded the Soviets of their responsibility to provide access. NATO has been briefed on the situation and the FRG has proposed a series of diplomatic countermeasures to try to force the Soviets to tighten the reins on the GDR. The possibility of trade and travel restrictions on the GDR is also being studied by the three Protective Powers and the FRG. The motives of the Soviet Union and the GDR in stirring up the Berlin access problem right now seem to include the following: 1. The East Germans are becoming increasingly isolated even within the Soviet bloc. In addition, they are pretty thoroughly isolated from the major international trends and activities of the day (e.g., they are absent from the NPT debate in the UN; they view with alarm the trend toward liberalization in some parts of the Soviet bloc and the first small steps now being taken to bring together the two parts of Europe). One of the few ways available to Ulbricht to exercise leverage on both his friends and his adversaries is the GDR’s de facto hold on German ground access to Berlin. He is now using this to show everyone that the GDR is still around and has to be reckoned with. For the longer range, the East German regime may also hope that it can gradually, by salami tactics, assert an increasing degree of access control, reduce the free flow of traffic, and strangle West Berlin. 2. The Russians may wish to use Berlin frictions as a way of maintaining their hold on the increasingly restive East European countries. They may also be willing to let the GDR demonstrate to Bonn one side of the stick and carrot technique (Tsarapkin’s willingness to talk with Brandt about non-aggression pacts being the “carrot”). Finally, it is not unlikely that the GDR initiated the decrees and access interruptions on its own, with the Soviets acquiescing but not pushing the GDR into these acts. We will have to see, through quiet diplomatic intercession with the Soviets, whether the Soviets can be brought to recognize that some of the objectives they themselves say they have in mind for Central Europe (e.g., German acceptance of NPT, avoiding challenge to the status quo there) are put in jeopardy by the GDR’s challenge to free German access to Berlin. If we can interest the Soviets in this, the result will not be a sudden retraction by the GDR, but more probably an unannounced diminution in the number of interruptions and denials of access. There will probably be a rescission, without a major crisis, of the immediate problem over German officials' access to Berlin, since the Soviet Union retains strong controls over the East Germans; has not challenged the Allied regime in West Berlin; and gives no indication of wishing to provoke a major confrontation over the issue. The protests already made to the Soviet Union have led to some easing of East German interference. There are other measures available for use if necessary, including higher-level discussions with the Soviets and graduated Western economic countermeasures against East Germany. The Berlin problem can probably be solved finally only in the context of a growing together of divided Europe of which it is a microcosm. In the meantime, we should use the political, diplomatic, and economic means at our disposal to counter threats as they arise. These would include engaging the Soviet Union’s own interest in not disturbing the status quo; East German economic interests and fear of isolation; and a clear understanding on our own side of the serious consequences to ourselves if Berlin were allowed to die on the vine. The damage to our relations with the Federal Republic; to Western confidence in our commitments and resolution; and to Soviet restraint based on their respect for our power and determination to protect our European interests, would be very great. B. German Reunification and Eastern Policy—One FRG major foreign policy goal remains the reunification of the German people. The Eastern policy of the governing coalition (better relations with Moscow, relations short of formal recognition with East Germany and diplomatic relations with the Eastern European states) reflects an effort to shake up existing rigidities in the hope of developing a climate or, at least opportunities, for ultimate reunification steps. No responsible German has a reunification timetable but most politicians are convinced that reunification can come about in some fashion. The leaders of the FRG know that at best it will be a slow process, and they will have to be patient. Relations have been established with Romania and reestablished with Yugoslavia. The Czechs, treading cautiously to avoid Soviet reaction to their internal liberalization, will probably delay establishing diplomatic relations with Germany for a year or two, but closer economic ties are probable. Barring unforeseen circumstances flowing from the present turmoil in Poland,Reference is to anti-Semitic demonstrations orchestrated by the “Partisan” faction of the Polish Communist Party that began in March. the Poles can be expected to resist FRG blandishments longer than the others. The USSR will resist any increase of German influence in Eastern Europe, but eventually may try to weaken German ties with the West, using German desire for reunification as bait. For the foreseeable future, however, the Soviets will not allow the GDR to be absorbed by the Federal Republic, nor is the Federal Republic likely to be seduced into abandoning NATO and EEC. More probably, we are seeing the beginning of a long process of greater interchange and discourse between the two parts of Europe, to which current FRG policy has made an indispensable contribution. The FRG Eastern policy is consistent with our own. In fact, the FRG probably was influenced toward greater flexibility by the U.S. example. Nevertheless, there has been German sensitivity to the U.S. reaction as the FRG seeks to open a dialogue with the Soviet Union. German press reports, private gossip in Bonn and reports by German travelers returning from the U.S., all have been quoted to the effect that the U.S. is worried that the FRG is too accommodating toward the East, talking with the Russians behind our backs, etc. The U.S. Position—The highest U.S. officials have assured the FRG time and again that we think German Eastern policy is wise, and that we understand and sympathize with it. We will have to show patience and sympathetic understanding on this score for some time to come. At the same time, we have a right to expect the FRG to keep us fully informed about their conversations with the USSR. C. Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)—Beginning in January, 1967, we have conducted hundreds of consultations with the Germans about the NPT. The Germans have had some serious objections to the Treaty text, most of which have been met. Essentially, however, they remain lukewarm. For one reason, they feel that the Soviets want it primarily to hurt German security; the Germans in turn don't like to make this kind of commitment to their enemies (a commitment they did not mind making in 1954 to their NATO Allies). Many Germans feel they will have to sign the Treaty. This realization does not make them any happier. Brandt’s SPD, in general, advises adherence; Kiesinger’s CDU is either opposed or lukewarm. Principal opponents of the Treaty include the leader of the Bavarian wing of the CDU, the CSU—Franz Josef Strauss. The U.S. Position—We believe the FRG should adhere to the Treaty both because the Treaty is valuable in itself and because FRG policy objectives in relations with other Western nations and with Eastern Europe would suffer if the FRG impedes or rejects the NPT. D. European Security Questions—When the Chancellor speaks of the future of Europe, we know he is not thinking of a Europe which would in any way be hostile to the United States. He foresees our acting together in friendly agreement. Beyond that, it is less clear what he has in mind. It does seem, however, that the Germans today prefer a Europe related to the U.S. in a partnership of equals rather than in what used to be called the Atlantic Community framework. Although the Germans sense that European arrangements are presently in flux, they continue to rely on NATO as the surest guarantee of German survival, at least under foreseeable circumstances. They recognize that the U.S. with 200,000 men in Germany and its nuclear capacity is the best guarantor of German security. At the same time, they are aware of our need to neutralize foreign exchange losses incurred by stationing our troops and their dependents in Germany. Between 1961 and 1966 the German Government purchased military equipment here in the amount of $600–$700 million annually. In 1966, the Germans no longer found it possible to make military purchases of the previous magnitude. The current arrangement (German purchase of $500 million worth of medium-term Treasury securities) expires June 30. US/FRG talks in Washington May 9 and 10 resulted in an impasse. The German offer to continue cost neutralization for one year at the $500 million level was unacceptable to us in view of the anticipated net foreign exchange loss of about $770 million. We pointed out the seriousness of our balance of payments situation, congressional pressure for troop reductions, and the favorable FRG balance of payments position. There was, however, no give in the German position. The talks were adjourned for two or three weeks to permit the FRG to review the matter with the Bundesbank and in the Cabinet. We still expect to achieve agreement. E. International Monetary Problems—The strong measures announced at the end of the year by the President to correct our balance of payments problems and to control American investment overseas were accepted by the FRG as a welcome step, although there is concern that we may adopt additional restrictive trade measures. To counter the need for US restrictive measures, the FRG has proposed European concessions in Brussels to encourage US exports. In Washington during gold discussions and later at Stockholm the Germans have been very helpful in maintaining the international monetary system. F. Relations with France—The relationship with France is important for the Federal Republic because a) rapprochement with France has wide popular appeal; b) the Franco-German tie is necessary for progress toward a more united Europe, eventually; c) association with France may help German efforts in Eastern Europe. The promise of closer ties with France was a key policy plank of the coalition (in contrast to Erhard’s alleged neglect to this relationship). The above considerations sometimes put the Germans in positions where they come perilously close to having to choose between their basic security interests (NATO/USA) and their relations with France. This is a choice which the Germans assiduously avoid. Nevertheless from time to time the Germans publicly disagree with the French on issues such as: 1) unity with the United States and others in Stockholm on the two prices for gold and the additional drawing rights; 2) continued need for NATO protection and specifically United States protection at a time when France has withdrawn from the Alliance in all but name; 3)FRG desire to expand the EEC to include the United Kingdom. The Germans in fact seek to maintain a friendly tone in their relations with France while disagreeing with many major elements of French policy. U.S. Policy—We should continue to express understanding for German desires for good relations with France. At the same time, we expect the Germans to keep the United States fully informed of any Franco-German agreements or planning that affect our interests and security arrangements. G. Political Extremism—Political stability under a democratic government is clearly a primary American objective in Germany. As if recognizing this, the radical movements of both the right and left share a virulent anti-Americanism. The extreme right, represented by the National Democratic Party (NPD), is now seated in all but two of the German state parliaments. It had its greatest victory in Baden-Wuerttemberg on April 28 with almost 10 percent of the vote. It is likely to gain Bundestag representation in 1969. Although it may not grow much more, its major importance is that the major parties may during the 1969 elections try to pre-empt some NPD attitudes in order to attract voters. Furthermore, NPD growth causes public uneasiness in other countries, including the United States and other NATO members, and has been and will be exploited by the USSR in savage propaganda attacks against the FRG. Left-wing anti-Americanism has found little echo among the population except with respect to the war in Viet-Nam, which has been exploited as an issue by left-wing elements. There has been some concern expressed in Eastern and Western Europe that the recent growth of the NPD may mean that Germany could repeat the process by which the Nazis came to power in 1933. It is important to bear in mind that there are fundamental differences in conditions now: the German economy is now strong; Germany is now no longer politically adrift and alone in a hostile Europe; it is no longer potentially the strongest military and industrial power on the entire continent; its people have been through the experience of Nazism once, and except for the ten percent fringe (which Germany has in common with many other countries), the German people have not shown an inclination to repeat that tragedy. U.S. Posture—We can do very little directly about right radicalism in Germany. We should (a) recognize that 90 percent of the electorate has consistently voted against the NPD; (b) avoid official public comment on what is after all an internal political matter; (c) be aware that the NPD is fed by the absence of any other means for registering strong protest on election day; and (d) see that frustration in the pursuit of legitimate German national aims feeds nationalist extremism. Basically this is a problem the Germans will have to meet themselves. Sharply aware of their past history, the Germans know perfectly well from the press alone what the outside world thinks of the NPD. Official public comment from abroad only feeds extremists. To the degree that U.S. policies contribute to general economic soundness in Europe, intra-European cooperation in which Germany participates, and to an evolution that gives hope for progress toward the healing of the division of Germany, we will contribute to conditions that make highly unlikely the emergence of extremist groups as serious contenders for power in the FRG. 263. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Confidential. Repeated to Berlin, London, Moscow, Paris, and USNATO. Bonn, May 8, 1968, 1858Z. 11795. Subj: Conversation with Wehner—Berlin access. The main topic discussed during my farewell callPresident Johnson appointed Henry Cabot Lodge Ambassador to Germany and George McGhee Ambassador at Large on April 22. McGhee left post on May 21 and entered on his new duties on May 24. Lodge presented his credentials on May 27. on All-German Affairs Min Wehner on May 7 was Berlin access and related questions. 1. I gave Wehner a brief review of my conversation with Sov Amb to the GDR Abrasimov on May 3.Reported in telegram 1396 from Berlin, May 3. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 USSR-GER E) McGhee commented on the meeting in telegram 1399 from Berlin, May 4. (Ibid.) I had pointed out to Abrasimov that recent GDR actions restricting access injected new tensions into a situation which had remained calm for the past three years. It represented an attempt to upset the status quo. I said that Abrasimov had taken the position that the USSR had always protested meetings of Bundestag committees in Berlin and other actions on the part of the FedRep tending to create the impression that Berlin was being treated as a Land of the FedRep. Therefore this could not be considered as part of the status quo. Abrasimov had hinted that if the Fed Govt were to publicly announce their curtailment of these activities, the Sovs would prevail upon the GDR to rescind access restrictions. I had told Abrasimov that I did not see any basis in his proposal for a bargain. 2. Wehner expressed appreciation for the position which I had taken. He agreed with my contention that Allied protests are not mere paper measures, but undoubtedly had some effect on the Soviet Union. As evidence he cited two recent lengthy articles in Pravda and Izvestia which took unusual and elaborate pains to relate access restrictions to the Potsdam Agreement. Wehner suggested that these articles should be closely studied. He was inclined to think that the Sovs, as a result of Allied protests, now felt it necessary to justify their position on the basis of the Potsdam Agreement. 3. Wehner said that Brandt had reported that the possibility of protest in Moscow was also under study. I confirmed this. I also told Wehner that countermeasures were being studied quadripartitely. If any were instituted, it would have to be by Quadripartite agreement and all, including the FedRep, would have to participate. Wehner agreed with this position. 4. I asked whether he had any suggestions as to what should be done next. Was he in favor of probes to determine the extent of the GDR measures? Wehner said that he was. He said that German civil servants had instructions to proceed as usual in traveling to Berlin. This involved of course the risk and inconvenience of being turned back at the checkpoint and having to continue by air. It was felt, however, that probes of this nature are necessary. 5. The Arndt-Behrendt exchange. Wehner then read from a memcon prepared by Parliamentary State Sec Arndt on his conversation with Behrendt (GDR Deputy Foreign Trade Min) at the Hannoverfair on May 1. He promised to make a copy of this memo available to us.The memorandum of conversation was forwarded in telegram 11795 from Bonn, May 9. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B) From this conversation it appeared that the GDR was sensitive to hints that access restrictions might affect interzonal trade. Behrendt took pains in pointing out that none of the GDR measures affected interzonal trade and that Pollak (the FRG interzonal trade negotiator) would be free to travel to Berlin by surface means. 6. Tsarapkin’s Trier visit. Wehner said that the govt was paying close attention to two instances which constituted interference in West German internal affairs. One was Amb Tsarapkin’s visit to Trier where, instead of attending the official Karl Marx celebrations, he visited the meeting organized by the leftist opposition. The Chancellor had instructed FonMin Brandt to make a suitable protest to Tsarapkin about this visit. 7. Special train carrying demonstrators. The other question concerned the special Reichsbahn train which would carry demonstrators to the May 11 protest meeting in Bonn from Berlin. This problem was still occupying the Cabinet and a final decision has not as yet been taken. Wehner said that he had taken the position that the govt should refuse permission for the train, at the risk of interference with the gymnastic festival in West Berlin which Wehner considered an ill-chosen occasion for a major exertion on the part of the FRG. It was however a difficult question to decide. The Min of Transport had taken the position that refusal to let the train go through might lead to further restrictive measures with regard to Berlin access. It was a question of judgment. 9. [sic] I agree that it was a difficult question. Permitting this train to go through however could set a precedent for similar demands in the future which would amount to permanent interference in internal German affairs. There was here a parallel to the offer by East German authorities to permit the SDS to demonstrate on the Autobahn. Wehner agreed. 10. Possible visit to the US. In conclusion, I told Wehner that I had greatly valued my association with him. I had admired the energy with which he had attempted to bring motion into the German problem. Wehner responded warmly. When I expressed the hope that he would undertake a visit to the US, Wehner smiled and said that the chances for such a trip decreased as election results became worse (this was the only reference during the conversation to the defeat suffered by the SPD in Baden-Wuerttemberg). He added that he had talked to Amb Knappstein at the foreign policy conclave chaired by Chancellor Kiesinger last weekend, and that Knappstein had urged him also to visit the US. I gained the impression that Wehner might, after all, undertake such a visit if a suitable occasion were found. I would consider this highly desirable and hope it will be followed up. McGhee 264. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Secret. Drafted by Johnpoll and Landfair, cleared by Toon and Stoessel, and approved by Leddy. Repeated to Berlin, London, Moscow, Paris, and USNATO. Washington, May 9, 1968, 1559Z. 160930. NATUS. Subject: Berlin Access. Ref: Berlin 1399.Telegram 1399 from Berlin, May 3, reported the views of CDU leaders on Berlin access issues. (Ibid., POL 38) 1. Department believes we should not encourage FRG to undertake probes (para 5 reftel). Would prefer to allow German travel to Berlin to develop normally; this will bring to light GDR interference with access in any event but would reduce risk of friction among the four western countries, imputations of blame, etc., if deliberate probe should lead to difficulties. 2. We share Ambassador’s view that politically inspired efforts to dramatize Berlin-Bonn ties (para 6 reftel) are inopportune but Department reluctant to reproach Germans on them for the time being. Our motives might easily be misinterpreted, and we would not wish Berlin access problems to become a source of friction and misunderstanding between the FRG and ourselves. 3. We understand that FRG authorities are not planning to resume Bundestag plenary meetings or Defense Committee meetings in Berlin, which we agree should be avoided. Dept would appreciate any information that Embassy may obtain that would indicate any changes in FRG plans in these matters. Rusk 265. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Confidential. Repeated to London, Moscow, Paris, Berlin, and USNATO. Brandt discussed his meetings with Tsarapkin in My Life in Politics, pp. 161–163. Bonn, May 16, 1968, 1745Z. 12181. Subject: Berlin access. Ref: (A) Bonn 12007; (B) State 164087; (C) Bonn 11526.Telegram 12007 from Bonn, May 13, was a situation report on East German activities. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B) In telegram 164087, May 14, the Department of State instructed the Embassy that if the issue of Brandt-Tsarapkin talks was raised by the Germans it should state that the United States had no objection to the discussions. (Ibid.) In telegram 11526 from Bonn, May 1, the Embassy reported on discussions with German officials regarding Berlin access. (Ibid., POL 38–6) 1. The Embassy’s view is that it would be unwise for Brandt to get into the specifics of Berlin access with Tsarapkin, even German access. The Germans' right of access is inextricably if implicitly bound up with the Allies' rights and with the responsibilities of the Four Powers. It is because this is true that the Allies are in a position to direct their approaches to the Soviets when there is interference with German travel to and from Berlin. A German-Soviet dialogue on access, outside the traditional Quadripartite framework which the Soviets continue to accept, might render it more difficult for us to approach the Soviets in future cases of interference with German access. It was this reasoning which led us in reftel (C) to suggest that it would not be appropriate to have Brandt’s discussion with Tsarapkin extend into matters which are an Allied responsibility. 2. The Germans do not seem inclined at the moment to have Brandt pursue the matter with Tsarapkin. They have not informed us that a meeting between the two has been scheduled. They have not indicated that they contemplate any further responses of their own in the access field soon. 3. However, the British Embassy (Gladstone) told us today that London felt a contingency plan should be developed, which would permit a swift Allied response in the event the GDR published a new travel decree or again interfered with German access to Berlin in the next few weeks. Gladstone said the British Minister in Washington had discussed this idea with the Department last week. Essentially what London had in mind was agreeing in advance that at a specified time after some new GDR access interference, the three Allies would proceed to deliver an oral démarche in Moscow. The three governments might also agree in advance to signal their displeasure directly to the GDR, perhaps in the form of a warning to the East German travel bureau about a possible slow down in TTD issuances. The British had no fixed ideas as to the details of this contingency plan but felt something along these lines would help us avoid having to go through the usual cycle of a press statement and protest to Abrasimov. We indicated that this idea had merit and that we would be willing, subject to any Departmental comments, to work out the details of such a plan at our next Tripartite meeting in Bonn on May 21.In telegram 166762, May 16, the Department of State replied that it saw merit in the idea of having Brandt warn the Soviets that “further GDR trouble making around Berlin would jeopardize a fruitful German-Soviet dialogue on matters of broader interest.” (Ibid., POL 28 GER B) McGhee 266. Summary Notes of the 586th Meeting of the National Security CouncilSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings File, vol. 5. Secret; Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith. Washington, May 22, 1968, 12:15–1:10 p.m. [Here follows discussion of events in France and Vietnam.]The portion dealing with France is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XII. Under Secretary Katzenbach: Turning to the German problem, he first commented on recent Italian elections in which the Communist Party did better than the Socialists.The Italian Communist Party had picked up 10 seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 2 in the Senate while the Unified Socialist Party lost 3 seats in the Chamber and nearly one-third of its 1964 vote. The result will be difficult negotiations before a new Government can be formed. Current East German activity, such as travel restrictions now being imposed, indicate that the East Germans are dealing from weakness. They are concerned about political developments in the Eastern European bloc. Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Stoessel: The major German problems summarized in the State paper Document 262. are: Berlin, relations with the USSR, German resistance to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the offset negotiations, and the political problem raised by neo-Nazis. Secretary Clifford: Even if the Germans are prepared to accept the figure of $500 million, we will still have a $300 million deficit in offsetting our balance of payment costs. We cannot continue to keep 300,000 men in Europe indefinitely. We have worked out the problem of the control of tactical nuclear weapons. We must reduce the cost of our presence in Europe. Secretary Fowler: We must find a long-range solution to the problem of the cost of our European policy. In our negotiations with the Germans, we should go no lower than $675 million. We should do all we can to hold them to the $750 million foreign exchange offset. Under Secretary Katzenbach: The State Department is working on a project for the next Administration which deals with mutual troop withdrawals and the reduction of the cost to the U.S. of our NATO defense policy. Secretary Fowler: We must insist, in addition to a reasonable offer on offset, that our European allies cooperate with us in international monetary affairs. [Here follows further discussion of Vietnam.] Bromley Smith 267. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (McGhee) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Confidential. A notation on the source text reads: “For the President From Walt Rostow: Herewith George McGhee’s [Final Report on Germany].” The report was transmitted to the President at the LBJ Ranch in telegram CAP 81232, June 3. (Ibid.) Washington, May 31, 1968. SUBJECT Final Report on Germany 1. Kiesinger. In my last meeting with Chancellor Kiesinger, he asked me to convey to you his warm greetings and to assure you that he still felt as he had expressed himself to you in Washington last August. As he wrote you,A copy of the Kiesinger letter is in Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 71 D 370, Germany. he considers your decision not to seek a new term as an unselfish act of the highest order of statesmanship. In my conversation with him, it developed that his immediate concerns are with the current situation in France, both from the standpoint of its effect on France as a member of the European Community and insofar as it may induce unfavorable reactions in Germany. He is also concerned about the increase of the NPD vote to ten per cent in the recent Baden Wurtenburg elections, and the adverse effect on the stability of the SPD as a coalition partner resulting from its corresponding eight per cent loss. 2. Present Internal Situation. Despite the NPD increase and continued student unrest the internal situation in Germany remains relatively stable, particularly in comparison with that in France and even England. The political storm over the Emergency Law should recede once the law is passed. The Grand Coalition, although squeaky, is understood by all to be the only viable government available and will continue at least until 1969. Student unrest, although troublesome, has not resulted—and should not—in a threat to the government as in France. The greatest threat is that it may produce a right wing reaction. Most important, the workers have refused a linkage of their objectives with those of the students, and the labor unions remain conservative and stable and do not threaten strikes. The German economy is moving forward satisfactorily at a rate of five per cent annual increase in GNP, and unemployment has been reduced to manageable proportions. Germany has found itself, increasingly, as a pivotal country in European and world decisions—such as monetary reform, KR acceleration, and British entry. There is, however, an underlying apprehension largely arising from uncertainties in the general world situation. 3. U.S./German Relations. U.S./German relations are on the whole quite satisfactory. Although there is a strong anti-Viet-Nam sentiment among the youth, this has not resulted in any appreciable overall anti-Americanism. We still have a reservoir of good will among the German people and strong support among government and party leaders. Germany, being a country in unstable international equilibrium, must “lean” on other countries. With increasing evidence of French internal weakness, there should be a tendency to shift toward greater dependence on the U.S.—particularly the American security guarantee and the continued high level of U.S. forces in Germany. The creation of a Popular Front Government in France would produce a feeling of “encirclement” in Germany, which would require special reassurances from us. At the same time Kiesinger will continue to show that he is capable of pursuing an independent policy, which first takes into account German interests. He will continue to seek greater freedom for maneuver in the face of rapidly changing circumstances. He will continue, in a pragmatic way but with little hope of a real breakthrough, to press for progress in German Eastern Policy. 4. Current Problems. (a) NPT . The Germans are reluctantly drawn along by the course of events toward the signing of the NPT. I am convinced, particularly as a result of my last discussion with the CDU leader, Kurt Birrenbach,No record of the meeting was found. that they will sign—if a large majority of the other important nations of the world do. They will, however, wish to wait until after the U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearings and will be influenced by the firmness of U.S. interpretations of ambiguities in the treaty and Soviet reactions. (b) Offset. We are in the final stage in the negotiations for an Offset Agreement for the next fiscal year. In my judgment, the 250 million dollar difference remaining between us can only be settled by a “splitting of the difference” approach—involving concessions by both sides. In my last meeting with him, I urged Kiesinger that the Germans better their current offer. (c) Troop Levels. The Germans remain sensitive to possible further decreases in U.S. troop levels. Reductions beyond the limited deployment now under way should be avoided if at all possible—and assurances to this effect given—although this need not preclude savings in “non-combat” activities. 5. Future U.S. Approach. We should continue to maintain and strengthen our ties with Germany as perhaps the most stable and potentially influential free world country, through full and early consultation—as an equal. We should be alert to and reassuring in regard to well-known German sensitivities. George C. McGhee 268. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, Berlin, General, vol. 1. Confidential. Washington, June 12, 1968. SUBJECT Berlin The Department, upon learning yesterday of East German restrictions on travel by West German citizens to Berlin through East Germany and to East Germany itself, as well as on German freight traffic to West Berlin, convened the Berlin Task Force. The Berlin Task Force was formed in response to President Kennedy’s request in 1961 to meet Soviet threats at that time to sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany. The Berlin Task Force, with representatives of State, DOD, CIA and USIA attending, examined a draft tripartite statement forwarded by Embassy Bonn. The Embassy had met with the British, French and Germans last night to consider how to deal with the situation created by the East German measures. The Task Force agreed to recommend to the Secretary that Bonn be authorized to discuss with the British and French an amended text to be issued after we have received further German plans on how to deal with the situation and you have given your approval to the final draft. Final agreement on the draft has now been reached and you have given your approval. We expect the Three Embassies in Bonn to issue the statement tonight.For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, p. 1009. The USIB Watch Committee this morning considered the Berlin problem and concluded that no Soviet or East German military measures relevant to the Berlin problem have been observed thus far. The German Cabinet was called into session at 9 O'clock this morning and at the time of writing had met for more than four hours. Foreign Minister Brandt cut short his trip to Vienna and Belgrade to return for the Cabinet session. The Chancellor saw Ambassador Lodge this evening and told him he regards the situation as serious.See Document 269. He said that it was important that responsible and realistic steps be taken. The Chancellor feels that the Three Protective Powers should take the matter up with the Soviet Union in the first instance, before the Germans do so, because it is a Quadripartite Agreement (to which the Germans are not a party) that is being violated by the Russians. Further steps that might be taken are under urgent study here and in Bonn. The Germans know we will expect them to do their share. The German Chancellor has also announced that he plans to go to Berlin tomorrow. While the trip is billed as an “information trip” its purpose is obviously to buck up Berlin morale. The East German measures, almost certainly undertaken with Soviet agreement, are designed to underscore further East German claims to sovereignty. Soviet agreement for the imposition of visa requirements by the Ulbricht regime probably was obtained late last month, when a high level East German delegation visited there. East German and Soviet thinking may be that the greater flexibility among West Germans on the question of recognition of the GDR, together with assumed difficulties we are having and recent French events, make this an appropriate moment to take this step. While the restrictions will not directly affect Allied access to Berlin, the East Germans can use them in a great many ways to harass traffic and the flow of goods to and from Berlin. West Berlin is almost entirely dependent upon the Federal Republic for its existence, and any impairment of this flow would strangle the city. Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 269. Telegram From the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson, in TexasSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Confidential. Received at the Communications Center at the LBJ Ranch at 6:10 p.m. Washington, June 13, 1968, 2133Z. CAP 81278. You will wish, I believe, to get the flavor of Kiesinger on the meaning of the East German visa move. Countermeasures not yet decided. Bonn 13232. Subj: Meeting with the Chancellor on Berlin access. 1. Summary: During a meeting with the three Allied Ambassadors this afternoon, Chancellor Kiesinger termed the East German measures on passports and visas a step in a long-prepared plan aimed at a gradual weakening of the status of Berlin and at the FRG. The Soviet Union clearly stands behind the measures and is seeking to isolate the FRG and to divide it from its allies. The new East German measures are not aimed only at Berlin and the FRG however but also at the Three Powers. The Chancellor felt that the assessment of the seriousness of this development provided in BQD-CC–28Not found. was correct. As suggested in that document countermeasures are required and not just protests. The Chancellor urged as a first step that the Tripartite public statement be issued by the three governments as quickly as possible. The German Government had not reached decisions on specific countermeasures which the German and Allied sides should undertake. This should be the subject of close Quadripartite consultation. He would welcome démarches by the three Foreign Mins with the respective Sov Ambassadors. The three Ambassadors expressed on a personal basis general agreement with the Chancellor’s assessment of the situation and said that their governments would wish to consult closely in order to find the right response to the East German steps. End summary. 1. Chancellor Kiesinger met with the three Western Ambassadors for an hour this afternoon to discuss the East German passport and visa requirements. Also present on the German side were State Secs Carstens, Guttenberg and Duckwitz. The Chancellor first said that he would go to Berlin tomorrow to meet with Governing Mayor Schuetz for a discussion of the situation. He will not follow Schuetz’s suggestion that he take part in a Senat meeting since he does not wish to provide the East Germans with any pretext for claiming that the FRG is seeking to intervene in the government of West Berlin. He thought that under the present circumstances the population of West Germany and of Berlin considers his visit necessary. 2. The Chancellor said that in his government’s view the East German move is a step in a long-prepared plan that is aimed at a gradual weakening of the status of Berlin and at the FRG. The Soviets do not wish a real Berlin crisis and actual travel to Berlin will probably not immediately be affected. The dangerous thing however, is that the East Germans have created an instrument which can be used at any time in the future to interfere with access. 3. The Chancellor referred to the Quadripartite document BQD-CC–28 and said that the assessment contained therein of the seriousness of the introduction of a visa requirement was correct. The FRG believes that the East German measures are aimed not only at the FRG but also at the Three Powers. He felt that “not just protests but countermeasures are needed,” if possible as contemplated in the BQD. 4. What makes the present East German moves more serious, Kies-inger stated, is that they mark a clear escalation. There is no doubt that the USSR stands behind the East German regime. It is trying more and more to isolate the FRG and divide it from its allies. The Sovs are seeking “permanent right of intervention in the FRG,” they will not accept the very sincere FRG policy of seeking a relaxation of tension. Instead, they intend “to force us to our knees” and they naturally seek to use Berlin for this purpose as the most exposed point. The Sov approach to the FRG is so blunt as to be actually disarming as when, for example, they insist publicly that the FRG must sign the NPT and that the FRG signature is the only one of interest to them. 5. The time has come to make the Sovs realize, Kiesinger said, that they cannot through an indefinite continuation of salami tactics force the FRG to accept Sov positions. “My request,” the Chancellor said,”is that the Allies, as foreseen in the BQD, take a very clear position against the East German moves.” This is necessary to maintain the confidence of the German population in Germany’s allies. The German people will expect a very clear position both from the FRG and the Three Powers “in the framework of the overall political situation.” The Chancellor realized how difficult problems connected with Berlin were and how necessary it is to proceed with caution and realism. A balance is required in finding the right response but the basic elements of BQD-CC–28 are right. 6. The Chancellor said that this was a preliminary presentation of the German views which would be followed by written papers spelling out the German position in greater detail. He urged that in the meantime the three governments issue as quickly as possible the proposed Tripartite statement. The German Government had not yet issued a formal statement and would do so only after consultation with the Allies. The statements made by the FRG press spokesman yesterday and today were “impromptu.” 7. The three Ambassadors expressed, on a personal basis, general agreement with the Chancellor’s assessment and indicated that their governments would wish to work in close consultation, as the Chancellor had suggested, in finding the right response to the East German move. The French Ambassador said that he personally was of the opinion that the passport and visa requirement could not be left unanswered. Ambassador Lodge said that the United States considered the East German move a matter of the highest importance. He had been particularly interested in the Chancellor’s mention of counter measures and asked if the German Government had any specific ideas. The Chancellor replied that they have not yet considered what measures can appropriately be taken by the FRG and the Allies. 8. Ambassador Lodge also noted that BQD-CC–28 foresees the possibility of the three Foreign Ministers and the German Government making appropriate démarches to Soviet Ambassadors or in the German case to East German trade reps. The Chancellor said that he would welcome an initiative by the three FonMins with the respective Soviet Ambassadors in order to express serious concern over developments. The Chancellor was not yet sure that he would call in Soviet Ambassador Tsarapkin right now since he considered it in the first instance better for the three Allies to approach the Sovs given the fact that it was a Four-Power agreement which has been violated. At an appropriate time he would, of course, make the FRG’s views known to Tsarapkin. 9. Our comments follow by septel.Telegram 13246 from Bonn. June 13. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 38) Lodge 270. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Thompson. Secretary Rusk flew to New York on June 14 for meetings with Secretary-General U Thant and Romanian and Soviet officials. He returned to Washington that evening. New York, June 14, 1968. SUBJECT Berlin PARTICIPANTS U.S. Secretary Rusk Ambassador Goldberg Ambassador Thompson Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov Ambassador Malik Ambassador Dobrynin Mr. Mendelevich The Secretary said he wished to raise the question of Berlin. We were very much disappointed at recent developments affecting the 4-power agreements on Berlin to which the Soviet Union was a party. We were always sensitive to developments affecting access to Berlin. It was difficult to understand why these actions had been taken without any consultations with the other interested parties. The measures taken affected travel and trade and were a threat to the viability of Berlin. He hoped the authorities in East Germany and in the Soviet Union realized the gravity of making decisions affecting access to Berlin. The measures already taken were slowing down the traffic to Berlin. There was a further aspect and this was how these measures could be taken if there was a serious interest on the part of the Soviet Union to get Germany to sign the non-proliferation treaty. The German point of view was that they were already committed to their allies on the question of atomic weapons. They considered the NPT a unilateral concession to the Soviets without any reciprocity. The measures with regard to access to Berlin fed the opponents of the non-proliferation treaty in West Germany and added an additional new burden on this problem. The timing almost made it look as if the purpose was to sabotage the non-proliferation treaty. The Secretary said we could not accept the reason given for these measures. The Mayor of Berlin had made it clear that the emergency legislation would not apply to Berlin and there had been a gradual improvement of relations between the United States and the Soviet Union and between the countries of East and West Europe. The question arose whether East Germany wanted to interrupt this. He concluded by saying this was indeed a very serious matter. Kuznetsov said the Government of the GDR had taken no new steps with regard to the existing situation on access. The line was the same as before. The East Germans were handling the access with respect to West Germany on the same basis as they would citizens of a foreign country. They now only require visas, which was a normal practice of sovereign countries, and allied access was not affected. It was not the intention of the Soviet Union to aggravate relations with the United States or with other war-time allies. We have developed an approach and understanding with respect to the GDR which the Soviets considered a sovereign state. Any attempt on the part of the West Germans to connect the non-proliferation treaty with the visa problem was deliberate on the part of opponents of the non-proliferation treaty. The Secretary said that, looking at the long-standing practice with respect to access to Berlin, it was hard to see how these measures could be taken in this way at this time. The East Germans were requiring visas and imposing a fee for transit to West Berlin which was a burden on access. The proposed taxes on goods in transit were costs which could be discussed in the existing machinery for Inter-Zonal trade between East and West Germany. The way in which these measures were carried out, including neglect of consultation among the four powers with responsibility, was of very serious concern. 271. Memorandum of Telephone ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Secret. No drafting information is on the source text. Washington, June 14, 1968. PARTICIPANTS Georg von Lilienfeld, Minister, Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany Eugene V. Rostow, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Minister Von Lilienfeld called Mr. Rostow to tell him that he had received a personal call from the Chancellor (off the record) on another matter but said that they were concerned about the German situation and in particular what the US and allies would do. Von Lilienfeld said that the Chancellor sounded very worried, that this thing might go on in Berlin, that they wouldn't be in a position to do much about it but protest, and that the other side could well get away with it. This would have a deep effect on public opinion, that there were feelings of frustration and discontent which seem to be in vogue, and that a weak and ineffective response could affect German attitudes to the allies. Mr. Rostow said that we do take the GDR move very seriously, that it was extremely important that we work together and that the FRG take responsibility along with the allies. Mr. Von Lilienfeld said that he also told the Chancellor this. The feeling seems to be that an FRG move on the interzonal trade would not really be effective. Steps in other directions should be taken. Von Lilienfeld said that Diehl also called him about getting to Berlin by air. If PanAm and some others could increase their air travel to Berlin, sort of a shuttle, that this would have a great effect by showing that something was being done. Von Lilienfeld added that, “Now you have to wait for days before getting to Berlin.” Re the shuttle idea, he thought this would have a strong effect. Mr. Rostow said he would take this up with his colleagues. 272. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Read) to the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow)Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Secret. A notation on the source text reads: “C[op]y sent Ranch at 3:30 PM 6/16.” Washington, June 16, 1968. SUBJECT Berlin Situation, June 15 The autobahn remains quiet with traffic lighter than normal due to a three-day German holiday and no abnormal delays currently being experienced by travelers to and from Berlin. There are continuing unconfirmed rumors that Chancellor Kiesin-ger may visit Washington, Paris and London in the near future to seek support. The President is considering sending the Chancellor a special message of support on the Day of German Unity, June 17.For text of the President’s message, see Department of State Bulletin, July 8, 1968, p. 44. The British and French called in the Soviet Ambassadors yesterday and made strong representations concerning the East German measures. The Soviet representatives took the line that the East German measures were “routine” and did not affect Allied access. The Berlin Task Force met for two hours this morning to consider further developments and to examine proposed countermeasures. The BTF supported calling a special meeting of the NATO Permanent Representatives in Brussels for June 18 or 19, when the other NATO countries will be informed of the developments. This will be especially useful if their support is solicited for countermeasures in the trade and travel field. In Bonn preparations are going ahead on a written tripartite legal protest, to be delivered in Moscow, against the violation of quadripartite agreements. We expect the drafts to be submitted to the three governments for approval on June 17. The Bonn Quadripartite Group is giving intensive study to countermeasure proposals. The FRG has proposed that it impose special levies on East German truck and barge traffic in the FRG, payable in hard convertible currencies—a suggestion in which we have concurred and suggested even further strengthening. The Bonn Quadripartite Group has also agreed, with our concurrence, to propose in NATO that East Germans seeking to travel in the West (outside the FRG) be required to pay fees in hard currencies for their travel documentation—a service which had been rendered without fee in the past. We are maintaining a 24-hour watch in the Operations Center of the Department. NWDavis Davis signed for Read above Read’s typed signature. 273. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Secret; Immediate. Repeated to Paris, London, Moscow, Berlin, USNATO, USAFE, USAREUR, USNMRSHAPE, EUCOM, and USELMLO. Bonn, June 18, 1968, 2017Z. 13432. Subject: Quadripartite Ambassadorial luncheon discussion of Berlin access problems. 1. At the regular Quadripartite Ambassadorial luncheon on Berlin and related problems today, State Sec Duckwitz made the following points in describing the FRG’s position on the Berlin situation as worked out in yesterday’s Cabinet meeting: A. The formal statement to be made by the Chancellor in connection with the June 20 Bundestag foreign affairs debate is still in preparation but will be provided to the Allies shortly.For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 1010–1012. B. The FRG does not contemplate an approach to Soviet Ambassador Tsarapkin in the near future. The FRG has taken steps to inform governments around the world of the East German moves and of the Federal Government’s assessment of them. C. It is not opportune to take countermeasures in the interzonal trade area since this would be very dangerous to Berlin. Duckwitz said the FonOff would send the three Allies a detailed explanation of this position. D. The FRG is contemplating legislation which would bring into effect the automatic application in Berlin of Federal legislation subject only to negative action on the part of the Berlin Government or the Allies to prevent the application of individual laws. I also hope that the three Allies can provide now a favorable response to the FonOff aide-mémoire of December 1, 1967 concerning the elimination of the Berlin clause in individual treaties. In this context Duckwitz also mentioned that the Reichs-tag building in Berlin would be ready next year but his inference was not clear. E. The Berlin assistance law would be extended without any time limit. F. It was hoped that an air shuttle service could be established between Berlin and Hannover so that the total cost of travel between points in the Federal Republic and Berlin by air would not be greater than the train fare. The FRG would provide the necessary subsidies. (Further details on this available from other FRG sources are being reported separately.) G. The FRG hoped to utilize the laws on political parties and on passports to prevent entry into the Federal Republic of undesirable elements from the GDR whose purpose was subversion. 2. Duckwitz estimated that the Federal outlay required to compensate for the effects of the new East German measures would be about DM 115 million annually. In connection with the travel restriction paper, Duckwitz said that Chancellor Kiesinger had opposed a public announcement on TTD restrictions alone since they seem such a small response to the situatuion. 3. The FonOff called a Bonn Group meeting shortly after the Quadripartite luncheon during which the following further details and background emerged on the German position: A. The report of the Harkort Task Force deals with the possibility of action on the part of the FRG to suspend the IZT agreementInterzonal trade was regulated by the Berlin agreements of August 16, 1960, signed by officials of the Federal Republic of Germany and German Democratic Republic acting as representatives of their “economic areas.” or to begin a blanket denial of Warenbegleitscheine (shipping documents) thus stopping all shipments to the GDR. The Task Force concluded that such measures would be dangerous for Berlin and would not seriously interfere with the East German economy unless all Western countries suspended shipments. The Task Force concluded that this was not a likely possibility. This led to the conclusion that countermeasures in the IZT field were not opportune. It was decided, however, that the Cabinet should suspend consideration of measures to facilitate the East German regime such as the oil subsidy, the settlement of the PTT account and any further increase in the swing credit. Van Well said that if the Allies had other suggestions to make the German side would be glad to hear them and it was agreed that an experts meeting would be held tomorrow. B. The decision on IZT does not cover other possible countermeasures in related fields such as transportation. The Ministry of Transportation has completed a paper on truck and barge charges which will now be considered at the State Sec level. C. In considering the whole problem, the Cabinet came to the conclusion that the Allies had publicly emphasized their own rights frequently during the past months but that it would be useful if measures were undertaken by the Allies which would reinforce the Federal Government’s position in West Berlin. This would reassure the Berlin population and would be an appropriate answer to the Soviet Union and to the GDR. The FRG had thought of the Berlin clause change and the applicability of Federal legislation in Berlin as long pending issues on which action would now be useful and appropriate. Van Well could not elucidate State Sec Duckwitz’s reference to the Reichstag building. However, the FonOff has now informed us that Duckwitz was referring to this as a major FRG construction project which would soon be completed as an example of Federal aid. The FRG has plans to reconstruct a library as a further such project. 4. During the meeting the German side raised for discussion the German paper on the activities of GDR trade and travel offices in Western countries. The French and British representatives said they had referred the German draft to capitals but expect that it would take several days for London and Paris to provide comment. Both reps thought it would probably be better if this FRG paper was not the next presentation to NATO. For psychological reasons it would be better to present NATO with some further paper outlining German action in either the trade or transport fields. 5. Our comments follow by septel.Not identified. Lodge 274. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Bonn, June 19, 1968, 1924Z. 13515. Subj: Brandt-Abrasimov conversation. 1. Assistant Secretary Ruete called in the British, French and US DCMs to report on the Berlin aspects of the Brandt-Abrasimov conversation. Ruete explained that the other aspects of the conversation, which covered détente in general and mutual renunciation of the use of force, would be reported on personally by Brandt to the FonMins in Reykjavik on Sunday.See Document 278. 2. Ruete first reported on the origins of the meeting and some of the atmospherics. Brandt was invited in his capacity as SPD Chairman. Abrasimov emphasized this point, at one time making a disparaging remark about Tsarapkin and saying that it is much better to have “man to man” talk between members of Central Committees: like Brandt and himself. Another peculiarity of the meeting, Ruete said, is the fact that as late as 8 p.m. yesterday the East German news service, ADN, was saying that Brandt was still in West Berlin, even though he had been in East Berlin since 4 p.m. The implication was that the Soviets and the East Germans were not on the same wave length. 3. Ruete said that the origin of the meeting was a Soviet invitation to Brandt three weeks ago, before the East German measures on June 10. Immediately after receiving the invitation, Brandt had cleared the idea of accepting with the Chancellor. Ruete said that Brandt had done this because he was aware that the meeting was a potential “coalition splitter” and he wanted to be very sure that he and the Chancellor had a full understanding from the outset. Then came the East German measures on June 11, before Brandt had a chance actually to visit Abrasimov. Brandt again got the Chancellor’s approval for the meeting, taking fully into account the new situation created June 11. (Comment: Ruete’s account was not clear on whether the immediate initiative for holding the meeting yesterday came from Brandt or Abrasimov, and questioning by the DCMs failed to clear up this point. The obscurity suggested that the immediate initiative came from Brandt.) 4. In reporting on the meeting itself, Ruete read carefully from Brandt’s written report. Brandt introduced the subject of Berlin. He referred to the East German visa measures as a “grotesque” thing to apply to Germans on German soil. He also said the East German measures were contrary to the whole effort at détente, both politically and psychologically. Brandt cited Chancellor Kiesinger’s March 1st answer to Tsarapkin For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 988–989. as proof that the FRG wants no aggravating of the situation in Berlin. 5. Abrasimov answered with what Brandt characterized as three defensive arguments: A) The East German measures had nothing to do with existing international agreements, and the East Germans were entirely in their rights in doing what they did; B) The volume of traffic has not in anyway been affected. To prove this Abrasimov pulled out voluminous statistics on traffic for individual days before and after June 10; C) In general, the Soviet Union wants no tension in and around Berlin. 6. Abrasimov further said that the FRG has no political claim to West Berlin. Abrasimov said that the Soviet Union has never put into question the right of West Berlin to work culturally and economically with the FRG. 7. Later in the evening, the subject of Berlin came up again, this time raised by Abrasimov. He raised it in a curious way, asking Brandt what he should report to Brezhnev as Brandt’s main point on Berlin. Brandt replied that he should tell Brezhnev that he, Brandt, had stressed the damage which would result for all concerned, including the détente effort, from the East German access measures. Abrasimov then said that the real problem was the efforts of the FRG to politicize West Berlin. He cited the holding of the CDU Parteitag and the plenary session of the Bundestag in West Berlin as examples. Interestingly, Abrasimov disparaged the importance of the FRG emergency legislation, strongly implying that this had simply been used as a pretext by the East Germans. 8. Brandt again referred to the Chancellor’s March 1 message to the Soviets to show that the FRG has no claims on Berlin and wants no tension there. Brandt then repeated that the East German measures were serious and spoke particularly about the burden which they place on the average man. They hit hardest those least able to bear the burden economically. Brandt at this point suggested that it might be possible to work out a kind of “lump sum” overall settlement, negotiated directly between the FRG and the East German government, for all the costs of the use of the Autobahn. This presumably would substitute for the individual charges for visas and the movement of goods. (Comment: Questioning of Ruete by the DCMs made it seem that this proposal had not been thought out within the FRG and may have been a spur of the moment idea by Brandt.) 9. Significantly, Abrasimov reacted quite positively to this idea. Brandt felt that this was an encouraging sign. 10. Ruete said that Brandt’s general impression of the whole conversation was that it was neither discouraging nor encouraging, but he did feel that Abrasimov was trying to make clear that the Soviets wanted no worsening of the situation in Berlin. There was also, by indirection, some flavor of the Soviets not being entirely with the East Germans on the June 11 measures, but this was nothing you could put your finger on. 11. In a press conference earlier this afternoon Brandt carefully dodged questions about the substance of his talks with Abrasimov. He stated merely that they had discussed questions of mutual interest, including, of course, the situation in Berlin. Lodge 275. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Secret. Drafted by Johnpoll and approved in U and M on June 27. The meeting was held in the Under Secretary’s Conference Room. Washington, June 20, 1968, 3:15 p.m. SUBJECT Berlin PARTICIPANTS Alexander Boeker, Ambassador-at-Large, FRG Foreign Office Georg von Lilienfeld, Minister, FRG Embassy Horst H. Holthoff, First Secretary, FRG Embassy The Under Secretary Walt W. Rostow, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Eugene V. Rostow, Under Secretary for Political Affairs George C. McGhee, Ambassador-at-Large John M. Leddy, Assistant Secretary, EUR Alfred Puhan, Country Director for Germany Helmut Sonnenfeldt, INR/RSB Alexander C. Johnpoll, ERU/GER The Under Secretary welcomed Ambassador Boeker and told him how useful it was to have an opportunity to get German thinking on the Berlin problem just before the Reykjavik meeting. Boeker said that the FRG felt very strongly that the situation should not be dramatized, and is trying to avoid creating the impression of being overly concerned. But everyone in the FRG knows of the great potential for danger in the present situation, and the Government is greatly concerned over the long-range effects of what the “GDR” has now done. Three facts stand out: 1. The “GDR”; is trying to enhance its prestige and standing as an international entity. 2. The new “GDR” visa and passport measures impose an economic burden and irritating hindrances on traffic with Berlin, but in themselves they do not represent a serious danger. 3. The great danger is that if the “GDR” gets away with this, it will be tempted to escalate the fees and other hindrances to the point where they become prohibitive and highly dangerous. As things now stand, it will cost the German people about 100 million DM per year. One can easily imagine how the “GDR” can screw this figure upward. The FRG had tried to look at the situation through the eyes of Pankow and Moscow. It did not seem to be a case of Ulbricht dragging the reluctant Russians along, but rather a long-range concerted plan. Two factors seem to have induced the Russians to let the “GDR” act at this time: various signs of weakness in the Western camp, and unrest, such as in Czechoslovakia, in the Eastern camp. The FRG does not wish to dramatize and escalate the situation, but neither does it wish to behave like an ostrich. What the FRG has to think about together with the three Allies and with the wider NATO group is, at what point do we really have to undertake serious countermeasures. The FRG especially wants to talk with its American friends about what can be said to the Soviets to convince them that a point will unavoidably be reached, as things are now going, when the situation will have become not merely irritating but intolerable. The Under Secretary asked whether the FRG has any further concrete steps in mind. Boeker replied that there were none that the FRG hadn't already mentioned to the three Allies in Bonn for discussion in Reykjavik. He said that the FRG is open to suggestions for things that might be done together to prevent further “GDR” escalation. Mr. Leddy pointed out that the major action available to us short of coordinated action in the trade field has now been taken with the imminent NAC approval of TTD measures. Ambassador McGhee asked whether the FRG saw the purpose of countermeasures as overcoming the existing situation or the prevention of further “GDR” escalation. Boeker replied that it would be good if we could overcome the existing situation, but this would be difficult. He repeated the suggestion he had made earlier today of trying to reach a compromise with the Soviets for the “GDR” to enforce its demand for visas for entry into East Germany but drop the visa requirement for transit to Berlin. Boeker said that it was useful to compare the situation now with that at the time of the Berlin Wall. The construction of the Wall was a dramatic act but was essentially defensive—to stop the economic hemorrhaging of East Germany. The current move is not dramatic but it is a dangerous and aggressive act because it is aimed against Berlin’s viability. We should all, in responding to Soviet statements that the matter doesn't involve the Allies, reply publicly that it does indeed involve the Allies because if the “GDR’s” act remains unchallenged, the potential will have been created for the destruction of Berlin’s viability. Under Secretary Rostow pointed out that we have protested to the Soviets and are looking hard with our German, British and French colleagues at the problem. He said that we are not clear, however, on the FRG position. Is the FRG interested in trying to get the “GDR” action undone? Has thought been given to asking the German people to avoid getting passports for travel to Berlin? Boeker said “no”, because that would really strangle Berlin. The enormous traffic between the FRG and Berlin would come to a halt except for a trickle of persons by air. The fact of the matter is that there is a power physically in existence which demands passports and visas. In order to keep Berlin alive and keep the traffic flowing, the FRG can only go ahead and acknowledge the existence of this power and announce, as Kiesinger did today, that the exercise of that power to force stamps on FRG citizens does not mean recognition of the “GDR”. The Under Secretary said that he understood the FRG view that it could live with the “GDR” effort to try to gain prestige from visa enforcement, and could put up with the inconvenience of the “GDR” travel and freight hindrances. It was somewhat more difficult to see how the FRG could handle the psychological problems. How will the Berliners react? How do you choose the point at which you draw a clear-cut line beyond which the situation cannot be accepted? Boeker replied that the Berliners have over the years shown a great deal of stamina and determination, and they will continue to do so up to a point. Where that point is, nobody knows. It depends on the firmness of the responses and on the continued Allied presence in Berlin. The Under Secretary asked what the FRG would have us do. Boeker replied that the Allies in Reykjavik should make clear how high the stakes in Berlin are, and should show solidarity with the FRG. In this connection, Boeker said, it was hoped that Secretary Rusk might visit Germany after the Reykjavik meeting. He anticipated that Brandt would officially invite the Secretary when they met in Reykjavik. Boeker said that it was important that the Foreign Ministers at the NATO meeting should state clearly and publicly that the situation in Berlin is close to that danger point of intolerability. Mr. Leddy pointed out that we had discussed this morning the interzonal trade as a possible countermeasure. It is regarded traditionally as internal German trade, and the FRG is approaching IZT countermeasures very cautiously because of this; because it is not easy to reverse; and because evidently the FRG had considered this as an isolated German measure rather than a coordinated Western move. But we had thought of trade measures in terms of a NATO-wide step which could be quite effective. There are some loopholes in “GDR” trade with the West, e.g. Austria and Sweden. But with common NATO action, trade measures could hurt the “GDR” considerably. If it were decided by the Governments involved that some form of trade measures were needed, he was not pessimistic about the chances of getting common NATO action. The Under Secretary said that he agreed that if some such step were to be taken it would be better to do enough to make it really pinch the East Germans. Boeker thought that selective trade measures might be useful. He added that IZT is intimately bound up with supplies going to Berlin—Berlin might be badly hurt if IZT were cut off. Boeker said that there is an isolated danger that people in Germany will acquire a feeling of being left isolated, in the absence of counter-measures. Also, in both the CDU and the SPD, there is a growing feeling that the FRG will have to take another look at the NPT in the light of the “GDR” and Soviet actions. Perhaps there would be some virtue to tying FRG signature on the NPT to a Russian guarantee on Berlin access. The Under Secretary said that we should look at possible selective measures on a contingency basis, to see that we are in agreement on what would work and what wouldn't. Boeker said that another aspect of “GDR” trade that could be examined would be the transit of “GDR” goods through Western countries on the way to ports—Austria, Denmark, Italy and others provide such transit facilities. Walt Rostow asked where further contingency planning is taking place. Mr. Puhan replied that this work is focused in Bonn, with the Quadripartite Group there. Under Secretary Rostow said that it is clear that Ulbricht wants to isolate the two parts of Germany and the two parts of Europe from each other. We in the West, on the other hand, want more and more contact to take place. Our public position is clear that we regard the recent “GDR” steps as illegal, and we have protested against them. We don't want to take measures that the FRG doesn't want to do itself or doesn't want us to do. Evidently, the FRG is searching for a plan that would avoid future escalation rather than addressing itself to the current “GDR” steps. Is there an advantage to waiting? Boeker replied that the FRG is doubtful that serious countermeasures can be mounted, and it doubts whether there are available countermeasures that really would be effective. What has to be done is to make clear to the Soviets that there are limits to Western tolerance. The Under Secretary said that the Soviets, the Germans, and we are all in the dark as to just what that limit is. Mr. Sonnenfeldt thought that the Soviets rather than Ulbricht control the Eastern side of this problem. It is necessary to get the Soviets to put the brakes on Ulbricht by showing the Russians that their own interests would be better served that way. Under Secretary Rostow said that trade countermeasures could be costly and might interrupt the processes of trying to bring the two parts of Germany closer together. He wondered whether it would be easier to face this early, when a matter of principle is involved, or later when it becomes a matter of the amount of money the “GDR” is trying to extort from its hold on access. Boeker replied that there is not much in the way of countermeasures which offer much promise of effectiveness. It is necessary to say something to the Russians to show them that their own interests are involved. Mr. Puhan said that in considering the use of countermeasures it is necessary to weigh their possible effect on public opinion. What will the effect of the situation be on the next elections in Germany, on the political parties, on the German public’s view of the Allies. The U.S. looks to the Federal Republic for answers to some of these questions. The Under Secretary thought that a significant public gesture should be made by the Foreign Ministers in Reykjavik. Boeker agreed. He thought that at Reykjavik it would be necessary to convince the NATO Allies that it is not merely a question of visas that is involved but the potential strangulation of Berlin. Mr. Sonnenfeldt said that we would all have to think about some ways to get the Soviets and the “GDR” to stop the process of escalation against Berlin, and even pull back somewhat on implementation of the new “GDR” regulations. The Under Secretary said that in considering countermeasures we should not give undue weight to the economic difficulties that would be involved for Western countries. Psychologically it might impress the Russians more to see a willingness on the part of the West to undertake measures that hurt us somewhat. Mr. Puhan said that it was important to point out to our German friends the falseness of various news stories that the U.S. is unwilling to support the FRG in this problem because of our desire to improve relations with the Soviet Union. We have, in fact, supported the FRG and Berlin. The President’s message is an example. Mr. Sonnenfeldt thought that we should be thinking of steps to be taken now to avoid a greater crisis three months from now. The Under Secretary proposed that we all take a look at specifics on possible countermeasures that the Secretary and Brandt could look at in Reykjavik. We should also do some work on deciding on what kind of statements should be made there. Mr. Puhan pointed out that we already have the draft text of a Tripartite legal protest to be delivered in Moscow. Boeker said that in the recent talks with the Soviets on Berlin, the U.S. and U.K. referred to the breach of international agreements, whereas the French had only referred to a violation of established practices. He wondered whether the French are going along with the draft text of the Tripartite legal protest. Mr. Johnpoll replied that the French Embassy in Bonn had gone along with it, but it had of course been referred to Paris for government decision, which we do not yet have. Boeker agreed that we should all come up with a few specifics for examination in Reykjavik and that it would have to be made clear there to the other NATO Allies that steps should be taken in order to avoid a later, more serious, difficulty over Berlin. 276. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to London, Paris, Moscow, Berlin, USNATO, USAREUR, EUCOM,USAFE, USNMR SHAPE, and USELMLO. Bonn, June 21, 1968, 1935Z. 13634. Subj: Conversation with Kiesinger re Berlin. 1. Summary. Chancellor Kiesinger during an hour’s conversation with the Ambassador this afternoon emphasized in strong terms the seriousness with which the entire CDU/CSU, the over-whelming majority of the SPD and the Federal Government as a whole view the East German passport and visa requirement. He thought that if this step were not met firmly it would be followed by a more serious Communist escalation. The objective must be to bring the East Germans to revoke the requirement whether this would prove possible in the end or not. The Federal Government was prepared to take any steps within its power and while the Chancellor did not feel that IZT constituted a very effective measure, he did not entirely rule it out. The United States for its part must talk directly to the Russians in a “most energetic” fashion. The German people must get the feeling that the Americans are “firm.” The United States must convince the Soviets of the seriousness with which we view the situation. The Chancellor expressed his great hope that the Secretary would visit Bonn after the Reykjavik meeting if his health permits. Such a visit alone would have a beneficial psychological effect for the West Germans and Berliners. End summary. 1. The Ambassador met for an hour’s discussion of the Berlin situation with Chancellor Kiesinger this afternoon at the latter’s request. The Chancellor at the beginning noted that he had just come from a meeting of the CDU Steering Committee where yesterday’s Bundestag debate had been discussed. He wished to express his views on the Berlin situation to the Ambassador before leaving Bonn for the weekend. 2. The Chancellor said that the FRG’s friends must know that we here—all of the CDU, and overwhelming majority of the SPD and the whole government—view the Berlin situation as “very serious.” The Chancellor was particularly pleased that the President in his message had expressed regret that Berlin “was again threatened.” The East German move is in reality a threat, the most serious since the Wall. This may, the Chancellor noted, seem overly dramatic to an outsider but not to those who are familiar with the past history. Access, including civilian access, has always been most closely linked with the continued freedom of West Berlin. 3. The Chancellor said that the passport and visa requirement has undoubtedly been under consideration in East Berlin for a decade. It is interesting that the East Germans chose this particular moment to implement it. They may have felt that the present combination of circumstances—the Presidential elections in the US, the political upheaval in France, and the economic problem in England was particularly opportune. Developments in Czechoslovakia may also have played a part. The Chancellor could not judge whether the initiative was taken by the Soviets or the East Germans. The important thing was that the decision was made to take this “dangerous step.” “It is my strong conviction,” the Chancellor said (switching into English), “that at present the German people feel what will happen next, and then and then?” 4. The Federal Government desired to avoid escalation. It was in any event too weak alone to take strong steps. The FRG is prepared however, to take any measures it can in East Berlin. The Chancellor knew that the three Allies had frequently mentioned IZT. He was ready to do something in this field but he feared that it is not an effective measure as it had been in 1960. The GDR was no longer as vulnerable as then. The Chancellor emphasized that his government was ready to do everything “to strengthen the viability of Berlin.” As he had said in the Bundestag, something must be done to make the other side cancel the new requirement. “We must not put up with it. We must strongly demand that the requirement be rescinded.” Otherwise they will certainly escalate and the next step would mean that the confidence of the German people in Germany’s partners, particularly the US, would be dangerously weakened. For this reason energetic and vigorous steps are required. The Chancellor noted in this connection that the extreme groups on the left and on the right in Germany are both endeavoring to exploit anything they can to encourage anti-Americanism. 5. The Chancellor then said that he had asked Brandt to urge the Secretary to come to Bonn after the Reykjavik meeting if possible. (At this point a news ticker was brought to the Chancellor indicating that the Secretary had announced he would decide on a visit to Bonn next Monday.) The Chancellor noted that the Secretary knows the whole Berlin problem so well and has always taken such a firm stand. The fact alone of the Secretary’s visit would be of psychological benefit in West Germany and Berlin. 6. The Chancellor said that the great majority of the German people are convinced that the US and the FRG must stand together. His own party in particular has fought bitter fights for German-American friendship against earlier calls in Germany for neutralism. He doesn't expect the impossible from the Allies but he hoped that most of all in Washington the situation was seen as seriously as in the FRG. 7. The Ambassador replied that the United States Government certainly considered the new developments affecting Berlin most serious. Washington was not inclined to say that the German side must take countermeasures before we would do anything. In the Ambassador’s view the key principle was to act “together.” He noted that some effective steps had already been decided upon and that the Bonn Group has proven a useful instrument. The Ambassador thought that the German proposal for an air shuttle service between Berlin and Hannover and perhaps other cities was a very good idea. Whether the East Germans will revoke the visa requirement, however would, in his view, depend on whether the Soviets are really backing them up. Effective countermeasures taken now might in any event deter further Communist encroachments. The Chancellor agreed that this was an important objective. 8. The Ambassador then asked the Chancellor just what he had in mind that the United States should do. He replied that the most important thing is for the US to talk directly to the Soviets. He was asking for a “most energetic US approach.” He had talked with the President and knew our problems—that we must carefully manage crises and not destroy such possibilities for understanding with the Sovs as may exist. We should not think that the Germans were the “last warriors” of the cold war. The German people, however, must get the feeling that the Americans are firm. If together we can reach a common “design” for action and the US warns the Soviets at the same time, this will help. 9. The Chancellor noted that he had made clear to Sov Ambassador Tsarapkin that the Federal Government is prepared to be realistic about Federal activities in the city. The FRG’s legal position must be preserved and he could not say that a political party or the Bundestag would never again meet in Berlin. On the other hand, small questions such as the Defense Committee or police trade union meetings were of no real interest, and de facto solutions could be found. The Chancellor had the impression, however, that the Sovs were no longer interested in such solutions. 10. The Ambassador, referring to the Chancellor’s request for a firm American approach to the Soviets said that for us to be firm there must be something concrete “in sharp focus” to be firm about. The Chancellor agreed that any US démarche must be credible. The Federal Republic, he said, is an orderly and healthy country. There were difficulties with the farmers and there would be further student unrest but there would be no political upheaval in the FRG unless some new source of unrest is introduced. He did not wish a loss of confidence in Germany’s Allies to constitute such an element. 11. The Ambassador, after expressing his admiration for the way in which the Federal Government had so far handled the East German threat stated that he would report the Chancellor’s views to Washington where he was sure they would be studied by the President and the Secretary. 12. Comment: The Chancellor’s failure to be concrete on what he wanted us to be “firm” about leads me to the view that he was “making a record”—putting himself in a position to say that he had “told” us. Lodge 277. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Bohlen and approved in S/S on June 21. Washington, June 21, 1968, 5 p.m. SUBJECT Berlin Situation PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR The Secretary Deputy Under Secretary Charles E. Bohlen Ambassador Dobrynin told the Secretary he was leaving tomorrow for consultation in Moscow but did not know for what subject. He rather doubted it was for a Central Committee Meeting, and in any event expected to be back within a few days. Dobrynin then said he had been instructed to make the following comments in regard to the Berlin situation in response to the Secretary’s observations to Kuznetsov last week in New York.See Document 270. He said he was to tell the Secretary that the Soviet Union, as was hoped was the case in the U.S., was not interested in creating a state of tension in regard to the Berlin situation. The actions by the GDR were the result of an unrealistic and provocative policy followed by the West Germans. These actions however did not affect the rights for travel of the U.S., France or Great Britain, and were not inconsistent with any foreign power agreements. The GDR had for some time exerted rights in regard to passports, visas and documentation at certain specific points in their territories and that there would seem to be no grounds for any allied concern. The Secretary inquired what particular policy of the West German Government did the Soviet Government have in mind. Dobrynin said it was using West Berlin as a meeting place for Bundestag committees and treating it as though it belonged to West Germany. There was also the emergency measures for the West Germans. The Secretary pointed out that the emergency measures specifically did not apply to West Berlin. He then pointed out the 1949 agreements in which the Four Powers reverted to the situation which existed prior to the blockade, namely on free transit of persons and goods.For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, p. 221. Then ensued a discussion as to whether or not the East German actions were in violation of the 1949 agreement, with the Ambassador maintaining that they were not since nothing new was added, but the Secretary and Mr. Bohlen maintained that the power to regulate could theoretically imply the power to limit or stop. Ambassador Dobrynin did not agree with this interpretation. The Secretary pointed out in support of his argument that as he understood it a family of five West Germans would have to pay $17.50 to go into East Berlin, and he also pointed out that the taxes imposed on goods could theoretically be increased so as to constitute a real impediment to their movement. The Secretary then inquired exactly what was it that Ulbricht feared. Dobrynin said he did not know that Ulbricht was afraid, to which the Secretary replied that he obviously was; he seemed to be concerned at the establishment of a peaceful, normal situation around Berlin, and it was not clear what he was afraid of—was it the situation in Czechoslovakia or was it simply that he was afraid of peaceful coexistence?In telegram 13964 from Bonn, July 1, the Embassy suggested that the substance of this discussion be passed to the German Government. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15) 278. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 69 D 182, CF 303. Confidential. Drafted by Puhan and approved in S on June 25. The meeting was held at the U.S. Embassy Residence. The source text is labeled “Part I.” Part III, a discussion of NPT, is ibid. Part II, dealing with mutual force reductions, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 314. Brandt discussed the NATO meeting in My Life in Politics, pp. 165–166. Reykjavik, June 23, 1968, 1 p.m. US/MC/17 UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE FORTY-FIRST MINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCILReykjavik, Iceland, June 24–25, 1968 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary of State Assistant Secretary Leddy Deputy Assistant Secretary Springsteen Mr. Al Puhan, EUR/GER Germany Foreign Minister Willy Brandt Mr. Georg Duckwitz, State Secretary Dr. Hans H. Ruete, Assistant State Secretary Mr. Wolf Schilling, Personal Assistant to State Secretary SUBJECT Berlin The Secretary said that Berlin had been much on our minds. He was very much interested in how the Foreign Minister saw the Berlin problem. He would welcome information regarding Brandt’s visit with Abrasimov. The Secretary said he had three talks with Ambassador Dobrynin and, as Brandt knew, one with the Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov on Berlin. Brandt said he was anxious to give the Secretary full details on his meeting over and above those already given by Ruete to the three DCMs in Bonn,See Document 274. and those which had been given to Ambassador Lodge yesterday.No record of this conversation was found. However, his notes would not arrive until later and details would have to wait until then. He said Abrasimov had asked him to come and see him before the East Germans imposed their restrictions. The Secretary asked whether Brandt thought Abrasimov knew of East German intentions when he invited the Foreign Minister of the FRG. Brandt was not sure. Abrasimov told him that he had been ordered to go to Moscow to report to the meeting of the Supreme Soviet later this month and to the meeting of the Central Committee in early July. Abrasimov had told Brandt he had instructions to discuss all aspects of the FRG-Soviet relationship and to report to Brezhnev, Kosygin, and Podgorny with Gromyko present. Abrasimov invited Brandt to say something first. Brandt said he told Abrasimov that he sometimes felt a mood of resignation regarding the USSR. Two topics were then discussed in detail: the renunciation of force and Berlin. Brandt said Brezhnev had called while he was talking to Abrasimov. Abrasimov asked what points he should make to Brezhnev. Brandt said that he told him to say to Brezhnev that on Berlin the USSR must not go contrary to the spirit of détente. He told him to say that if the Soviets were not satisfied with the FRG’s April 9 memorandum on renunciation of force,For text, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 997–1002. Bonn was prepared to have further discussions. Abrasimov told Brandt that an answer to the April memorandum was on its way. Brandt gave it as his view that the Soviet reply would be quite negative. Brandt concluded that there were no modifications in Soviet policy. While the Soviet presentation was not aggressive, there was stubborn insistence on their point of view. The Secretary said we had had that experience for many years. Brandt said the Soviets appeared to play with history at times. He had recalled to Abrasimov that there were times in history where the Russians and Germans had been able to live in harmony. Brandt had cited in this connection the end of the 18th Century. Abrasimov did not disagree. Brandt said Abrasimov had a paper with him on Berlin. Reading from this paper, Abrasimov attacked Brandt, stating that when he went from Berlin to Bonn and became Foreign Minister, the claims of the FRG on Berlin were stepped up. Abrasimov said he did not understand why the West Germans were complaining about the recent East German measures. He told Brandt that the FRG was fully aware of the treaty the Soviet Union had with the GDR and that it was the view of the Soviet Union that it was within GDR competence to impose the measures it had recently enacted. Brandt told Abrasimov that it was incongruous that the Yugoslavs and the West Germans should agree to dropping visas at the very moment the East Germans were imposing them. The Secretary recalled that one Soviet official had called the East German measure anachronistic. Brandt said Abrasimov recited figures of people traveling to West Berlin, demonstrating that more West Germans went to West Berlin after the imposition of the East German measures than before. He asked Brandt how that could be called damage. Brandt said Abrasimov told him something which was apparently not in his paper, saying the Soviets wanted quiet (Ruhe), but warned Brandt that any manifestation of increased FRG presence in Berlin like the planned CDU Party Convention or a meeting of the Bundestag would have very serious consequences. Brandt added that Abrasimov said relations would be somewhat easier and certain things could be settled more easily after Schuetz, the Mayor of Berlin, was no longer President of the Bundestag. The Secretary noted that this was a point that bothered the Russians. Brandt continued by saying that in Berlin itself, there was no feeling like that in 1958 or at the time of the Wall, but there was a good deal of resignation. Brandt said he was much worried about a deterioration. He felt that we might be in danger of getting on very wide roads, leading nowhere if we continue to talk about and plan on the basis of countermeasures developed in the past. The East Germans had been given the green light by the Soviets because of the effect their action would have on Czechoslovakia and on strengthening Bloc solidarity. East Berlin took its recent action despite knowing that in a relatively short period of time it could have gotten a good deal of money out of the FRG. He referred in this connection to the willingness of the FRG to pay oil subsidies and certain road fees. He said Finance Minister Strauss had been agreeable. He concluded that East German officials dealing with trade matters had been pushed aside in favor of a political act. If this conclusion was correct, fees for TTD’s, fees to be paid by East German ships, are all of questionable value as countermeasures. Brandt assured the Secretary that he was aware of American criticism that the West Germans had reacted reluctantly to the East German measures. He said he was aware of our expectations that the Germans should do something more. But, Brandt said, if his theory was correct that the East German measures represented a political action, it would have to be dealt with by the three allies with the USSR and, unfortunately, the United States would have to bear the largest part of this burden. Brandt said very emphatically that the Russians must not get the impression that there can be détente which excludes the problem of Berlin. He did not wish to leave the Secretary with the impression that the Germans were rigid on the point of other countermeasures. But in his view the political significance of the East German action was the dominant factor. The Secretary said that he had hit the Soviets very hard on the Berlin situation. He referred again to his meeting with Kuznetsov and his three talks with Ambassador Dobrynin. The Secretary said he had some real concern about the total relations of Communism and the Free World. He saw a real problem in the Soviet-China relationship. He thought the developments in Czechoslovakia and Romania had disturbed the Soviets greatly. He recalled the feeling close to panic in Moscow after the Middle East crisis erupted. He thought the Soviet leaders faced real problems which made them very dangerous. The Secretary said that he personally had been expecting difficulties in Berlin, in Korea, and in the Middle East. He had asked Dobrynin what Ulbricht was afraid of. What dangers would Ulbricht see in the Czechoslovakia developments. Dobrynin had been unwilling to reply. The Secretary said that we were in a very delicate total situation. He felt we would be very fortunate if we got through this fall without difficulties in Korea. The Secretary agreed with the Foreign Minister that developments in Czechoslovakia had a bearing on the situation. So did the situation in France and the unsettled political situation in Italy. He felt that the surprises and tragedy in the U.S. electoral campaign had also affected Soviet thinking. At no time had solidarity among the Western powers been of greater importance. The Secretary said the Soviets had emphasized in talking to us their strong feeling about FRG efforts to incorporate West Berlin. The Secretary characterized the East German move as shrewd, since the Soviets were aware of differences between the constitutional view on Berlin held by the FRG and the three Western powers. The Secretary said the Soviets cited the recent German emergency legislation as a cause of East German retaliation. He said he had brushed this aside, and he was aware that Berlin Mayor Schuetz had denied the applicability of this legislation to West Berlin. The Soviets have told us, the Secretary continued, they had no desire for tension and did not wish to affect access to Berlin. They called the recent measures simply a change in form, a change in formalities. The Secretary said the Soviets knew that U.S. citizens traveling to unrecognized regimes like that of Communist China or of Cuba regularly get visas. The Soviets went to special pains to say they wanted quiet (Ruhe) in Berlin. The Secretary assured Brandt he didn't accept this Soviet explanation. He felt the Soviets must have known that the East German move would cause real problems. He told Brandt that we had protested the violation of Quadripartite Agreements reached after the end of the blockade of Berlin. At this point, the Secretary expressed his appreciation for Ambassador Boeker’s coming to the United States. He said he was looking forward to seeing Chancellor Kiesinger in Bonn. The Secretary reminded Brandt that the Kennedy administration had begun with a Berlin crisis. At that time we had taken a very strong lead. We increased our defense budget by millions. We moved troops but no one else added anything. The Secretary said we were all alone. The French made no contribution and indeed even the Foreign Minister’s predecessors in the FRG directed their suspicions at us rather than at the Soviets. The British were a pale echo. He said he wanted to be sure that we acted now with complete solidarity. He stressed the importance of establishing Four Power unity in the meeting tonight. The Secretary said we were prepared to press the Soviets hard. He felt that it would be impossible for us to accept physical limitations on access to Berlin. This would affect Allied rights to Berlin. He reminded Brandt that the power to tax, as Chief Justice Marshall once said, was the power to destroy. The Secretary agreed that countermeasures presented an extremely frustrating problem as long as physical access was not impaired. He mentioned the restrictions on GDR travel already taken by NATO. He wondered if it was not possible that the financial arrangements affecting trade could not be a matter of discussion between the two Germanies. He asked whether there had been any real interference with access. Brandt said there were very few cases of interference. He recalled the East German decree on travel through the GDR by NPD members and a later one relating to FRG officials. He felt that the East Germans were not enforcing the latter measure. The Secretary interjected that the measure against NPD members was obviously very clever because the Soviets knew we wouldn't fight a war over NPD members going to Berlin. Brandt said he had sought Tito’s judgment last week on the Soviets' intentions in Czechoslovakia. Tito said he was almost sure the Soviets could not turn the clock back in Czechoslovakia. He gave as reasons the Soviets' serious problems in other parts of the world, and the fact that Czechoslovakia had greater support in Eastern Europe, particularly in Hungary and Rumania, than the Soviets realized. Brandt mentioned a recent incident where the East Germans stopped a truck carrying atlases which depicted the GDR as East Germany. This GDR gesture was a possible indication of future incidents. Brandt said the GDR could claim underwear manufactured in Berlin was produced for the West German Army. He thought that a most successful countermeasure would be to invite journalists to go to Berlin in an Allied car with Allied travel orders. Mr. Leddy queried as to what the East Germans would do. There was no answer. Brandt pointed out that in his view the imposition of fees was more important than the use of visas. Fees could be doubled; they could be used in a number of arbitrary ways. Brandt said he had told Abrasimov that the West Germans had been willing to make practical arrangements for the use of services maintained by the East Germans, roads, waterways, etc. He thought it was better to make a lump sum payment to the East Germans for the use of such services than to have fees levied on individual users. He noted that something like this had been worked out within IZT when he was Mayor in Berlin. He thought such proposals were of interest to East German planners, if they had any say in the matter, since they would remove the uncertainty regarding receipts of West German payments. The Secretary thought Brandt’s efforts had been very constructive. He asked whether the time had come to suggest to the Soviets a Joint Commission to regulate such matters. It appeared to him, and he emphasized he was speaking only in an exploratory sense, that there were advantages in making such a proposal to the Soviets, even if it were rejected. Brandt seemed receptive to the suggestion. He also mentioned the possibility of going back to the idea of establishing an access authority for Berlin though he wondered if the suggestion was not now passe. He said he would appreciate it if the Allied side would speak to the Russians about establishing some sort of a Commission. He thought the Germans could parallel this action by insisting that a pre-condition for it should be a guarantee of freedom of travel and traffic. The Secretary thought we might get somewhere if we related travel and traffic to Berlin with general international practice. He wondered what India charged Pakistan for the transit of goods. He wondered if general international practice in this regard might not be studied and applied to Berlin. He saw a whole range of possibilities. Positive steps also were needed to strengthen Berlin. He asked if organizations now located elsewhere could be moved to Berlin. Mr. Leddy said we had already suggested that the International Bank and the Fund hold their next meeting in Berlin. The Secretary wondered whether we could find ways of buying more in Berlin. He thought the quadripartite Bonn Group might look into this. The Secretary said that if the East Germans intend to depress the economy of Berlin, we must demonstrate that we can lift it. Brandt said he would appreciate the inclusion in any record of support for Berlin the fact that the FRG was willing to make its contribution. Brandt noted recent efforts by the Bundestag to give preferential economic and financial treatment to Berlin. He then noted that in a recent Cabinet discussion the question had been raised whether, after seven years, the time had not come to restate or reformulate Allied commitments to Berlin. He said his colleagues in the Foreign Office, and the Chancellor, also would not be unwilling to help reformulate the relations of the FRG to Berlin. Brandt said he would tell the French and British about it tonight if it made sense to the United States. Brandt said that differences in interpretation of the legal situation in Berlin had been exploited by the Russians. They might, however, be prepared to accept an interim arrangement until Berlin becomes a whole. He said this might be put in terms of West Berlin being “linked to the FRG” rather than described as a “Land of the Federal Republic.” The Secretary said that this is a problem because it causes difficulties with the Russians and is divisive among the Four. Mr. Leddy said the FRG “link” to Berlin might be stated in terms of viability. According to Brandt, Abrasimov had voiced no objection to Berlin’s cultural and economic relations with the FRG. He wondered if experts might not be able to devise a formula which could take advantage of this Soviet view to make it difficult for them to impede travel. The Secretary recalled that in the crises of 1961 and 1962 it was of the greatest importance in dealing with the Soviets to stress that we—the Allies—were responsible for Berlin; that the United States was in Berlin. Our responsibilities for Berlin and our position in Berlin resulted from World War II. We are not indebted to the Soviets or anybody else for our presence in that city. The Secretary said the Soviets had had to accept this, and that is why we have been sensitive to any suggestion that our responsibility for Berlin be diluted. The Soviets have emphasized that they have no interest in interfering with allied rights to Berlin. He noted that deriving from this is an allied interest in the closest association of Berlin and the FRG. The Secretary noted that we could exercise little pressure on the East Germans because our trade with them was very small. Moreover, few Americans travelled to the GDR. Brandt agreed and noted that German interest was far greater since 600,000 people travelled between West Berlin and the FRG during one month. Mr. Leddy noted that as many as 10 million West Germans move to and from West Berlin annually. The Foreign Minister said the NATO Agreement on TTDs would affect very few people. Trade between East Germany and the West had declined.IZT trade had declined last year by 11 percent, and by 13 percent in the first quarter of this year. At the same time Brandt noted that GDR trade with the East was on the increase. Mr. Leddy pointed out that if measures in the trade field were to be effective, they would have to be concerted and imposed by all members of NATO. Brandt said he liked the British very much but he had great doubts about British willingness to go along with that suggestion. The Secretary laughingly agreed and reminded Brandt that we remembered British trade with Cuba and China. Mr. Leddy said that he simply wanted to emphasize that we could not think of countermeasures in the trade field in isolation. Brandt said if the existing IZT agreement were cancelled the FRG could not get another one including Berlin. The Secretary recalled that during an earlier Berlin crisis the British had insisted trade countermeasures were steps to be taken only just before nuclear weapons would be used. 279. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 69 D 182, CF 303. Confidential. Drafted by Puhan and approved by S on June 27. The meeting was held at the British Embassy. Reykjavik, June 23, 1968, 7 p.m. US/MC/20 UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE FORTY-FIRST MINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL Reykjavik, Iceland, June 24–25, 1968 PARTICIPANTS Federal Republic of Germany Mr. Brandt Mr. Duckwitz Mr. Ruete Mr. Van Well United Kingdom Mr. Stewart Lord Hood Mr. Maitland Mr. Benchley Mr. Parsons France Mr. Seydoux Mr. Puaux Mr. Schricke Mr. Maniere United States The Secretary of State Assistant Secretary Leddy Mr. Springsteen Mr. Puhan SUBJECT Quadripartite Dinner After welcoming his guests to the Quadripartite Dinner, Mr. Steward asked Mr. Brandt to give an account of how he saw the situation in Berlin. Mr. Brandt said that if time permitted, he would also like to discuss German views on European security and the renunciation of force. On Berlin, he thought the measures taken by the East Germans were part of a political program. A risk existed that the Soviets would be encouraged by their current success and seek to implement further measures. He thought the Alliance as a whole was called upon to do something about the East German restrictions. He indicated three areas in which action could be taken: 1. Manifest Western solidarity, to make clear that harassments would bring the Allies more closely together. FonMin Brandt expressed his appreciation for the statements of support from his colleagues and for NATO’s efforts in the field of temporary travel documents (TTD’s). He said it was important that political statements were devised to influence the Soviets. 2. Strengthen the viability of Berlin. He said the FRG Government would be promulgating a law which provided for substantial economic aid to Berlin. The FRG would also assume the burden of the levies imposed on passengers and traffic to Berlin. He felt that, in connection with Berlin’s viability, we must make it clear how important we regard the ties between the FRG and Berlin. He assured his colleagues that they need fear no juridical arguments, but he wished to emphasize that the ties between the FRG and Berlin were of vital importance. He asked for a clear reply by the Allies to the Soviets in support of FRG efforts. He suggested it might be useful if the legal advisers in the Bonn Group were to study how the Western sectors of Berlin could be “linked to” the FRG in the absence of reunification. 3. Demonstrate to East Berlin that measures like their recent ones do not pay. He said countermeasures had to hit them where their greatest concern lies, namely in their desire for recognition. Mr. Brandt said the East Germans knew that they were giving up certain economic advantages when they took their most recent actions. The Western Germans had been prepared to grant them a petroleum subsidy, and to make payments for postal services rendered by the East Germans. They discounted these economic advantages and opted for political actions. Thus, Minister Brandt felt countermeasures in the economic sphere would not be very effective. He urged his colleagues not to fall victim to the view that the Germans were running away from using IZT to counter the East German measures. He noted IZT trade had decreased greatly in 1967, by more than 11%. There was another decline of 13% in the first 3 months of this year. The GDR was trading more with other Western countries as well as with the East of Europe. He asked what measures could be taken. He said it was important that the Three Powers in the Allied Travel Office make absolutely clear when they refuse TTD’s to East Germans that their action is in response to East German travel restrictions which directly affect the Allies responsibility. He asked if the Three could look into the possibility of transporting some Germans who were refused admittance by the GDR by Allied Military transport to and from Berlin. In other words, Minister Brandt said, we would like to move not only into the air but by land. He recalled the use of travel orders issued by the Allies to Germans when he was in Berlin. Mr. Brandt asked what would happen if countermeasures failed. Mr. Brandt said Berlin was an essential problem which could not be excluded from East-West discussions. He added that there could be no détente which excluded Berlin. Minister Brandt said Kiesinger felt that we all must insist upon a withdrawal of the East German measures. Mr. Brandt made a distinction between travel into the GDR itself and transit travel from the FRG to Berlin. He pointed up the additional burdens which the East German measures imposed on the little man in Germany. He said a family with 3 or 4 children, going on vacation from Berlin to the FRG, would have to add another 50 DM’s to their costs. He said this was not a theoretical but a very real problem. Mr. Brandt recalled his conversation with Soviet Ambassador Abrasimov. He said Abrasimov had insisted that he was seeing Brandt as a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Soviet Ambassador’s Counselor in picking up the German Foreign Minister in West Berlin for the meeting had demonstratively addressed him as “Mr. Party Chairman”. Mr. Brandt said he had made it very clear to Abrasimov that the Germans regarded the situation created by East Berlin as very serious and that it could have very serious consequences for FRG-Sov relations. Mr. Brandt said Abrasimov rejected these arguments. He regarded the East German action as normal and said it represented only a change in formalities. He cited figures to Brandt to show that travel to Berlin had increased since the East German measures had been put into effect. He assured Brandt that the Soviets wanted no trouble. He accused Bonn of creating all the noise. He warned Minister Brandt against any manifestation of FRG activity in Berlin, mentioning in this connection a planned CDU Party Convention and a meeting of the Bundestag, which Minister Brandt said incidentally had not been planned. Abrasimov, according to Mr. Brandt, told the Foreign Minister that the FRG’s claims to Berlin had increased since Brandt had come to Bonn. Minister Brandt said on other subjects he could discover no change in the Soviet position with the possible exception of some Soviet interest in trading with West Germany, particularly in the field of natural gas. Minister Brandt said Abrasimov claimed the FRG aide-mémoire of April 9 regarding the renunciation of force had been entirely negative, but in later discussions said he would not exclude following up on it. He indicated that Brandt’s presentation of the case might influence the Soviet reply. Mr. Brandt said the Soviets don't like the Grand Coalition in Bonn, in which respect they did not differ from some of his people. Brandt said he asked Abrasimov if he thought that any future German government would be more likely to bring about better relations between Germany and the Soviet Union. The Secretary said we were very much concerned about the East German measures, both when looking towards the past and looking towards the future. Looking towards the past, they were a violation of Quadripartite Agreements. Looking towards the future, he said one could ask “What next?”. He reminded his colleagues that Chief Justice Marshall had said the power to tax is the power to destroy. The Secretary told of his talks with the Soviets.See Document 270 and 277. They took essentially the same line with him that Abrasimov had taken with Brandt. They expressed their intention not to increase tensions in Berlin, and said they did not mean to interrupt access to Berlin nor to interfere with the rights of the Allies. The Soviets said the East German restrictions were formalities. The Secretary continued that he did not get the impression the Soviets were contemplating or would contemplate the elimination of these measures. He gave it as his estimate that the East German action had been carefully considered in advance and was not the result of weekend deliberations. He felt the Soviets would be rather stubborn. The Secretary said his impression was that these moves were rather clever. The Soviets and East Germans could say that what was being done was in accord with normal international practice. The Soviets were emphasizing those aspects where differences between the Allies and the FRG exist on the status of Berlin. They judge these measures will not seem worth a crisis to the Allies. The fact that people and goods continue to move makes it difficult to work up a great deal of excitement. Thus, the Secretary concluded, the situation was not very satisfactory. The Secretary suggested that we should examine the steps we can take to make it clear to East Berlin that action like that taken by the East Germans does not pay, but more specifically to make it absolutely clear that real interference with access is unacceptable. The Secretary agreed with Brandt that the countermeasures thus far suggested were not too promising. He thought that conceivably it was one of Ulbricht’s objectives to reduce contact between Berlin and the Federal Republic. It may be that Ulbricht was frightened of developments in Czechoslovakia. The Secretary thought these measures may be another kind of wall to prevent further contacts. He said the countermeasures which could be taken by the U.S. alone were not meaningful. There was little travel or trade between the United States and the GDR. Perhaps 50 East Germans came to the United States in the course of a year. He stated U.S. preparedness to examine with our allies what measures could be taken which would not hurt West Berlin. The Secretary suggested further that we ought to examine new possibilities of reinforcing the viability of the City of Berlin. He thought the East German measures gave a special urgency to this task, to reassure West Berlin in a very tangible way. He thought the Bonn Group might wish to concentrate on this aspect. In this connection, the Secretary paid his respect to the attitude of the FRG toward the viability of Berlin. The Secretary suggested that the two administrations of the two Germanies might somehow deal with the problem of German access to Berlin. The arrangement proposed by Mr. Brandt earlier for a lump sum payment for services rendered by the East Germans might make it possible to link the question of access with other matters of interest to the East Germans. We would like to make them realize that consultation and agreement are necessary. The Secretary speculated regrading Soviet approval of the East German action. He thought the timing was both curious and ominous. He referred to Minister Brandt’s statement that the East Germans had discounted in advance the advantages of arrangements with the FRG which would have been profitable to them. He said surely the Soviets must have known that the East German restrictions would make signing of the NPT by the FRG more difficult. The Secretary thought the explanation may be found in Eastern European developments. He felt that Ulbricht’s concern with Czech developments had motivated the move. The Secretary denied that passage of the emergency legislation by the FRG had anything to do with the Berlin situation. The Secretary concluded by saying that we take the situation very seriously and we want to make absolutely clear that we will not allow Berlin to suffer. Ambassador Seydoux began his remarks by recounting the conversation between Alphand and Soviet Ambassador to France Zorin a few days ago. Zorin’s reply, according to Seydoux, was not unlike that of Soviet officials elsewhere. Seydoux said his Government was much interested in Kiesinger’s and Brandt’s statements in the Bundestag on June 20.For text of Kiesinger’s statement, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 1010–1012. For text of the Brandt statement, see Meissner, Die deutsche Ostpolitik, pp. 264–267. He expressed his admiration for the way in which the German Government was dealing with the problem. He referred to the questions raised and measures indicated by his German colleague, i.e., “linking Berlin to the FRG,” the transport of German civilians in military cars, etc. He stated that the French were, of course, ready to study these problems. He felt the best place for studying them was in Bonn but he cautioned that all would have to make sure that measures undertaken would not create graver problems than they solved. Seydoux said he was also very much interested in the Secretary’s remarks. He associated himself with the view that the situation was very serious and repeated French readiness to examine all proposals but again, he cautioned, the measures must not create more problems than they solved. British Foreign Secretary Stewart agreed with the assessment that the situation was very serious. He complained that there was no justification for these measures and that they were taken without consultation after the FRG had made determined efforts to improve relations with Eastern Europe. Perhaps it was this effort on the part of the FRG that caused the restrictions to be imposed. Mr. Stewart felt the U.S.S.R. was losing support in Eastern Europe. He suggested that some may be hoping the FRG would slacken off its policy of détente which would suit the Soviets very much. The Foreign Secretary said he found Gromyko very hard and unyielding during his last visit to Moscow. Stewart visited Moscow May 22–23. He said that if the FRG slackened its policy of détente, Moscow could say it never had been real. The Foreign Secretary thought that with regard to Mr. Rusk’s reference to the NPT, the Soviets could always turn FRG hesitation to sign into propaganda against the FRG. He was certain the Soviets wished to maintain the thesis that Germany was always to be feared. It was his view that the Soviets would like to provoke the FRG into a reversal of its current policies. Mr. Stewart said that all had agreed on countermeasures which were right, proportional and supportable. They should drive home the need of the Soviets to take seriously these measures. Mr. Stewart found Minister Brandt’s suggestion of closer links between Berlin and the FRG entirely suitable. He recommended that the proposal of the German Foreign Minister to have German civilians carried by military automobiles to Berlin ought to be considered. He felt further the Bonn Group should also study measures to help with the viability of Berlin. He thought we could not rule out further measures because of the seriousness of the situation. Like his French colleague, he cautioned prudence. The Foreign Secretary said the problem was to move with great care in order not to inflame the situation without however losing all in the end. The Foreign Secretary concluded by saying to Mr. Brandt that he wanted a manifestation of Western solidarity. He believed that the German Minister wanted a statement out of this meeting. Foreign Minister Brandt said he would like to make an addendum. He noted that it was not very difficult for a citizen of West Germany to sign a paper when travelling to Berlin, stating that he was a citizen of West Germany. He thought it was more destructive however for a Berliner to have to state that he was a citizen of a “separate political entity”. He had no doubt that this in the long run would affect the morale of the people in Berlin. The Secretary agreed that the use of the term “separate political entity of West Berlin” was contrary to Allied concepts and could cause problems. He felt this matter could best be examined by the Quadripartite Bonn Group. Mr. Brandt made a reference to the Secretary’s remarks regarding the recent German emergency legislation. He said the Soviets had overestimated the opposition to these laws on the part of West German labor leaders. The opposite effect had been achieved, even among students. He called this a serious miscalculation. Mr. Brandt said he also wished to note that the Eastern European countries had reacted negatively to the East German measures, citing Czech and Yugoslav newspapers and press associations to prove his point. He noted further that Italian Communist papers will weigh in against the East German measures. He said Ulbricht had stopped tourist traffic to Czechoslovakia and has forbidden the sale of a Czech Communist German-language weekly paper in East Germany. As a result, the Czechs would make it a daily even though there were not too many Germans in Czechoslovakia. Mr. Brandt turned to FRG eastern policy. He said both Chancellor Kiesinger and he would not allow themselves to be provoked by Ulbricht into a position not their own. He said FRG foreign policy had received very strong support from the Bundestag. Mr. Brandt noted that the German Government had some problems with morale, both in Berlin and the FRG itself. He asked his colleagues to avoid using the word “protest” since people had concluded that this was an empty gesture. He thought a further possibility to give Moscow some additional food for thought existed if the third world would support the FRG. He felt the third world would understand that the East German actions were contrary to the spirit of détente. Mr. Brandt thanked his colleagues for their remarks regarding the viability of the City of Berlin. He thought any additional help that could be given in this regard would be most welcome. He assured his colleagues that when he spoke of linking the City of Berlin to the FRG, he did not intend to raise old legal controversies. He said he wished to state once more that if his colleagues believed there was any sense in going back to the idea of establishing an international authority on access to Berlin—a proposition for the two administrations to control traffic to Berlin under an allied umbrella—he would be willing to go along. However, he remained skeptical. In conclusion, the German Foreign Minister asked that a statement, which would emerge from this Quadripartite Meeting should be added as an appendix to the NATO communiqué with a paragraph early in the main communiqué referring to the appendix. He felt under no circumstances should a reference to Berlin by the Fifteen become point 12 or 13 of the communiqué. He said such slighting of the serious situation which had been created would disappoint the German public. He also asked for language less legal but more political.For text of the NATO communiqué, see Department of State Bulletin, July 15, 1968, pp. 75–77. There followed a brief discussion regarding the line to be taken with the press after this meeting. It was generally agreed that the Four would point out that they had discussed solidarity of the Allies, the seriousness with which all of them regarded the situation and further measures to deal with it. The Secretary thought we should say that there had been a complete review of the situation. Full agreement had been reached that the East German measures were serious and contrary to international agreements and long standing practice. He suggested further that we would say that we would be discussing these matters with the other allies after which we will make our plans known. The meeting adjourned at this point after designating four advisers to work on a draft of a statement. DINNER At the start of the Dinner following the Quadripartite Meeting, Mr. Stewart asked Mr. Brandt to say a few words about the European Security Conference problem which Brandt had mentioned earlier in his presentation. Mr. Brandt said whenever the subject of a European Security Conference arises the question is how to deal with East Germany. He said the FRG proposal is to create a kind of link so that when the time comes a new relationship would have been reached between the two parts of Germany. Continuing, he said, however, that the security conference idea is blocked. He said he saw this on his recent trip to Yugoslavia and noted that not even all of the Group of Ten felt as strongly as the Dutch, the Belgians, and the Danes on the NATO side. He noted that the FRG had said in Aide-Mémoires to the USSR For text of the December 14, 1967, and April 9, 1968, German aides-mémoire, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 980–982 and 997–1002. that it intended to work on proposals on an exchange of non-use of force declarations. As far as East Germany is concerned he sees some formulas which would not recognize the GDR as a state but which would not exclude it from participation. He said that the FRG has found a formula which contains several important elements. He said that we must make clear to the USSR that not regarding the GDR as a sovereign state does not mean that declarations between the FRG and the GDR would be invalid. He stressed that they would be valid and that the validity would run from the declarations themselves and not from the manner in which the GDR was treated. He recalled that the FRG had said in 1954For text, see Department of State Bulletin, October 11, 1954, pp. 520–521. that it would not use force, and it does not propose to re-open this issue. He said that the FRG will incorporate its ideas in a paper that he suggested be considered by the Bonn Group. The Secretary welcomed this idea and noted that the US finds itself in a situation where it is often necessary to reach agreement with regimes that we do not recognize, citing Hanoi and Peking. 280. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Confidential. A note on the source text reads: “Rec'd 9:21 a.m.” A copy of this memorandum was transmitted to Secretary Rusk in telegram Tosec 23 to Reykjavik, June 24. (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 69 D 182, CF 300) Washington, June 24, 1968, 8:40 a.m. Mr. President: Walther Casper called me Saturday P.M., June 23, 1968, from Germany. He asked me to pass to you the following personal message from Chancellor Kiesinger, with whom he had just talked at length. 1. The Chancellor was “most grateful” for your message on Berlin.See footnote 2, Document 272. 2. The Chancellor was “not in the slightest worried” about basic U.S. support for Berlin. Unlike the situation in the past, there is “no nervousness” between the German Chancellor and the American President. There will be no requests for “new guarantees.” 3. In the light of some reports that U.S. circles regard the Bonn reaction to East German measures as “lukewarm,” he wishes you to know: —The German government takes the measures against Berlin “most seriously.” —The “moderate” German reaction and the avoidance of “spectacular” moves is the result of a considered policy arrived at in the light of “the world situation.” Kiesinger does not want Germany to do things which would interfere with East-West détente, Vietnam negotiations, or any other constructive possibilities. —Kiesinger does not feel he is acting from domestic political weakness. The German people and the citizens of West Berlin are “purposeful and steady.” They would support stronger measures. The recent student trouble in Berlin should not be taken as a measure of any basic weakening of fiber there. 4. Although the pressure on Berlin was instigated by Ulbricht, it was clearly permitted and supported by Moscow. Moscow, as well as Ulbricht, will be watching closely what Germany, the U.S., and Germany’s other allies do—or fail to do. If our reaction and mood are weak, there will be further “turns of the screw” which could either change the status of Berlin or the status of the Eastern zone of Germany. Therefore, we must all stand up firmly at the beginning of the campaign of pressure. We must head this off before they decide “salami tactics” could yield them major results. 5. The Chancellor is pleased with steps taken by NATO and hopeful that the NATO meeting will increase the sense of solidarity on this issue—sending a helpful signal to Moscow and Ulbricht. 6.President Johnson bracketed paragraph 6 of the memorandum and annotated: “OK if State agreed.” A second notation reads: “7/1/68 Mr. Rostow notified John Walsh.” In addition—because of U.S. influence in Moscow—he hopes we will instruct our Embassies around the world that: —The U.S. takes the pressure on Berlin most seriously. —We shall resist further pressures. —We are watching the situation closely. —This attitude should “ooze out” into diplomatic circles so that word gets back to Moscow. 7. Our strategy should be to convince Moscow that it has more to lose than to gain by letting Ulbricht go further down the road of pressure on access to Berlin. 8. With respect to the NPT, Kiesinger does not wish to raise an explicit threat that Germany will not sign in the face of these pressures on Berlin. But he does think it wise for us to state what is the political fact in Germany; namely, the pressure on Berlin is creating an “atmosphere” in which the acceptance of the NPT will be “more difficult.” Walt 281. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Madrid for Leddy. Bonn, June 26, 1968, 1915Z. 13837. For the Secretary. Subject: Report of conversation between Kiesinger and Rusk at Bonn. Also present: Brandt and Lodge. 1. Kiesinger began by extending the Secretary a hearty welcome. He was grateful that, although the Secretary had not been well and had to make a long trip from Iceland, he had nonetheless come. His visit had great value because it showed the German people they could count on American friendship. 2. The Secretary said he was glad to come because he wanted to bring back to President Johnson, Kiesinger’s thinking. 3. Kiesinger expressed his gratitude to President Johnson for the message which he had sent concerning Berlin and said he wanted to thank the President once again. He did not want to repeat himself, but there was one thing he wanted to say very clearly which was that there was no desire unduly to dramatize the Berlin situation and there was at present no sign that a crisis would arise. But a crisis could occur soon if we did not join together to resist such measures. We are in a very evil situation in which their side tries to achieve their purposes by piecemeal processes which they could not expect to achieve all at once. 4. The gravest danger is that there would be a crisis of trust and confidence in the German Govt and in Germany’s Allies. People therefore ask what will be the next step? If there is a next step, will there be only verbal protests? 5. There is a two-fold anti-Americanism in Germany: (A) On the extreme left are the students and the anti-Vietnam group. They are unimportant. It is not at all comparable to French student unrest. But they do poison the situation in Berlin and their continued unrest has changed the face of Berlin. (B) The other anti-Americanism is right-wing neo-Nazi. They were able to obtain almost 10 percent of the vote in Baden-Wuerttemberg. It is a small minority containing farmers, small business people, and foolish nationalists. Certain circumstances could make them dangerous too. 6. There is unrest everywhere in the world and the Allies must stand together. The Chancellor said he knew that the Secretary as an experienced statesman is under no illusions about Communism. We Germans, on our side, favor détente, but Moscow does not like the turn of events whereby Germany is no longer attacked as she used to be in Romania, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Yugoslavia and Hungary. This govt must try everything to give people faith in the strength of the West. This should not be hard to do. People here are contented. With some exceptions, there is a high living standard. I can give you my word that what happened in France could not happen here. While everything can be improved and sincere complaints must be taken seriously, we have, by and large, 60 million stable people ready to carry their share of the load. It is therefore better to meet this crisis and the sooner we do it the more people will side with the US—whether in or out of NATO. 7. Secretary Rusk said that he could understand the anti-Americanism caused by the Vietnam war and other problems. But the other side of the coin was the growth of isolationism in America which, he said, his successor will have as his no. 1 problem. He will also have to face a big debate on a sharp reduction of forces in Europe. 8. He said he was not surprised that there was pressure on Berlin. He had expected it. When you consider what the Soviet Union was doing in the Middle East and what is happening to Vietnam, Laos and South Korea; when you know that the Soviet attitude is getting more and more ideological with more of cold war flavor and with increased opposition to bridge-building; when you take note of Soviet problems with Peking and Czechoslovakia, you must then recognize that it all adds up to a Soviet desire to put pressure on Berlin. 9. The harassment of access routes in Berlin is a very serious matter. If it should be accelerated it would become more so. Our primary effort must be with the Soviet Union as we have no leverage on East Germany. It is not easy to change the Soviet Union. The new group is different from Khrushchev. The Secretary said we would follow up hard and that the Four Western Powers must have solidarity. If the Four can be united then there could be progress. 10. They must also help the economic livelihood of Berlin itself. We would, of course, be instantly involved in any physical violence there. It looked like a hard summer. The Soviet Union might be a little frightened (to which Kiesinger commented in the affirmative). The sight of Romania walking out of the Warsaw Pact, the events in Czechoslovakia and East Germany—these things must cause concern, but with full consultation and a common point of view, our side could be confident. 11. Kiesinger agreed that Khrushchev showed his hand more than the present group and wondered whether the present group was actually stronger or whether they felt uncertain. 12. The Secretary referred to the inertia of committee operations. It is hard to take a forward step. Once it is taken, it is hard to take a backward one. 13. Kiesinger said he would meet de Gaulle in September and saw merit in taking up Berlin with him before that time. Kiesinger quoted de Gaulle as saying “We are more for German reunification than any other government. Reunification is vital to the interests of France.” Kiesinger said he had heard that the French attitude at Reykjavik had not been “too good.” He recalled that de Gaulle had said that the United States was the real danger and not the Soviet Union. Whiskey was more dangerous than vodka. The Soviet threat was only “military,” whereas the U.S., by its very nature, was constrained to dominate. Kiesinger said he thought de Gaulle did not intend to leave NATO. 14. The Secretary said that solidarity among the Four was very important if we were to impress the Russians. In the 1961–62 crisis when we said “If you do this, it means war,” de Gaulle had stood aside. The Secretary suggested that Kiesinger might find in the NATO communiquéFor text, see Department of State Bulletin, July 15, 1968, pp. 75–77. a basis for sending de Gaulle a message. 15. Kiesinger said that is a good idea, perhaps we can do it. 16. The Secretary said it would impress the Russians. 17. Brandt said it should be done soon. 18. Kiesinger asked whether the Secretary was expecting trouble in Korea. 19. The Secretary said we were watching Korea. There had been some increased infiltration by North Korea, but he saw no large infiltration by Korea. The U.S. had been very plain with Russia. It would not tolerate the invasion of South Korea. The next time it would not be a long war with 130,000 casualties, but a very violent short war. There is unrest all through Southeast Asia. 20. The Secretary said that in Paris even when the talks are behind the scenes, everything is known to the press. Private talks will come but not yet. 21. Kiesinger said the stronger you admonish the Russians, the more success we will have. Perhaps they won't take back the measures they have already taken but our warning would prevent them from going ahead. 22. East Germany, he said, wants international recognition as a sovereign state. They must be made to feel they have had a setback. 23. The Secretary said that governments look at the problem of sovereignty differently from the way in which public opinion looks at it. After all, we are talking to Hanoi and Peking and do not recognize either. 24. Kiesinger said he liked the NATO communiqué as regards non-recognition. Lodge 282. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, Clifford Papers, Memoranda of Conversation. Top Secret; Sensitive. There is no drafting information on the source text but it was typed on the stationery of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs. Washington, July 23, 1968. SUBJECT Visit of FRG Minister of Defense Schroeder—23 July 1968 PARTICIPANTS FRG Minister of Defense Schroeder Dr. Wieck Mr. Schneider (Translator) US Secretary Clifford Mr. Nitze Mr. Warnke Mr. Clifford welcomed the German guests and said we would be happy to discuss any subject that they wished to raise. Initially, however, he expressed an interest in Dr. Schroeder’s views on Czechoslovakia. Dr. Schroeder said that he would be glad to comment on the CSSR and then would like to hear Mr. Clifford’s views on the situation in Vietnam. He noted that he had first been briefed on the Southeast Asia problems on a visit to the United States in 1953 and that he regretted that it still remains an American burden 15 years later. In discussing Czechoslovakia, Dr. Schroeder said that he wanted to avoid any impression that his position is influenced by ethnic considerations, such as the Sudeten matter. The FRG has no thought of intervention and believes that the situation is one within the Soviet Bloc, the members of which must be left to work out their own solutions. He finds the letter from the Central Committees of five Warsaw Pact nationsFor text of the July 15 letter, see Robin Remington (ed.), Winter in Prague (Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1969), pp. 225–231. particularly interesting. This letter maintains that the adoption of Socialism by a nation constitutes an “irreversible decision.” He commented further that the world has now lived through 50 years of Communism, and no one, of course, can tell what will happen during the next 50 years. What is certain, however, is that there will be changes both in the Communist world and in our own. The immediate question is whether the new developments in Czechoslovakia can survive. This question is affected by the fact that this is not 1956, but 1968. Overt intervention by the Soviet Union would have repercussions both in Eastern Europe and in the West. The Soviet leaders, however, are probably more afraid of reactions in their own country. The Russian population does not want an armed conflict. The Russian leaders thus find themselves in a dilemma for which there is yet no panacea. This dilemma is how to keep allied countries with them, but without force. The CSSR has the FRG’s good wishes, but it must remain clear that outsiders are not responsible either for the present situation or for its resolution. Mr. Clifford then asked what effect the ferment in Czechoslovakia may have on other East Europeans, such as Hungary, Rumania, Poland, Bulgaria and even East Germany. Dr. Schroeder replied that the Central Committees of four of these countries signed the letter of rebuke to the Czechoslovakian Presidium. Rumania had not, but it was not there when the letter was drafted. We must assume that the Central Committees of these other countries meant what they said. Nonetheless, they are apt to be influenced by a trend toward independence. The situation with respect to the rulers in East Germany—Pankow—is somewhat different. The ruling groups in the other Warsaw Pact countries think of themselves as nations. Pankow, in contrast, is very much aware that it rules over only part of a nation. Also, although it does not reflect credit on his countrymen, Dr. Schroeder believes that the Germans are apt to stick quite rigidly with spiritual goals or ideological principles once they are adopted. The rulers in Pankow regard themselves as “perfect Communists.” Dr. Schroeder sees differences, however, between those who have lived in Russia and those who have not. [Here follows a 2–1/2 page discussion of Vietnam.] Mr. Clifford then suggested that Dr. Schroeder indicate the specific points he would like to discuss. Dr. Schroeder listed three: (1) Force reductions in Europe; (2) Consultation on nuclear matters; (3) Armaments. On the first point, he asked whether we felt from the meeting at Reykjavik that the Foreign Ministers had the same view on force reductions as that expressed by the Defense Ministers in Brussels.For text of the NATO Foreign Ministers declaration, see Department of State Bulletin, July 15, 1968, p. 77. For text of the December 1967 declaration, see ibid., January 8, 1968, pp. 49–52. He observed that the German view has not changed. He continues to feel that such reductions as have been made by NATO members have elicited no response from the Soviet side. Both sides are subject to pressures created by popular aspirations and the heavy costs of defense. But these forces can be brought to bear with more vigor in the West. Although they may in time have some effect in the East, there is as yet no sign favorable for simultaneous force reductions. Dr. Schroeder queried whether the Soviets might be waiting for an end to the Vietnamese war before following any reductions in force. He asked whether we held the same view on force reductions as in May. At Mr. Clifford’s request, Mr. Nitze made an initial response. He said that we saw no sign of reductions by the Soviets. On the contrary, their defense budget has increased by about 20%. He also agreed that pressures for cuts in the defense budget are greater in the West, because the Communist countries have less sensitivity. In his opinion, the meetings at Brussels and at Reykjavik reflected no difference in views. Views in the US Senate, on the other hand, are influenced by Vietnam and other considerations. Although he does not believe Congress will pass the Symington amendment—which would require reduction of American forces in Europe to a total of 50,000Reference is to the announcement by Senator Stuart Symington (D-Mo.) that he would introduce an amendment to the 1969 Department of Defense appropriations bill cutting off funding for all but 50,000 of the 337,000 U.S. troops in Europe. The Senator withheld the amendment during the bill’s mark-up.—a milder alternative might find acceptance. Mr. Clifford said that we are taking the Symington amendment seriously and that it poses some danger. The United States is faced with serious domestic problems of race and poverty. Costly programs of education, housing and welfare will be required to solve these problems. Some of our people say stop the war, cut defense costs and “get our own house in order.” Senator Symington claims that the five leading newspapers in his State all favor his amendment. He is concerned about defense costs, the balance of payments problem and the over-all US economic and monetary posture. Mr. Clifford cited the fact this position has considerable public appeal. Other Senators, including Senator Mansfield, support it, although they don't go as far. Senator Russell’s position gave some cause for concern, but he now appears to begin to recognize Senator Symington’s approach is unwise. The issue will be presented after the Senate Appropriations Committee completes its hearings. Senator Symington plans to present his amendment when the Appropriations Bill is on the Floor. As a parliamentary device, Mr. Clifford regards it as improper, though legal. In any event, it will be hard to veto, since the entire Defense appropriation is involved. In reply to Dr. Schroeder’s question on timing, Mr. Clifford said that the bill could have been voted on next week if he had testified this week. Now, however, he has arranged with Senator Russell that his appearance will be deferred until next week or even later. This means that the bill will not come before the Senate before it recesses on August 3rd. We regard a delay as desirable. The developments in Eastern Europe have been helpful and show that we should not rock the boat at this time. He continued, however, that an American political axiom asserts that you “can't beat something with nothing.” In declining order of preference, we would like (1) to defeat the Symington amendment and have it thrown out entirely; (2) if this proves infeasible, to present the mildest alternative—a Congressional requirement that we report back in six months on what might be done; (3) if this is not enough, to accept a requirement for a reduction in Calendar Year 1969, for a five-year reduction plan or some variant of these. If we had our choice, we would elect to keep the situation as it is now but, as he noted in his remarks to the Ministers in Brussels, we cannot maintain our present force strength in Europe indefinitely. These troops have been there for the 23 years since the end of World War II. Certainly this was never contemplated but, as justification for this, there has been no war in Europe for 23 years. Dr. Schroeder said that also this has allowed 23 years of Communist history to go by. Mr. Clifford commented that the President fully supports our European force posture, but it is up to us to persuade the Congress that now is the wrong time for drastic cuts. He expressed the view that we can defeat the Symington approach but we may have to find some kind of concession. The tree that bends a little with the wind can survive where the tree that stands too rigidly may fall. Dr. Schroeder said that he appreciated this explanation and would like to say two things. First, the question of US forces in Europe cannot be considered without also considering Vietnam. He noted Mr. Clifford’s cautious expression of limited hopes for an agreement in Vietnam and said that he assumed that such an agreement would take away some of the pressure. Secondly, he agrees that developments in the Soviet Bloc should help show that now is a poor time to change the balance of forces in Europe. Mr. Clifford’s comments to the Ministers in May were accepted without unrest. Dr. Schroeder also called attention to the pragmatic view shown by the FRG in the trilateral discussions on redeployment and rotation. The impact of withdrawing forces depends on the way it is done and surrounding circumstances. In this connection, he asked for comments on US strategic mobility, remarking that, without it, the concept of reinforcing would remain “vague and in the air.” Mr. Nitze observed that we have worked very hard on strategic mobility for the last five years. Three factors are significant: (1) Pre-positioning of equipment, so that only men have to be moved; (2) air mobility resources—the development of the C–5s provides this capability at a cost of about 1.4 cents per ton mile; (3) Fast Deployment Logistics Ships. On the last of these, authority for construction has been sought for three years. Politically, we have tried to bite off a great deal. The FDL concept involved a new and modern shipyard and series production, as in the case of the C–5. The shipyard has now been built in Pascagoula, Mississippi and a highly satisfactory ship design has been obtained. We are now trying for four FDLs and may get two. Their production would take two or three years. 30 FDLs and the C–5s would enable us to reinforce with two divisions in 30 days. These facts have clear implications for our readiness. Our air squadrons obviously are clearly deployable. From the military standpoint, the same forces in Europe should be maintained and this increased strategic mobility be used to reinforce and not as a substitute. We have already achieved a ten-fold improvement in mobility since 1961. Mr. Clifford noted that many of the supporters of the FDL would, however, expect that its development would yield some cuts in our forces in Europe. Mr. Nitze explained that a further argument presented by Senator Symington and others is the disproportionate share of the European defense burden borne by the United States. Such critics maintain that the defense of Europe is not taken as seriously by the Europeans as it is by us. This kind of argument was easier to answer in the days of the offset agreement. The present efforts at neutralization are welcome, but they represent just a postponement of the problem. Mr. Nitze observed that developments in the past several years have made NATO much more capable, whereas previously it could present only a nuclear response. Maintenance of this flexible response capability requires a certain level of force. Our common goal should be to find ways to make it continuously possible to maintain these force levels. Dr. Schroeder conceded that European efforts could be greater and should be greater. He noted, however, that European Parliaments are difficult to control. In his opinion, the Alliance needs more from the United States than a promise of help if it is to remain viable. The substantial US presence provides a tremendous power for cohesion, particularly for NATO in 1969. He voiced his recognition of the fact that we could come up with more convincing arguments for our Congress than he could. He is convinced, however, that the physical presence of the leading power in the Alliance remains essential. The maintenance of an adequate level of defense effort by the other allies needs study, although 1969 is an election year in the FRG as well. Although he recognizes that we must take the Southeast Asia situation into consideration, he is convinced that Europe remains of primary importance to the security of the United States as well as to its European allies. Insofar as the balance of payments is concerned, Dr. Schroeder observed that the situation has been somewhat alleviated. Although he agrees that a long-range program on balance of payments is needed, he voiced the view that 1969 is a bad year for exerting pressure on this point since 1969 is the year that countries can withdraw from NATO. Mr. Nitze responded that the real issue is whether we have long-range hopes for equalizing the balance of payments. In this respect, we need a plan. Although we can appreciate the FRG’s desires for its own air industry and its interest in a consortium, the question of a follow-on airplane must also be examined from the standpoint of offset, economy and relative effectiveness. Dr. Schroeder called attention to the FRG’s latest procurement requests to Parliament. These involve 134 helicopters, at a cost of 1.4 billion DMs; 88 F–4 Phantoms, at a cost of 2.5 billion DMs; production of additional F–104 Starfighters under US license. He asserted that this shows cooperation on the part of the FRG. He also remarked that placing some part of the orders in the FRG would make it easier politically for these programs to continue. With respect to the follow-on aircraft, Dr. Schroeder explained that the FRG plans to replace its F–104s and G–91s by a single aircraft in the mid-70s. They have sought the support of other aircraft-producing countries, including the United Kingdom. The objective is not to build an independent industry but to facilitate European cooperation and cohesiveness. A similar arrangement exists with the United States on the Main Battle Tank 70. In its aircraft proposal, the FRG hopes to strengthen European development capability and to include the United Kingdom, although this is sometimes not easy. He repeated that the aim is not to build a costly aircraft industry. Dr. Schroeder introduced the question of the supplemental agreement on Main Battle Tank 70. This supplement provides for an increase in the funding for research and development. Mr. Nitze said that he believed that the supplemental funding agreement should be signed but that it should be recognized that no decision on actual production has been made. Dr. Schroeder reported that he now has approval from his Finance Office to sign the agreement and feels that the development project should continue because of its political and symbolic value, whatever the eventual results may be. He recognized that signing the supplemental agreement would commit neither side to production or procurement. Dr. Schroeder and Mr. Clifford then each signed two copies of the agreement in English and two copies in German. There was brief discussion about what should be said to the press. Dr. Schroeder suggested that no communiqué would be necessary and that any comments to the press could be very general. Dr. Schroeder also expressed the hope that Mr. and Mrs. Clifford would take the occasion of the NPG meeting in Bonn on October 10th and 11th to spend an additional day either before or after these meetings. Mr. Clifford said that he was planning to come to the meeting with Mrs. Clifford and would hope that his schedule would permit him to come a day earlier. Mr. Nitze said that he would like to raise two other things before the meeting adjourned. First, on the balance of payments, it would be helpful to exchange views in September on long-range solutions. Dr. Schroeder expressed the opinion that the respective chairmen for such discussions should be provided by the foreign offices. He agreed tentatively to a date in September, but said that this should be confirmed through diplomatic channels. There was general agreement that these talks would take place in Bonn. Mr. Nitze’s second point was an elaboration on the subject of a follow-on aircraft for the FRG. This involves very important considerations, both from the standpoint of offset and the strategic questions of how best to handle the air-to-air and close air support missions. It is, in his view, essential to avoid any misunderstanding. Mr. Clifford asked how far thinking on this subject has progressed in Dr. Schroeder’s country. Dr. Schroeder said that their Parliament was providing 30 million DMs in support for the conceptual phase. The United Kingdom desires present a complicating factor. He proposed that the US and the FRG could remain in close contact on this question and that our representative in Bonn should get in touch with the Defense Ministry after the next meeting of the consortium, probably in September. He reiterated his statement that the FRG is not seeking to develop either a separate or autonomous aircraft industry or a separate “European component.” At the present time, he does not even know who the final partners will be. He said that he would welcome US support, specifically in the form of competition in the engine field with UK firms and competition in avionics. Mr. Nitze emphasized that the strategic and balance of payments problems which are involved should have priority over the problem of production. He noted that the entire subject should be explored thoroughly at some time. Dr. Schroeder repeated his offer to provide more information after the next consortium meeting. Mr. Nitze said that this would be helpful, but that a full discussion would remain necessary. At one point in the discussion, Captain Zimmerman was asked to join the group to report on the work of the Joint Task Force on the problem of consultation prior to selective release of nuclear weapons on or from German soil. He explained the report and the draft letters and said that two questions remain open. The first of these is whether the arrangements should be between governments or between the President of the United States and the Chancellor of the FRG. The second relates to the form of the FRG response. The FRG has a standard response which quotes the letter received and notes concurrence. Captain Zimmerman said that, during the Task Force deliberations, the US representatives had complained that this form was tantamount to one party saying “I love you” and the other saying “I agree.” Mr. Clifford said that the arrangement for consultations between the President and the Chancellor appeared acceptable and Mr. Nitze noted that this was what would happen in an emergency anyway. Dr. Schroe-der expressed willingness to accept our form of response. 283. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Confidential. Drafted by Obst. The meeting was held at the White House. A memorandum of Rostow’s conversation with Defense Minister Schroeder, July 22, is ibid. Washington, July 23, 1968, 5 p.m. MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION BETWEEN MESSRS. WALT W. ROSTOW AND FRANZ J. STRAUSS, MINISTER OF FINANCE, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY OTHER PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Knappstein Dr. Walter Rieger (Asst. to Minister) Mr. Edward Fried Mr. Harry Obst (Interpreter) Mr. Rostow, in referring to the meeting Minister Strauss had had with Secretary Fowler earlier in the day,A memorandum of their conversation is in Department of State, Central Files, POL GER W–US. said that, according to an old Chinese proverb, there were two sides to any crisis: danger and opportunity. Thus all of the recent financial crises had contributed to move the international monetary system forward on to a new basis. He emphasized the importance of holding on to the present two-tier gold system and making it work; and called attention to the need for U.S.-German collaboration in avoiding a devaluation of the franc. He endorsed the Minister’s proposal for directly exporting German capital to the US. He recalled Strauss' argument, on the occasion of the Adenauer funeral, for U.K. entry into the Common Market and asked: What were the Minister’s views on Europe now? Mr. Strauss replied he had had no reason so far to change his views of the past. Some of the past arguments for European unity, however, were not considered as credible by many as they used to be. For instance, the argument that Europe would have to stand united because of the threat from the Soviet Union. This was drowning in the détente euphoria. He had discovered that people were more inclined to accept an argument as convincing if they saw the maintenance of their living stand-ard endangered. Saying, “You will suffer the fate of Spain or Portugal if you do not unite,” was at present much more effective. Mr. Rostow inquired if the Minister was in agreement with the views of Servan-Schreiber. Mr. Strauss stated that in principle he was in agreement and he had even written the foreword to the German translation of “The American Challenge.” He said, in order to help Europe wake up, it might be a good idea if the US confronted Europe with the prospect of a substantial withdrawal of US troops from Europe in the foreseeable future. However, a credible presence should remain. Mr. Rostow asked what Mr. Strauss considered to be a credible presence. Mr. Strauss replied that two divisions with the necessary support troops and air support might be considered a credible presence. A US contingent of that magnitude would considerably facilitate the working out of a permanent financial offset agreement. The financial aspect, however, was not his main concern. Europe was in danger of degenerating and getting weak. The mentality prevailed to enjoy the current prosperity to the fullest, to cultivate one’s garden in the quiet corner of world politics, and let the US worry about the rest. This did not just over-burden the US militarily and financially but was also beginning to fray the nerves of the American people, while the moral fibre of the Europeans was beginning to weaken. Mr. Rostow remarked that, once France had been brought back to a policy of European integration, one should try to shape a policy that would put the US somewhere halfway between total responsibility and isolation. President Johnson was trying in many parts of the world to pursue a policy of building “regionalism.” He cited examples in Latin America, Southeast Asia, and Africa. The President was anxious to leave to his successor a strong NATO. But it was necessary, in order to ensure continued presence of the US in Europe in the face of strong Congressional opposition and the Southeast Asia conflict, to work out a reasonable financial formula for the long run. Once the big planes would become available, it may be appropriate to think of a different pattern of US troop deployment. Meanwhile it was necessary to neutralize fully the US balance of payments cost of keeping those troops in Europe and thus to buy time for a rational solution. In the face of the developments in the East, it was of paramount importance for the West to present to the East a picture of maximum poise, power, and unity rather than the picture of a disintegrating West. Mr. Strauss declared himself in full agreement with those views. He said that Chancellor Kiesinger was ready to try a new approach to General de Gaulle, in order to move him in the direction of integration. Mr. Rostow remarked it would be a grand thing for de Gaulle to say now, after the recovery of the Pound and the stabilization of sterling balances, that Britain could be considered fit to enter the Common Market. Mr. Strauss said there were mainly two obstacles: the first, because of its currency problems, Britain would not be in a position to abandon all tariffs. Mr. Fried interjected that he believed Britain was capable of doing so. Mr. Strauss said Britain may not be prepared to enter into full competition. France certainly would not. Mr. Fried remarked Britain should prove fully the equal of France in a battle of competition. Mr. Strauss continued: the second, more difficult problem was in the field of agriculture. In addition to having to drop preferential arrangements with Canada, etc., Britain would have to pay substantial sums into the Brussels fund as an agricultural importer. Germany, being in a similar position, was paying one billion Deutschmark more into the fund annually than it was getting back, while France was pocketing a profit of about the same amount. Mr. Rostow asked the Minister’s opinion on the Czech situation and on Mr. Ulbricht’s intentions. Mr. Strauss replied he considered the Czech development very exciting. Most indicators were pointing against a Soviet intervention by force. He and Defense Minister Schroeder, by the way, were being accused by the Soviets of having come to the US to hatch a plot for Czechoslovakia. On the occasion of Ulbricht’s 75th birthday, comments in East and West German newspapers had upgraded Ulbricht considerably. However, Ulbricht seemed to realize instinctively that a Czech-type development was in store for him, or at least for his successor. He could brake it down somewhat but not bring it to a full stop. Mr. Rostow asked how things were looking in German relations with Rumania and Yugoslavia. Mr. Strauss described the relations as good. One problem was the scarcity of goods that these countries were able to sell to the FRG. The German Ambassador to Rumania had come up with the interesting proposal to finance a chain of tourist hotels throughout Rumania as a means of letting Rumania earn some foreign exchange. A “silent infiltration” of the country with Western and Yugoslav tourists could be a powerful instrument and dangerous to the Soviet position. It had been interesting to note that during a dinner speech in Italy the Rumanian Prime Minister had stated that he did not share the view that the FRG presented a military threat to the Eastern countries. Even Radio Prague, in the past notorious for strong anti-German propaganda, had now refrained from such attacks and was instead criticizing East Germany. It was also interesting to note that the Organisation Gehlen had filed reports of anti-Russian feelings and predicted explosive developments a year ago. It had sounded like an incredible fairy tale by an agent at that time. Things must have been cooking for quite a while. Mr. Rostow remarked that a turning point seemed to have been reached in Eastern Europe following the Cuban missile crisis. Between Sputnik and Cuba there had been a trend to turn towards the Soviet Union. After Cuba there had been a gradual, slow reorientation to the West. Mr. Strauss stated the Germans would have to learn to be patient. One of their cardinal mistakes had always been to look for short-term solutions. Matters like the reunification of the country demanded a long-range perspective. It could only come at the end of a long process of change. 284. Memorandum for the RecordSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 15. Secret. Drafted by Fried on July 25. A memorandum of President Johnson’s conversation with Finance Minister Strauss, July 25, is ibid. Schroeder also held discussions with Secretary of State Rusk, July 22, and Secretary of Defense Clifford, July 23. Memoranda of these conversations are in Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 GER W. Washington, July 24, 1968, 5:30 p.m. SUBJECT The President’s Meeting with German Defense Minister Schroeder, Wednesday, July 24, 1968, 5:30 p.m. (The President, Defense Minister Schroeder, Amb. Knappstein, Walt Rostow, Ed Fried, Freddy Schneider (FRG Interpreter)) The President welcomed Schroeder, said he was delighted to see him again and asked about his health and recovery from his heart attack. The President then told Schroeder he had gone over and approved the exchange of letters on nuclear consultations. He complimented the drafters on the clarity of the language. Schroeder said he was happy to hear of the President’s approval because this was an issue of importance to the German Government. On Czechoslovakia, Schroeder said no one could be confident of predictions. The Russians were operating under a number of restraints: the effect of their action internally, in Eastern Europe, and in the West. The world’s memory of Hungary in 1956 also served as a restraint on them now. In answer to the President’s question, he said that, on balance, he believed the Russians would try very hard to de-escalate the crisis and reach a settlement. On the issue of withdrawal of U.S. troops from Europe, the President recalled that we faced similar problems a year ago. Some 12 to 13 members of the Democratic Policy Committee were for pulling troops out. We said we would study the problem, and with Senator Dirksen’s help as a responsible opposition leader, we managed to get by. The problem is even more serious this year. Senator Symington is pushing hard on his amendment to the Defense Appropriation Bill to cut the number of our troops in Europe to 50,000. This would be disastrous. The prospect now is that action on the Appropriation Bill will be put off until after the recess. The President said it was essential to keep steady on this issue. We will face a wave of isolationism in the United States if we are not careful. The Administration will stand firm and do what it can to bring the Congress around. We expect trouble but we are not prepared to liquidate our agreements. Wherever possible, we should get rid of fat but we must not cut into any muscle. The danger we face in common is a constant danger. There should be no reason for the German people to doubt our commitment to facing it with them. Schroeder said he recognized that the balance of payments issue was making the troop problem more difficult for us. The interim solution we arrived at this year, and perhaps for another year, should dampen it down. But all are agreed that a longer-term solution is essential. The President asked Schroeder about progress on NPT. Schroeder said they still had problems to thrash out. The President jokingly expressed surprise since he understood the Germans had practically written the Treaty as it stands now. Schroeder said they would have to wait for the discussion of the non-nuclear powers at the end of August and the beginning of September. He personally believed that after that meeting the Cabinet would be able to consider the NPT favorably. (Amb. Knappstein interjected that the Russians were making this very difficult.) The President asked about the Chancellor, expressed gratification for his relations with him, and asked Schroeder to give the Chancellor his regards. Schroeder replied that the Chancellor was doing well but faced the difficulties inherent in a big majority. Schroeder commented that the developments in France had come as a big surprise. In the end de Gaulle had won his majority, but he did so by campaigning on the threat of communism—almost an about face from his position before the crisis. More generally, Schroeder remarked that some people, both in and outside of Germany, believed that the Germans should be following a bolder policy. What did the President think? The President replied that the Germans had been doing well on their present course. He could only hope that other countries would do as well. The President expressed his hope that Schroeder would have a good visit in Canada and in Alaska. ERF 285. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 16. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to Moscow, Prague, Bucharest, Belgrade, Paris, London, Rome, The Hague, and USNATO. Brandt discussed West German reaction to the Czech crisis in My Life in Politics, pp. 166–168. Bonn, September 5, 1968, 1500Z. 16455. Subject: Ambassador’s talk with Chancellor on Czechoslovakia. 1. Summary: The Chancellor made the following principal points: the Soviet decision to invade Czechoslovakia is not an isolated matter but represents a basic change in Soviet policy toward all of Eastern Europe. “Wise and firm” US leadership is essential in the new situation. The US can stop Soviet action against Yugoslavia, and hopefully, Romania. The heightened Soviet emphasis on all Eastern European states being their private preserve puts the FRG in a special and vulnerable position because “half our country is one of the states in the Soviet preserve.” Hence FRG efforts toward German unity will be sharply attacked. A NATO summit would be the best means of demonstrating the strength and unity of the West, and there are signs that other countries are coming to this view. A meeting between the President and Kosygin is, of course, the President’s own decision, but if such a meeting takes place it must take on a new and different cast, with the President making clear to Kosygin the gravity and consequences of the new situation created by Czechoslovakia. The Chancellor is not optimistic over his chances of persuading de Gaulle of the need to stand with the West on Czechoslovakia. The Chancellor is sending Birrenbach to the US on September 7 as his “special envoy” to represent German views and to learn US view on the response to Czechoslovakia. End summary. 2. The conversation took place in a relaxed atmosphere during the evening of September 4 at the Chancellor’s bungalow. Present were the Chancellor, Carstens, Guttenberg and Osterheld, as well as the Ambassador and the DCM. The Chancellor began by saying he attached importance to the conversation with the American Amb on the eve of his trip to the Near East. He had debated some as to whether he should go in view of the Czech situation but decided that he should do so. Comment: It was clear that the Chancellor attached public political importance to this talk before going on his trip. He also clearly felt he ought to speak to the American Ambassador after his interview with Tsarapkin. 3. The Chancellor said that there are signs that Soviet policy has undergone a basic change. The threat to Romania remains very real and Yugoslavia is also menaced. Tito is deeply worried and feels “anything is possible” from the Soviets now. Tito also is disappointed in the Western reaction to date, including the US reaction and, on a quite different scale, the de Gaulle reaction. The Chancellor said he had always been deeply impressed by a remark which Secretary once made to him to the effect that European Communism, because it does not meet the realities of the world today, simply will not be able to hold out under “co-existence” and that only in China is Communism likely to survive in the longer term. What surprised the Chancellor was that the Soviets struck out so soon and so sharply in an effort to stop this inevitable internal erosion of European Communism. It was in reality an act of desperation and weakness. The Chancellor said he had done everything possible to avoid any provocation for Soviet action in the Czech case, including efforts to keep important official Germans from even going to Czechoslovakia. 4. Throughout the conversation, the Chancellor kept returning to the theme that wise and firm US leadership is essential in meeting the situation. The US as the leading power in the West must assume the lead. The Chancellor said he recognized our difficulties on the eve of an election, but there was really no alternative. He felt that by taking a firm line and rallying Western unity, it would be possible for the US to deter the Soviet Union perhaps from moving against Romania and especially against Yugoslavia. A Soviet move against Yugoslavia would be a most grave event for all our security interests. 5. Although it is not necessarily a new policy, the categorical emphasis which the Soviets now put on all of the “socialist” states being their private preserve poses a very special problem for Germany because one part of Germany, the GDR, is regarded by the Soviets as a part of the Soviet bloc. This would seem to mean that all efforts by the FRG to bring [about] the German reunification or even contacts with the GDR will be regarded by the Soviet Union as a hostile act. With their new emphasis on UN Articles 53 and 107,For text of the U.N. Charter, signed at San Francisco on June 26, 1945, see 59 Stat. 1031. the Soviets are likely to use this as a pretext for intervening more directly against the FRG. Not only in the propaganda sense but also politically, the Soviets are likely to be aggressive against the FRG. 6. This may well, among other things, take the form of moves against Berlin. The Chancellor said that the FRG was determined to meet this expected, new aggressiveness from the Soviets with calmness but also with firmness. He expected also greatly heightened propaganda attacks against the FRG. (We took this occasion to tell the Chancellor of the helpful instructions regarding US willingness to assist in countering Soviet propaganda attacks against the FRG around the world.) 7. The Chancellor said that he stuck by his proposal on the value of a NATO summit meeting as an effective means for demonstrating the unity of the West. He mentioned that he was encouraged by signs that some countries, like the Netherlands and Luxembourg, were showing signs of being favorable to the idea. He mentioned also New York Times sponsorship. He said that there is now a great opportunity for NATO and the West. 8. The Chancellor referred to rumors of a meeting between the President and Kosygin. The Chancellor said he would not of course presume to advise for or against such a meeting; it was up to the President to decide if such a meeting is held. Its main purpose however, must be to bring home to the Soviets fully the gravity and consequences of their action in Czechoslovakia and to deter them from similar action against other countries. The Chancellor said he realized this would change the character of a President-Kosygin meeting but he felt obligated to say that the Czech invasion created an entirely new situation. 9. On de Gaulle, the Chancellor said he will be meeting him at the end of the month and will of course encourage him to stand more closely with the West in reacting to Czechoslovakia. The Chancellor said he did not know how de Gaulle would respond, although he feared he would probably still hope to play an independent arbiter role between East and West. 10. The Chancellor said he felt it was essential that the German Government have close contact now with the US because Ambassador Knappstein is unfortunately ill and Minister Lilienfeld has recently left. He is sending Birrenbach as one whom he fully trusts as his personal envoy Lodge reported on his discussions with Birrenbach in telegram 16454 from Bonn, September 5. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 GER W) to talk with key people in the US. The Chancellor said that he understood important decisions were being made in Washington at this moment and that he would very much appreciate being informed on them. 11. In the course of the conversation, the Ambassador made number of points. He said that he fully agreed on the great gravity of the situation and knew that it weighed very heavily on the President’s mind. He also said that he felt it was an hour of real opportunity for NATO which had not existed before. The Amb also said that the Soviets are paying dearly for their action in Czechoslovakia. Their efforts forcibly to put down the spirit of freedom and the desire to share in the benefits of modern technology might erode the foundation of Communism in the long run. But military success had a certain devastating effectiveness all its own. The Ambassador promised to keep in closest contact with the Chancellor on the latest US thinking regarding steps to be taken. Lodge 286. Letter From President Johnson to Chancellor Kiesinger Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 71 D 370, Germany. Top Secret; Sensitive. A typed note on the source text reads: “Signed original picked up by Captain Hanks DOD/ISA for transmittal 9/9/68.” Washington, September 9, 1968. Dear Mr. Chancellor: This letter is to confirm our understanding concerning consultation between our two governments on the use of nuclear weapons. With respect to the general release of nuclear weapons, the United States believes that in the interest of maintaining the full effectiveness of the nuclear deterrent, no special arrangements going beyond the provisions of the Athens Guidelines on consultationFor text of the May 6, 1962, NATO communiqué, released at Athens, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 541–543. are desirable. With respect to the selective release of nuclear weapons by the US for use in Germany or by forces of the Federal Republic, I can confirm to you the following undertakings: 1. In order to enable the Government of the FRG to make its views known to the US Government before selective release of nuclear weapons for use from or on the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Occupied Zone of Germany, the President of the United States and the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany will consult directly with each other prior to such release. 2. The President of the United States will not make selective release of nuclear weapons for use by German armed forces if the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany objects to such release. The United States Government regards the above undertakings as being in amplification and support of the Athens Guidelines on consultation. It is my understanding that to avoid any possible impairment of the nuclear deterrent, knowledge of these undertakings will be limited to our two governments and that they will not be made public. Should any public statements regarding the subject matter of this letter be necessary, such statements will be the subject of prior agreement between our governments.In his September 17 reply, Chancellor Kiesinger stated that the German Government was in accord with the understanding outlined in the President’s letter. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to President, Walt Rostow, vol. 96) Sincerely, Lyndon B. Johnson 287. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 16. Secret. The meeting was held in the Secretary’s Dining Room. The source text is marked “Part I of V”; other memoranda of conversation covering the meeting are ibid. A memorandum of conversation between Birrenbach and President Johnson, September 13, is in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 326. Washington, September 9, 1968, 8:30 a.m. SUBJECT Soviet Policy PARTICIPANTS Dr. Kurt Birrenbach, CDU Member of Parliament Baron Herbert von Stackelberg, Minister, German Embassy Carl Lahusen, Counselor, German Embassy The Secretary The Under Secretary John M. Leddy, Assistant Secretary, EUR Alfred Puhan, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary, EUR Alexander C. Johnpoll, Acting Country Director, German Affairs Dr. Birrenbach said he was here at Kiesinger’s request to explain the German viewpoint on developments in Czechoslovakia. Before coming here Birrenbach had long talks with the Chancellor, Minister of Defense Schroeder, and Foreign Minister Brandt. The FRG thinks that the strategic situation in Europe has been altered: there are now 15 Soviet divisions in Western Czechoslovakia; 40 Soviet divisions west of the Vistula; they have 30 divisions in a high state of readiness; the Soviets have proved that they can move much faster than we had realized. Soviet policy had changed after the Bratislava and Karlovy-Vary meetings into one of repression of any signs of independence among the bloc countries. The change in Soviet policy is based on a wrong appreciation of the Dubcek experiment. Within the bloc, Poland is stagnating; the GDR, Bulgaria and Hungary are under complete control. The Soviets simply cannot understand Western reactions. They are misjudging the situation in the West on the basis of the French reaction, United States involvement in Southeast Asia, reductions and rotations in NATO forces, the force ceiling of about 460,000 men on the German contribution to NATO, etc. Birrenbach continued that the Soviets are taking advantage of what they think are these signs of Western weakness to try to isolate the FRG. The FRG is accused of being solely responsible for European tensions because of the FRG’s refusal to accept the five conditions laid down by the Karlovy-Vary meeting (recognition of the GDR, Oder-Neisse Line, division of Germany, special status of Berlin, and total nuclear renunciation). The Soviets referred in their Notes of November 21, 1967 and July 5, 1968,For texts, see Documents on Germany, 1944–1985, pp. 971 and 1017–1022. to Articles 53 and 107 to suggest that these gave the Soviets right to intervene in Germany. Tsarapkin in his recent talks with Kiesinger had raised this issue in a brutal way. Tsarapkin had charged the FRG with fomenting unrest in Czechoslovakia; he had called the FRG détente policy “interference” in the internal affairs of a socialist country. He had threatened severe consequences to the FRG if the FRG persisted in its policies. He had identified FRG policy with the program of the NPD. Birrenbach said that there was now fear in the FRG that these Tsarapkin complaints could lead to further East German pressures on Berlin accesses. Birrenbach said that as a result of the Czech developments and the Tsarapkin communication, FRG Ostpolitik is completely blocked; movement toward détente and the policy of working toward disarmament are under serious question; there is unrest among the European neutral countries as well as Romania and Yugoslavia; and popular morale in Berlin has suffered. Germany’s Eastern, European and Atlantic policies are all in difficulties. The first two may have consequences in the next election by improving the prospects of the NPD. Some NATO concepts, on the strategic situation, require force levels, and political warning time need examination.See page 6. [Footnote in the source text. Reference is to the last paragraph of the memorandum.] The Secretary said that with respect to Birrenbach’s political analysis we can agree with most of it. The Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia was a rude shock to those affected with the euphoria of détente. We have been concerned about excessive détente euphoria for some time. For the present, most NATO countries have adopted the view that there should be a reduction in the number of friendly exchanges, particularly the more visible ones. For the longer run, consultation in NATO is necessary. The Secretary added that he had to take exception to the statement about our concentration on Southeast Asia, with the implication that this meant we were neglecting European problems and that this had encouraged the Soviets in Czechoslovakia. The Secretary compared the Soviet defamation of the FRG with the defamation of Israel in the Arab world. The defamation of Israel among the Arab countries is the only thing they can agree on, and therefore it is important to them. Similarly, the Soviets hope to build up East European unity by concentrating on the Federal Republic. We are trying to help counter this Soviet defamation; we have informed the FRG, for example, that we are prepared to send appropriate instructions to all our Embassies. As for Articles 53 and 107 of the United Nations Charter, we ought to get that problem out of the way promptly. The Articles actually are empty. They don't have the slightest effect on NATO commitments. The Soviets know that if they try anything in Germany it means war. It is as simple as that. Birrenbach said that this should be made quite clear to the Russians. The Secretary said that broadly speaking we see things the same way. For the short term, the outlook in Eastern Europe is negative. For the longer run, however, trends in Eastern Europe toward greater independence and liberalization are irreversible. They are practical necessities. Birrenbach asked whether this was also true for the Soviet Union. The Secretary said he thought this was the case. The Under Secretary said that the Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia was really not surprising. The fact that the Soviets felt compelled to do it was a tribute to the success of Western policy in Eastern Europe. What we need is a strong alliance and a collective policy toward Eastern Europe. The Secretary said that East-West relations have, of course, been complicated by the Czech developments. The fact that the Soviets were willing to accept all the disadvantages of intervention—involving risks to their bilateral relations with the Western countries, Soviet relations with the other communist states and parties, and many other risks—is not a good omen. But this doesn't make the other pressing problems disappear. The problems of nuclear missiles, Viet-Nam, the Middle East—all require solutions. We've all got to give some thought to the problem of getting somewhere in these matters despite Czech events. Birrenbach asked whether there was still some possibility of a meeting between the President and Kosygin. The Secretary replied that there is no plan for such a meeting now. He called Birrenbach’s attention to the President’s press statement to this effect.For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1968, Book II, p. 928. He pointed out that in a matter of this kind, nothing is final. The Under Secretary pointed out that in dealing with weapons of the new kind, such as ABM’s, governments reach a point of decision from which they can't turn back. This has a bearing on the problem. The Secretary said that on warning time NATO had had good advance knowledge of the movement and the order of battle of the Soviet forces. What we did not have was a warning about their decision to march. Of course, the time and forces required for a move against the West is an entirely different thing than that required to move against Czechoslovakia. It may be that the amount of political warning time has now been cut somewhat. We have to look carefully at this. But the concept of political warning time has not been eliminated. 288. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 15–1 GER W. Secret. Drafted by Malin; cleared by Puhan and Moffat, and approved by Johnpoll. Repeated to Paris, London, and USNATO. Washington, September 14, 1968, 1705Z. 238769. Subject: Brandt Letter to Secretary. 1. The following is text of English translation letter from FonMin Brandt, delivered to Secretary September 10: “Dear Dean, “I thank you sincerely for your letters of 2 and 6 September 1968.Not found. On the same day that I received your letter of September 6, I asked Ambassador Cabot Lodge to inform you that I felt that a meeting of foreign ministers before 10 October would be most useful. Our other thoughts in this connection have been discussed by the ambassador and State Secretary Duckwitz. “In reply to your letter of 2 September, I wish to confirm that the events in Czechoslovakia and the resultant change in the strategic situation in Central Europe have been a source of great concern in the government and public in the Federal Republic of Germany. The government, parliament and the public are convinced that, as a consequence of the Soviet aggression, the Atlantic and European structures urgently need strengthening so that the long-term peace policy we all desire can be continued. “For this reason I was pleased to comply with your suggestion that talks might be held with the French Government on the basis of the Franco-German Treaty of January 22, 1963 on the question of French cooperation in Western defense. On September 7, Foreign Minister Debre and I had one of the consultations at ministerial level provided for in that treaty. “According to Mr. Debre, the French government are of the opinion that a return to the cold war will have to be prevented. On the other hand, they feel there can be no question of continuing the policy of détente as long as Soviet troops remain in Czechoslovakia, and that whilst economic relations between East and West should be developed further the Soviet Union should again and again be given the responsibility of restoring the conditions essential to the continuation of the policy of détente. “With regard to military security, I suggested to Debre that the present Franco-German study group for problems of European security in the seventies should make a concrete assessment of the military situation in view of the changes caused by the events in Czechoslovakia. Debre agreed with this proposal. “I am not sure whether the proposed security talks will eventually bring France closer to joint defense efforts of the alliance. Nevertheless, I think they will provide a favorable opportunity to gain a better idea of French views and intentions and to explain to the French the conclusions that force themselves upon us on account of the events in Czechoslovakia. “As regards the question of a meeting of foreign ministers of the NATO countries, the French recommend that the regular December ministerial conference should be brought forward a few weeks. In their opinion, a meeting of foreign ministers at the present time would be too spectacular and would not be in a position to make decisions now. I told Debre that I had agreed to a meeting of NATO foreign ministers in the first half of October but would prefer it to be held in Washington. “As soon as the planned Franco-German talks on security questions have produced some results I shall not fail to inform you about them. “With kind regard, (signed) Willy Brandt” 2. Secretary’s response will be sent by septel.Telegram 241274 to Bonn, September 19. In it Rusk indicated that Brandt’s report reinforced his pessimism on French views. (Ibid.) Rusk 289. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 16. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Moscow, Paris, London, and USNATO. A memorandum attached to the source text indicates that Walt Rostow transmitted the telegram to President Johnson at the LBJ Ranch. Bonn, September 18, 1968, 1525Z. 17052. Subject: Ambassador’s talk with Chancellor on implications of Czechoslovakia. Ref: State 239442.Telegram 239442 to Bonn, September 16, provided instructions for requesting a special high-level meeting of NATO members. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 NATO) 1. Summary: The Ambassador presented the instructions in the reftel, supplemented by State 238789Telegram 238789 to Bonn, September 15, reported on Birrenbach’s visit to Washington. (Ibid.,POL 7 GER W) on the Birrenbach visit, to Chancellor Kiesinger. The most significant points in the Chancellor’s reply were (A) satisfaction with the Birrenbach visit, (B) willingness to consider later increases in the German defense budget if based on a careful NATO appraisal of the new security situation, (C) willingness also, hedged with expressions of real concern to consider at least the possibility of defense budget increases to assist us on our military balance of payments problem, (D) pessimism regarding the prospects of getting increased collaboration from de Gaulle, coupled with no apparent willingness by the Chancellor to press him very hard. End summary. 2. The conversation, which lasted more than an hour and a half, took place in a relaxed, frank atmosphere. Carstens and the DCM were also present. 3. The Chancellor began by saying that he had had only a brief conversation with Birrenbach, who was tired after his trip, but that he was pleased to learn that the US analysis in all its essentials was the same as that of the FRG. The central problem, the Chancellor said, is that we are confronted with a serious new military situation, involving a forward position of many additional Soviet divisions in Eastern Europe. It was essential that NATO draw the right conclusions from this situation. 4. Responding to this, the Ambassador then made the following presentation, based on the reftel: the Soviets have done something hazardous in Czechoslovakia which presents new dangers for the Western Alliance. We believe there is a strong German and Alliance view that a NATO response is required in the present situation. Without being provocative, such a response should involve specific actions to improve the Allied defense position in Europe. It should also be prompt if it is to be effective. A NATO Ministerial meeting in the near future would be useful—provided substantive results can be achieved. Following our consultations with Germany and other members of NATO, we intend to propose a special meeting of the North Atlantic Council at the Permanent Representative level to be held in Brussels in late September or early October to determine what governments are willing and able to do. The Secretary also plans a dinner October 8 of those NATO Foreign Ministers who are in New York. This meeting could appraise whether progress on real substance justified a special, early Ministers' meeting in Brussels. To sum up the general NATO situation, the key question is the willingness of Allied governments to take firm decisions regarding their contributions to the common defense effort. 5. The Ambassador continued that this is a highly important juncture in the development of postwar Europe. There is a necessity for real action. To take it can set us ahead and start somewhat of a an upward spiral; failure to take it will have serious effects on the future of NATO and of Europe. NATO can be compared to a boat in front of a boathouse on a lake; it either goes forwards or backwards; it does not stay still. All NATO countries—in common indeed with countries everywhere—confront complex domestic and international difficulties. This may perhaps be truer for the US at present than for others because of our elections. Certainly what is done between now and the end of this year in NATO will have a very strong effect on the new American government, whoever heads the government. Germany is the country most directly affected by the Soviet move in Czechoslovakia. If Germany shows within NATO that it thinks the situation is sufficiently serious for them to take concrete steps, then we are confident that this will lead to positive action by others. This means decisions on the military budget, both in the sense of money spent for Germany’s own forces and for balance of payments purposes arising from the presence of US forces. A statesmanlike German decision on this latter subject could be politically very important in determining the position of the new American government. The Chancellor has heard the talk of a decline in the American public interest in Europe in recent years. The Czechoslovak events present an opportunity to reverse this trend if positive action is taken to energize NATO and resume progress toward European integration. They also present a risk of its intensification if action is not taken. 6. The Chancellor replied that he wanted to make the German position clear on increased military effort. The FRG felt that it made no sense, as an immediate reflex reaction to the Soviet invasion, to increase indiscriminately the German defense budget. Any decisions on the defense budget must be based on a careful German and NATO study of the new situation. Defense Minister Schroeder must first make considered proposals to the Cabinet. He will soon have an opportunity to do this in the form of the annual white paper on defense which must be submitted to the Bundestag. 7. More specifically, on neutralization of US military expenditures, the Chancellor said that he understood the US position. He added that, however, any solutions involving an increase in the German defense budget presented very serious problems. It could involve a kind of double burden coming on top of any general increase required to strengthen the Bundeswehr itself. He pointed to the very great difficulties recently in hammering out the budget decisions in the medium term financial plan. Nevertheless, the Chancellor said, the FRG was prepared to “look very carefully into this.” 8. Regarding de Gaulle, Chancellor said that he will hear from him September 27 how he sees the new situation created by Czechoslovakia, but that he does not expect any great change in de Gaulle’s willingness to cooperate. It is likely that the only positive thing which can be expected from de Gaulle is a commitment that he will not withdraw from NATO at this time. The Chancellor said that the Germans will look into whether it is possible to work out more collaboration between NATO forces and French forces, but that he was not at all certain that something could be worked out. 9. Regarding the situation in general, the Chancellor said that the Germans had no new reports of an imminent military threat to Romania or Yugoslavia. The Ambassador pointed out that we also had no new information pointing in this direction. The Chancellor said that it is now very difficult to predict how the Soviet leadership will react in a given situation. The German appraisal is that the Kremlin is a disunited, leaderless team, which makes it potentially more dangerous. Khrushchev, although he embarked on some very dangerous ventures indeed, was sufficiently in charge to back down again when the situation required (e.g. Cuba). The difficulty with the present disunited Kremlin team is that it is much harder for it to decide to pull back when it has made an obvious mistake. The Chancellor said that, although he, like others, could hardly say he predicted the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, looking back on it now he realizes that there was a certain inevitability to it. There were certain things, both from the point of view of their ideology and their strategic views, which the Soviets “simply could not let happen.” What their brutal invasion can only mean is that they lost their heads in the Kremlin. The Chancellor also felt that Czechoslovakia really went too far; perhaps Dubcek realized this, but lost control of the situation. He stressed again, as he had in the previous conversation, how the FRG had really bent over backwards to avoid giving the Soviets any pretext whatever to charge German involvement in the liberalization process in Czechoslovakia. He even felt at one point that a Western leader should have warned Dubcek to “take it easy” in his contacts with the West. 10. On the NATO reaction to Czechoslovakia, the Chancellor said that he has been concerned with the slow erosion of NATO over the past few years. He agreed that the events in Czechoslovakia provide a new opportunity for revitalization. He also agreed fully that whatever NATO does should not be dramatic, but measured and considered. The Chancellor felt a stronger and united NATO does have an effect in Eastern Europe and on the Soviet Union. The Soviets will negotiate differently and more responsibly if NATO is stronger and more united. The other Eastern European countries will also be heartened. The Chancellor also mentioned, although quite briefly, the need for the US to exercise at least full co-leadership in the process of developing a proper NATO reaction. The Chancellor concluded by saying that “we will do all that it is possible for us to do to bring about a proper NATO response.” 11. The Chancellor’s comments on his trip to Turkey, Iran and Afghanistan will be reported in subsequent message.Telegram 17078 from Bonn, September 18. (Ibid., DEF 1 NATO) Lodge 290. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Rostow Files, Non-Proliferation. Secret. No drafting information is on the source text, which was approved in S/S on September 24. Washington, September 20, 1968, 12:30 p.m. PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Ambassador Dobrynin Assistant Secretary Leddy Ambassador Dobrynin had asked to see the Secretary either today or on Monday. The Secretary agreed to see him at 12:30 p.m. today. Dobrynin began by referring to the question of technical talks on PNEDs (Peaceful Nuclear Explosive Devices). He said that the idea of the US and the USSR meeting on this subject had been at the US initiative, that the US thought it would be useful with the non-nuclear conference in Geneva and that the Soviets were now prepared to go ahead with the talks on October 7, as suggested by the US. The Secretary asked whether this subject had been discussed with Ambassador Foster when he and Dobrynin met the other day. Dobrynin replied that they had just discussed the NPT and that Ambassador Foster did not wish to discuss the PNEDs talks. The Secretary said that he would have to discuss this question with the President and Ambassador Foster, and that he would let Dobrynin know later. He observed that there were complications. The Secretary said that the Executive Branch, as the Ambassador knew, was attempting to move the non-proliferation treaty through the Senate. In response to the Ambassador’s question, he said he thought the matter would not come to a vote before the Fortas nomination had been settled,Reference is to the nomination of Associate Justice Abe Fortas as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. probably not until the end of the month. The Secretary then opened up the question of the recent intense Soviet propaganda campaign against Germany and Berlin. He said that he wanted to discuss this question with real seriousness. There had been a buildup of propaganda, threats and agitation by the Soviets against West Germany and Berlin. We have observed an unusual series of attacks, charges, use of strong language, including the latest attack of today, by Izvestya and Pravda against Germany and Berlin. We had observed the strange interpretation by the Soviets of Articles 53 and 107 of the UN Charter as a justification for Soviet intervention, as well as the astonishing Soviet démarche to the Dutch Prime Minister de Jong attempting to dissuade him from making his prospective visit to Berlin. He said that the US cannot accept pressures against contacts between Berlin and the outside world. We and the other protective powers have a responsibility for Berlin, including its economic viability. He said that the Soviet campaign was developing in a serious way and asked for Ambassador Dobrynin’s comments. He asked, “What’s behind this?” Dobrynin said in effect that all of this had been precipitated by the Federal Republic and the State Department acting together. As proof he observed that the US and allied statements on Articles 53 and 107 had just been issued now whereas the Soviet position on these Articles was stated to the Germans as long ago as July 1967.For text of U.S. statement, see Department of State Bulletin, October 7, 1968, p. 365. Similar statements were made by the United Kingdom and France. The Secretary said that he hoped there would be no confusion in the Soviet Government over the fact that any rights under the UN Articles in question and the Potsdam Agreement must be multilateral as amongst the four powers (US,UK, France and Soviet Union) and cannot be unilaterally applied by the Soviets or arrogated to the Warsaw Pact. Dobrynin then said that while he had nothing particular to say on the basis of instructions from Moscow, he would make certain personal observations: The Secretary had suggested that there might be the possibility of a military attack. He derided this possibility. He suggested that the US was simply playing the FRG game. He said, “Do you really think we would attack? Why are you making such a fuss?” The Secretary then quoted the following excerpt from Pravda, dated September 18: “As a participant in the Potsdam agreement, the Soviet Union will continue to stand ready, together with other peace-loving states, to take the necessary effective measures, if the need arises, to stop the dangerous activities of neo-nazism and militarism.” He asked what was the meaning of the phrase “together with other peace loving states”? If this meant the US, the UK and France, that would be one thing; but historically the Soviet Union had never used this phrase to describe the countries of the West. This suggested that perhaps the Soviet Union may have meant to imply that the Warsaw Pact countries as “peace loving states” were entitled to take this action. The Soviet Union and the US had had somewhat different ideas of “militarism” and “neo-nazism” in West Germany; but it had, after all, been the East Germans who had moved into Czechoslovakia. In July, in August, and now in the middle of September there had been a series of menacing statements regarding Germany and Berlin. We are listening to these and must listen; we will have to reply and expect to do so; but we want to know what is behind this campaign. There was further inconclusive discussion about Articles 53 and 107 of the UN Charter, the position of NATO under Article 51 of the UN Charter and the question of the relative priorities between the UN and NATO, Dobrynin suggesting that the UN Charter was superior to NATO and the Secretary pointing out that the two were wholly consistent. Dobrynin asked whether the Secretary was really concerned over the possibility of the use of force by the Soviets and its Warsaw Pact countries against Germany and Berlin. The Secretary said he was certainly “concerned”, but not nervous or afraid; the US would do its duty together with its allies; but we want to know what is behind the Soviet campaign. He again reverted to the Soviet attempt to dissuade the Dutch Prime Minister from visiting Berlin, describing it as “unheard of”. He said that the Soviets had stated that such a visit would lead to “undesirable consequences.” He could not recall any such language having been used under these circumstances during his period of office. He asked Dobrynin to explain to the Soviet Government the seriousness of the view which we take over the propaganda assault and attempts at intimidation being conducted by the Soviet Union. Dobrynin then referred to his earlier message to the Secretary of August 31 regarding Berlin.For text, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XVII, Document 90. In that message the Soviet Union had recognized the state interests of the US in Berlin and had stated that any reports about action against Berlin were “completely without foundation.” He reaffirmed this message. He added that speaking personally he thought that the US was playing a German game and referred to the recent visits to Washington of Kurt Birrenbach and Helmut Schmidt. The Secretary then pointed out that several Soviet divisions had moved to the West and to the South. There were several hundred thousand Warsaw Pact troops in Czechoslovakia and substantial additional Soviet forces along the NATO border (Bavaria). This inevitably brings up a problem for NATO. Dobrynin interjected to ask, “Do you really believe now that this could be a military threat to NATO?” (His implicit denial at this point of any military threat to NATO ties in with his later remark below to the effect that the prime consideration for the Soviet Union is the preservation of the Warsaw Pact countries.) The Secretary thought there was the question of Soviet intentions and the question of the redeployment of the Warsaw Pact forces which needed looking at both together and separately. Dobrynin interjected to say that there were the same number of Soviet divisions but in a different place. The Secretary, resuming, said that, with respect to Soviet intentions, we do not believe at the moment that the Soviets intend a military assault on NATO, but there was uncertainty. He said, frankly, we do not entirely understand why you did what you did in Czechoslovakia despite the obvious costs in your political relations with the US, with Europe and around the world. Therefore, we wonder whether there may be elements in the thinking of the Soviet leaders which we do not fully understand. He said that it would have been easier for him six months ago to make a prediction of what the Soviet Government might do than it would be today. Therefore, we and our partners in NATO have to take note of the redeployment of Soviet forces and have to question again our judgments about Soviet intentions and have to consider the two together. At the close of a general discussion about peaceful co-existence, Ambassador Dobrynin made two major points which were clearly not just his own personal observation, but were in line with Moscow instructions: 1. The Soviet Union continued to pursue a policy of peaceful co- existence, including the promotion of East-West contacts, discussion of important subjects such as PNEDs, etc. 2. The Soviet Union would tolerate no weakening in any way of the solidarity or basic socialist structure of the Warsaw powers. He was emphatic on this point and said in effect “the Warsaw Pact structure must be preserved intact, and that’s all.” The impression drawn from this conversation is that Dobrynin sought to reassure the Secretary regarding any intention of the Soviet Union to use military force against NATO, including the Federal Republic and Berlin; that it wished to continue the policy of peaceful co- existence with the West and with the US in particular; and that the action in Czechoslovakia was purely defensive in an effort to protect the socialist structure and military arrangements of the Warsaw Pact powers.In telegram 244788 to Moscow, September 25, the Department of State reported on the Rusk-Dobrynin meeting and, noting that the Soviet Ambassador had taken no notes of Rusk’s comments, instructed the Embassy to meet with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko to summarize the Secretary’s comments. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 28 GER B) In telegram 5691 from Moscow, the Embassy urged reconsideration of these instructions since it would distract attention from Soviet actions in Czechoslovakia. (Ibid.) 291. Telegram From the Embassy in Germany to the Department of State Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 16. Secret; Nodis. Bonn, September 28, 1968, 1615Z. 17480. For the President and the Secretary from Lodge. 1. This message concerns American policy toward Germany in the light of the invasion of Czechoslovakia. 2. This event—deeply shocking to virtually all Germans—has resulted in increased readiness to provide more money for defense and to move further on European integration, including British entry into the Common Market. Although movement in this direction is hesitant and as yet inconclusive, it is more positive than any heretofore under the present government and clearly marks a waning of de Gaulle’s influence here. 3. I welcome this evolution and believe it is in the interests of the US. Conversely, I believe that if the Germans do not act now, the opportunity to strengthen NATO in the light of the Czechoslovak crisis will have been missed. This will make the invasion of Czechoslovakia an even greater short term Soviet success than it is already and will sharply reduce the possibility of converting it into a long term Soviet failure. 4. If the crisis does not lead to strengthening NATO, I believe the result in Germany will be a mood of pessimism and of accommodation towards the USSR. The result in the US will be disappointment over the lack of European response and continuing pressures to withdraw more American troops from Europe. The outcome either way may be a historic turning point. If it is negative, it will give impetus to a downward spiral in the US relationship with Europe, which, Germans tell me, must eventually result in Western Europe’s becoming an enlarged Finland. 5. The German decision is not firm yet. It may not take final form for several weeks. Perhaps the major concern of German leaders with regard to it is that, if they finally decide on a go-ahead policy, they will be left in isolation by their Allies, and thus exposed to Soviet attack and to both European and German criticism as being hasty and foolish “hardliners.” 6. I hope I appreciate at least some of the difficulties of your present situation, but I believe it most desirable in view of the importance of the German decision to give them some encouragement by positive moves of our own in response to some positive prior European moves. One such move would be a statement from you that you will recommend to the incoming administration that the US should commit itself to continued adherence to the NATO Treaty beyond the 1969 deadline. Another would be a similar recommendation to retain at least the present level of troops in Europe in the face of the new situation caused by the Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia, and preferably, to return to Europe permanently the two withdrawn brigades of the 24th Division. 7. The reports about strategic arms talks with the Soviets are a real worry here—at whatever level talks might be held. Although I know little of current plans, I accept the proposition that a workable arrangement on this subject would be in the interest of Europe as well as the US and that the matter should be pursued with the Soviets in the future. 8. Nonetheless, given the present atmosphere in Germany, a decision apparently to reward Soviet aggression by embarking on arms talks would, I fear, be incomprehensible here. How, it would be asked, can one explain a willingness to trust the Soviet word when they have just broken it so flagrantly in Czechoslovakia? 9. Another effect of an expression of US willingness to start talks with the Soviets now would put in doubt the judgment and good sense of German leaders in pressing for increases in defense. Such a US decision might well eliminate the possibility of a positive German decision on our defense. 10. You may have a different perspective in Washington. But as I view it, the chance for strengthening NATO, and the damage which would arise from not doing so, outweigh in terms of our national interest the potential gain from opening the talks with Soviets this time. Lodge 292. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource: Department of State, SIG Files: Lot 74 D 344, SIG Memo 87. Top Secret. An attached October 1 memorandum from Arthur Hartman, Staff Director, Senior Interdepartmental Group, to members stated that the paper was prepared for discussion at the October 4 SIG meeting. Washington, October 1, 1968. [Here follows a 6-page discussion of background to the crisis, legal position of the parties, and Allied administrative machinery already in place to face a crisis in Berlin.] VII. Berlin Contingency Planning US strategic thinking with regard to military contingencies in Berlin have been set out in National Security Action Memorandum No. 109 of October 23, 1961 (see Appendix)Not printed. For text of NSAM No. 109, see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XIV, pp. 521–523. which still provides current US view of the governing sequences and graduated responses in a Berlin conflict. Detailed contingency plans are available which have been devised to meet various categories of contingencies. By experience we know that rarely does a crisis situation exactly meet the developments as they occur. Nevertheless we believe that plans that we have are well adapted and sufficiently flexible to meet real situations as they arise. The major kinds of contingencies that might well arise in the foreseeable future and the kinds of contingency plans designed to meet them are as follows: A. Soviet/GDR action directed against FRG access to Berlin on the ground (road and rail). The Soviets may permit the East Germans to take action against FRG travellers instead of Allied traffic because (1) such a course is safer; (2) appeases Ulbricht’s claim to sovereignty; (3) provides an indirect but very effective way of undercutting Berlin’s viability; and (4) is a course of action that tends to exploit divisions between the FRG and its allies. The new passport, visa and tariff measures that were instituted in June provide an adequate basis for immediate and effective har-assment of FRG travellers. There are three major ways in which FRG travellers to and from Berlin could be harassed by the GDR authorities: 1. Denial of Berlin access to German travellers on a broad scale, but short of blockade conditions. This action could easily be implemented by the GDR simply by refusing to issue visas to travellers on trains, busses, and on the autobahn. Allied Response: Depending upon the scale of these actions the Allied Powers would protest in East Berlin, the Western capitals, and Moscow, in that order; the FRG would certainly protest and warn the GDR through Interzonal Trade channels (IZT agreement does not permit harassment of goods or passengers). There would be an immediate diversion of essential FRG travel to the air routes and the Allied carriers would add some flights. (Note: an air bus scheme run by Modern Air Transport, an American carrier, is well into the discussion stages with the Minister of Transport.) 2. Interruption of German Cargo Traffic on a significant scale (i.e., more than token harassment for 2–3 days) by charging exorbitant fees, applying unreasonable inspection standards, false quarantines, excessive delays, or outright denial of access rights. Allied Response: Protests through diplomatic and IZT channels, followed by FRG and Allied economic and political countermeasures (e.g. expansion of export control measures; refusal of TTD’s). Some limited transport of special cargoes by Allied train or by air cargo might well be attempted at an early stage, but not on a large scale. 3. Complete and sustained blockage of FRG traffic, passenger and cargo, while less likely than harassment, provides the Allies with one of their most difficult contingency problems. Allied Response: Aside from attempting to blunt the immediate effects of blockade by shifting passengers and cargo to air transport (which can be har-assed —“Harassment of Air Corridors,” below), no immediate relief is at hand. Complete blockage of German rail, road and barge traffic certainly would be followed by a period of intense diplomatic activity, expanding airlift implementation, breaking off of IZT and NATO-wide implementation of more serious Allied economic political and even military countermeasures (e.g. augmentation of Berlin military forces, increase in Allied military traffic, publicized buildup of Berlin stockpiles). If the blockage persisted and a significant economic, physical and/or psychological threat is posed to Berlin, the Allies will consider taking civilian ground access under their auspices. If, as a result of the failure to end the blockade of civilian traffic, Allied travel also became blocked, Allied contingency planning would be applicable (see below). Since Allied access to Berlin for military travel is a matter of formal agreement and of Allied right (which the Soviets have formally recognized over the years), tampering with Allied access, in any form, is much riskier for the Soviets and poses a threat of general war. A number of contingency plans to determine exactly what Soviet intentions are in a given situation exist. B. Interference with Allied access can come either by blockage of the Berlin/Helmstedt autobahn by the Soviets or East Germans, or by blockage of the Allied Military trains between Helmstedt and Berlin. Allied Response: The first aim of all contingency plans in this area is to determine Soviet/GDR intentions. For example, the tripartite armed train probe is designed solely as a test of Soviet/East German intent to use force to stop the daily Allied trains. One thrown switch or one removed section of track, if backed up by Soviet/GDR force to prevent the Allies from put-ting the track in order, would establish this point. Similarly, a contingency plan for a company-level probe up the autobahn from Helmstedt is designed solely as a test of Soviet/East German intent to use force to keep the autobahns closed. This contingency is available for use following failure of diplomatic initiatives. We have also planned a second probe from the Helmstedt end of the autobahn, consisting of a reinforced battalion combat team which is designed to achieve one of two political objectives: (1) provide circumstances under which negotiations with the Soviets might prove fruitful, or, (2) compel the Soviets to face the imminence of general war. The purpose of the battalion probe is not to fight its way through to Berlin but to demonstrate Allied determination and to test the extent to which the Soviets may be willing to use force. Finally, there is available a tripartite division-size force, again available for operations from the Helmstedt end of the autobahn. It is assembled under tripartite aegis upon the decision of governments, but to be implemented only under the command and control of NATO, since use of a force of that size through GDR territory obviously has implications for all of NATO. (One of its missions would be to extricate the battalion combat team probe.) C. Harassment in the Air Corridors to Berlin Soviet aircraft could undertake a campaign of harassment of civil flights traveling in and out of Berlin through the three air corridors set up by the Western Allies and the Soviets in 1946. Air access is solely an Allied responsibility and only Allied civilian and military aircraft fly the Berlin routes. However, the Soviets may permit harassment of civil Allied flights because they are carrying—or are alleged to be carrying—categories of FRG passengers forbidden by the GDR to travel in and out of Berlin. Soviet air harassment would probably take the form of large numbers of Soviet military flights in the corridors, some of which might buzz or otherwise worry our civil flights in the corridors. (This could follow an initial demand by the Soviets that the Allies permit GDR officials to screen FRG passengers at West Berlin airports, ostensibly to determine individuals forbidden to travel across East German territory.) Allied Response: Initial Allied response to air harassment would take the form of protests through the Soviet controller in the Berlin Air Safety Center and Allied notes to the Soviet Ambassador in East Berlin. If civil air travel becomes clearly hazardous because of near-misses with Soviet flights or other dangerous moves by the Soviet aircraft, Allied plans call for unarmed military air transports, one from each Power, to provide an immediate response and a test of Soviet intentions. These flights are presently on six hours' stand-by. (In the event that air harassment is carried out by East German air units, the Allies would treat the Soviets as nonetheless responsible and continue to deal only with them.) Contingency plans exist to cover the possibility of Soviet withdrawal from the Berlin Air Safety Center and include the situation of an attempted East German filling of the vacated Soviet position. These plans are currently under active review. In any case, the Allies will continue to hold the Soviets solely responsible and will attempt to pass on flight information to Soviet authorities in East Berlin as a flight safety measure. Rapid political advice to the Allied controllers in the Berlin Air Safety Center is of course essential. In the event civil air carriers cease to operate, Allied plans provide for military-sponsored air service (MSAS), using civil aircraft either under government contract or with military crews. MSAS, which would operate initially without passengers, would keep Allied civil air access alive, help replenish Berlin stockpiles, and establish Soviet/GDR intentions. If Soviet/GDR action were to result in damage or loss of an Allied civil aircraft, tripartite plans call for possible fighter aircraft escort flights, subject to national approval at each stage of implementation. D. Naval Countermeasures A number of NAVCONS (Naval Contingencies) were approved by the WAG in 1967. While detailed planning is the responsibility of the appropriate national authority, a wide range of possible countermeasures affecting naval and maritime activities is now available which could be implemented in time of crisis. Prior to implementation a national decision would have to be made in each case, which probably would be coordinated through the WAG. As conceived, the naval countermeasures include a flexible and escalating series of moves including: 1. In-port harassment of USSR/GDR/Bloc shipping 2. In-port seizure of lend-lease ships 3. Delays and administrative harassment of shipping in Kiel and Panama canals 4. Intensified surveillance of submarines and surface vessels 5. Intensive naval exercises and augmentation of national naval forces 6. Electronic countermeasures against hostile shipping 7. Boarding and searching of ships with embargo or selected items 8. Exclusion of hostile shipping from selected areas 9. Minor damage inflicted on shipping up to/including seizure of designated ships on the high seas E. Air Harassment of Berlin Activity inside West Berlin proscribed by the Soviets or East Germans, such as FRG meetings, may be expected to stimulate Soviet/GDR air activity over the city. These have in the past taken the form of frequent sonic booms and low-level jet flights over West Berlin “targets” such as the Reichstag building, where Bundestag (Parliamentary) committees meet while in Berlin. Soviet helicopters may also intrude an unwelcome presence over the city. The effect of such harassment is mainly psychological, although there can be serious dangers to Allied civil and military flights using West Berlin’s three airfields. Berliners have shown that they can take a heavy sonic pounding, at least for periods of several days at a time, without showing undue strain. Allied Response is limited to protests to the Soviets through the Berlin Air Safety Center and through diplomatic channels. F. Threats to the Continuation of Allied Control of the Western Sectors of Berlin Extensive plans for the defense of Berlin in the event of attacks on the very existence of Free Berlin, whether from internal insurrection (coup de main) or military attack from outside the city, exist. Efforts aimed at a “spontaneous” uprising by the SED directed against Berlin authority can be contained by the 15,000 Berlin police now in Berlin, supported by the 10,000 Allied troops in the city. If the East Germans make a determined effort at a take-over which might get out of hand, augmentation of the Berlin military forces (from the nearby FRG) always remains a possibility. The control of civil disturbances is primarily a Berlin policy responsibility, but Allied planning is based on the assumption that the only way to counter the enemy threat of surprise is for every military and police unit to have detailed orders to secure points vital to the defense of Berlin in the following order or priority: (a) countering a potential military threat, (b) maintaining law and order, (c) re-establishing Allied control within West Berlin. If hostile elements penetrate border defenses, defensive positions call for falling back on a series of shortened lines while protecting vital internal communications lines. Troop commanders will see that S- and U-Bahn lines are closed, will block canals, keep railway repair yards under surveillance, maintain ready reserves, pacify areas under their control and keep on the alert for a direct military attack in support of the initial civil disturbance or surprise attack. In the event of a military attack, the Allies plan to secure strong points in the city and secure the most vital lines of communication. Plans are based on a prior alert time of twenty minutes. 293. Action Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 16. Secret. A notation on the source text reads: “Rec'd 10:20 a.m.” Washington, October 4, 1968. SUBJECT Possible Crisis in Berlin I have gone over the Berlin situation with my people in light of the Kraemer paper I sent to you.On October 3, Rostow presented President Johnson with an untitled memorandum on the policy of the East German Government by Fritz Kraemer, “an extremely intelligent civilian who works in the Department of the Army.” (Ibid.) This is the way we see it: Military Indications There is no significant change since Czechoslovakia in the Soviet military threat against Berlin. Their increased forces in Czechoslovakia cut down what they can mount immediately against Berlin. But the roads are good and they can change force dispositions in a day or two. Moreover, their alert status is improved. The conclusion is that the current disposition of Soviet forces does not tell us much about their intentions toward Berlin. The Soviet Propaganda Campaign against the Federal Republic: The Russians are no longer coming down so hard on the claim that they have the right to intervene in the Federal Republic. They base this claim on Articles 53 and 107 of the UN Charter, which relate to actions against former enemy powers. They began pushing this line pretty hard at the beginning of July. The Germans became very nervous. To counter this we took the following actions: —On August 31, when Secretary Rusk warned Dobrynin about Rumania, he specifically warned that Berlin was a “state interest” of the U.S.See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XVII, Document 90. —On September 17, the U.S., the UK, and the French, in separate announcements,See Department of State Bulletin, October 7, 1968, p. 365. said publicly that Articles 53 and 107 of the UN Charter did not give the Soviet Union the right to interfere in the affairs of the Federal Republic. We also said that such intervention would bring a NATO response. —On September 20, Secretary Rusk repeated this position privately to Dobrynin.See Document 290. —On October 2, Secretary Rusk made the point again in his speech at the UN.For text, see Department of State Bulletin, October 21, 1968, pp. 405–410. —The next day, Gromyko in his speech to the UN did not assert Soviet intervention rights in the Federal Republic under the UN Charter.For text, see U.N. Doc. A/PV. 1698, pp. 6–14. For the moment, they seem to have backed off this line. The most serious threat lies in Communist moves to put pressure on Berlin by challenging Federal Republic rights and activities in the city. They could do this by: —Putting more restrictions on the movement of people and goods between the Federal Republic and West Berlin. Last spring they got away with new visa and passport restrictions and travel taxes. They may well try to step up this kind of pressure—again without challenging Allied rights in the city. —Intensifying their propaganda charges that Federal Republic meetings and other activities in Berlin are provocative acts. This could weaken Berlin morale and threaten the viability of the city. The Russians have been building up this kind of propaganda campaign. On September 20 Secretary Rusk told Dobrynin we were concerned about the menacing Soviet tone on Berlin. He made it clear that any move against Berlin would be very dangerous and that we cannot accept pressures against Berlin or against Berlin contacts with the Federal Republic. Dobrynin took no notes at this meeting. We cannot be sure that the full weight of Secretary Rusk’s warning was brought home to the Kremlin. Gromyko, in his speech to the UN, repeated the Soviet position that the Federal Republic had no rights in Berlin—but, with velvet glove, issued a warning that any “aggravation of tensions” would be Bonn’s fault: “The Federal Republic of Germany has ceaselessly laid claims on West Berlin, which has a special status of an independent political entity. Our answer is clear: West Berlin has never belonged, nor does it belong or will it ever belong to the Federal Republic of Germany. If sometimes an aggravation of tensions may occur here, the responsibility for this lies squarely with the West German Government.” A crisis could be associated with some important meetings the Federal Republic has scheduled in Berlin the end of October and early November. These are: —October 27 to November 2: meetings in Berlin of about twenty committees of the Bundestag. —November 3 to November 7: the National Party Congress of the Christian Democratic Union. These are high visibility meetings. If the East Germans—with Russian support—increase travel restrictions and the Russians intensify their propaganda campaign against Berlin so as to interfere with these meetings, the impact on the city and throughout the Federal Republic could be great. We could have another Berlin crisis on our hands. This would be a good time, therefore, to try to negotiate quickly an Allied Declaration on Berlin along the lines of the memo we sent you on September 17 (attached).Not printed. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Walt Rostow, vol. 94) As you know, this is what the Germans requested. The Declaration would be negotiated with the UK, the French and the Germans in Bonn. If you approve, Secretary Rusk could get this moving in his bilateral talks with Brandt, Debre, and Stewart at the UN in New York. You have previously set this aside as too openly provocative. The question is: do you now regard it as appropriate to move forward so as not to leave Gromyko’s warning unanswered. A fall-back position would be to agree that all three former Occupying Powers make a parallel démarche through diplomatic channels rather than in a public declaration. The experts believe this would not be as effective, but better than inaction—which could mislead Ulbricht and Moscow. A decision is urgent because Secretary Rusk dines with the NATO Foreign Ministers on October 7 (Monday). Walt Go ahead with the Allied Declaration on Berlin A tripartite diplomatic démarche No Call meThe President checked this option. 294. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Bonn, Berlin, London, Paris, and USUN. Moscow, October 6, 1968, 1510Z. 5894. Ref: State 250963.Telegram 250963, October 7, requested Thompson’s evaluation of the likely impact of a draft text of an Allied declaration on Berlin. (Ibid.) Subj: Allied declaration on Berlin. 1. In view of Soviet concern over Western reaction to Czechoslovak affair, I think there is a good possibility that West Germans can get away with the various governmental and party meetings scheduled to be held in Berlin without serious Soviet reaction. If in addition to holding these meetings the Allies issue the proposed declaration, the chances of strong Soviet and East German action will be greatly enhanced. If declaration is to be made at all I think it would better be made in response to Soviet or East German statements in protest to the meetings. 2. As for proposed text, the statement that Allies will accept no interference with passage of Germans and commerce between Berlin and Federal Republic sounds rather hollow in view of fact that GDR has interfered with passage NDP members and others. Moreover, this passage speaks of Berlin and not West Berlin and we have certainly accepted in fact GDR control of West German access to East Berlin. If this paragraph applies only to West Berlin, statement that Three Powers' authority in Berlin (not Four Powers') implies that we are similarly prepared to accept Soviet decisions in East Berlin. Although we have not been able to do anything about Soviet actions there, I wonder if we should weaken our right to protest. Finally, I should think proposed declaration would weaken our ability to keep West German activities in West Berlin within bounds. 3. For these reasons I believe we should not make any declaration unless forced to do so by Soviets or East Germans. Thompson 295. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 38–8. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Rusk. Rusk and Gromyko met in New York in conjunction with the opening of the 23d session of the UN General Assembly. An attached note from Read to Rusk, dated October 19, reads: “John Leddy recommends strongly that you dictate a brief note covering the assurances you got from Gromyko on Berlin, which you have mentioned to Leddy and Willy Brandt but not recorded as far as we know.” New York, October 6, 1968. MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION WITH FOREIGN MINISTER GROMYKO OF THE SOVIET UNION Following dinner I drew Mr. Gromyko aside for a brief private talk, in the course of which I raised the subject of Berlin. I reminded Mr. Gromyko that I had spoken directly with Ambassador Dobrynin about the importance of Berlin as a “vital state interest” of the United States and that we expected everyone to recognize that fact. I accepted Ambassador Dobrynin’s subsequent message as a categorical statement that the Soviets would not move against Berlin. I said it was very important that there be no crisis on this matter because it would be a very grave matter indeed. Mr. Gromyko stated clearly that the Soviet Union did not intend to move against Berlin and asked me whether I really thought they were planning to do so. I told him I accepted Soviet assurances on this point but did not wish to have a conversation with Mr. Gromyko without reiterating what I had said to Ambassador Dobrynin. Gromyko then said that the Soviet Union objects to the attempts of the Federal Republic of Germany to take over Berlin and indicated that they would continue to press on this point. I told him that it was important for West Berlin to have full contacts with the outside world and that it was perfectly natural for West Berlin to have close relations with the Federal Republic. I said I knew of nothing which the Federal Republic is doing in West Berlin which the East Germans are not doing to an even greater extent in East Berlin. I reaffirmed the tripartite responsibility for West Berlin. When I remonstrated with Gromyko about their démarche to the Dutch about a visit of the Dutch Prime Minister into Berlin he said this was because “the West Germans had arranged it”. I scoffed at this reason. Although the Russians have given us a flat commitment about moving militarily on West Berlin, this sort of commitment is worth only what it is worth and we can take no comfort from the continued pressure on West German activities in Berlin. Dean Rusk Initialed for Rusk above this typed signature by Deputy Executive Secretary John Walsh. 296. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL GER W–US. Confidential; Priority; Exdis. Also sent to the Department of State and repeated to all NATO capitals and USNATO. New York, October 8, 1968, 2127Z. 6954. Secto 68. Subj: Secretary’s October 8 luncheon with Brandt. Following based on uncleared notes FYI Noforn, and subject to revision. Secretary gave luncheon for FonMin Brandt attended by Amb Knappstein, Egon Bahr, FRG FonOff, and Alex Johnpoll, GER. Highlights of conversation were: 1. Sovs, FRG and Berlin. Brandt told Secy that his speech at the UN and particularly the references to FRG and Berlin had made a deep impression in Germany. He said Kiesinger had asked him to pass along the Chancellor’s own thanks. The Secy informed Brandt that he had repeated to Gromyko what he had already told Dobrynin about Berlin being a state interest of the US; and had also raised with Gromyko the Sov propaganda attacks against the FRG. Gromyko had replied in two parts: A. He stated quite categorically that the Sovs would not move against Berlin; B. The Sovs object to what the FRG is doing in Berlin.See Document 295. Another memorandum of their October 6 conversation is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 69 D 182, CF 321. The Secy had replied to Gromyko that what the FRG is doing in Berlin is our responsibility. There are no grounds for Sov objections, especially in view of what the East Germans are doing in Berlin. The Secy told Brandt that we will simply have to watch the situation in Berlin and see how it develops. The President’s position on Berlin is clear and firm, and the two major Presidential candidates are also people on whom the FRG and Berlin can rely. Brandt thought it would be helpful if progress could be made on an Allied paper that would make clear the legitimacy of what the FRG has been doing in Berlin over the years, but avoiding areas of juridical controversy between the FRG and the Allies. Brandt said that there was some difficulty with the French over this, but Debre had told him the French would go along with an internal paper along these lines (from the three Occupying Powers to the FRG) that would not be passed on to the Sovs. Brandt said that even such a paper would be better than nothing. The Secy replied that this is a matter that requires thought. We have said a lot to the Sovs in recent weeks about Berlin and the firmness of our resolve to defend it. Would it be a sign of weakness in Sov eyes if we keep making one statement after another about Berlin? This is something we have to give some thought to. 2. NPD. The Secy told Brandt that the problem of the NPD in Berlin was not entirely the same as the problem that party posed to the FRG. We have to take account of US public opinion and how it reacts to the program of the NPD and its anti American posture in a city which is occupied by U.S. troops. We can do whatever is required to defend Berlin, but we cannot do that to defend the NPD. Brandt said that some people in the FRG have criticized Schuetz for asking the Allies to ban the NPD; they say Schuetz should have waited for the FRG to act. Brandt thought this was nonsense. Schuetz was right to bring the problem before the Allies. The FRG may decide to bring the NPD to court, but in any event the courts would not hand down a decision before the 1969 Federal elections. The FRG Minister of Interior is conducting a study but it will probably not be ready for at least another two weeks. In the meantime, the NPD in Berlin is infiltrated with many Communist agents from the GDR. The Secy thought that the Allies would now have no alternative but to act against the NPD, Schuetz having raised the matter. Brandt didn't think there would be any objection from the FRG. 3. NATO. The Secy reminded Brandt of the discussion at last night’s dinnerSee Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 332. concerning an extension of the area of NATO interests beyond the strict territorial limits of the NATO countries, particularly into the Mediterranean and ME. If Sov forces were to move toward the Adriatic NATO would be faced with a major problem. These questions are not taken as seriously by some of the NATO partners as they deserve to be. This is so important that consultations at high levels and through special channels should be established. The Secy asked Brandt whether he thought there was any chance that a European caucus might be established in NATO. The US would not object if a European caucus were formed. The Secy pointed out that there have been occasions when we were ready to do what Europe wants, but were confronted by the fact that there is no Europe in that sense. Brandt replied that a European caucus based on a broad definition of Europe (including the Turks, Greeks, Portuguese, et al) would not work. There might be a chance for a narrower European caucus. The WEU would provide a good foundation for this but that would require French cooperation. Brandt said that he did not want to see anything happen that would reduce US engagement in Europe. Bahr added that creation of an additional grouping in NATO would add to the problems caused by the existing groupings. The Secy asked, in connection with Stewart’s suggestion on extending the duration of NATO, whether Brandt thought there was any chance of French cooperation. Brandt replied that he did not exclude such a possibility. He thought that the phrasing of such a suggestion would be very important. The language suggested by Stewart was too temporary, being limited to “present circumstances.” Brandt said that the FRG and the Italians could accept a lengthy extension. On the other hand, other countries, like Denmark, would have problems. The Secy pointed out that a decision that involved going to the Senate right now would cause some constitutional problems in the US. Brandt asked whether the Greek regime was causing political problems for us. The Secy replied that we do have a political problem. Andreas Papandreou was very active. On top of that, the Greek regime does a lot of foolish things which create more difficulties. For example, they took away Miss Mercuri’s citizenship and Mercuri is a popular actress here. It is not easy for anyone here to step forward and defend the regime. The Secy said that Pipinelis was a man who seemed to have good judgment and commanded a lot of respect. As a NATO matter we may have to decide to increase our military assistance to Greece. Brandt thought that it would be helpful all around if there were a NATO agency through which military assistance from one member to another could be channeled. It would certainly make things easier for the FRG. 4. Offset. Brandt raised the subject. He said that the FRG had set up a task force, and had raised the level at which it was being handled in the FRG. He didn't know how close we could come to agreement in the next couple of months, but there was no doubt that we will have to get away from agreements that only cover a limited period. The Secy pointed out that as a result of the Czech crisis things like the Mansfield Res had been put in the ice box for the moment. Undoubtedly efforts will be made to make them active again later. A satisfactory settlement of the offset issue will help us handle this. Brandt said that it would also be helpful if a settlement of the offset problem could be worked out in the context of some broader NATO agreements. It is a matter of optics. It would not present a good picture if the only consequence in NATO of the Czech crisis were to settle this bilateral US–FRG problem. Brandt also cautioned against any expectations that the FRG would take the lead in a military build-up among the NATO countries. This would create problems within the Western community. 5. FRG-French relations. The Secy referred to Debre’s remarks at last night’s dinner on NATO choosing between nuclear weapons and doing nothing at all in the military field. As a matter of fact, there is hardly anything that would help NATO more than a demonstration of French solidarity with NATO. Brandt said that the FRG has become disillusioned by the French, and this is also true of Chancellor Kiesinger who is quite disillusioned. Brandt said that the Germans nevertheless will go on talking with the French about friendship between the two nations in order to try to save the new relationship between the peoples. The Secy though that it was important to leave the way open for France to return at some future time to Europe and NATO. In reply to Brandt’s question, the Secy said that our own relations with the French had improved in manner but not in substance. 6. Spanish bases. Documentation on the negotiations is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XII . The Secy reviewed for Brandt our negotiations with Spain over the base problem. He told Brandt that even if we had gone along with the Spanish financial demands, they would have come right back with a request for a bilateral security treaty—something that simply could not have gotten through the US Senate. The Secy asked Brandt whether he thought there was any chance that the NATO partners would let Spain into the Alliance. Brandt said no. The Dutch, Norwegians, Danes, and the British would be opposed to it. But on the problem of Spanish bases, Brandt suggested to the Secy that he ask Ambassador Lodge to discuss this with Chancellor Kiesinger who is going to Spain on a visit shortly.Kiesinger visited Spain October 27–30. The FRG might have some economic leverage that could be used, and Kiesinger might be able to accomplish something in Madrid. The Secy thought it was an interesting suggestion and said he would be communicating with Amb Lodge about it shortly. Rusk 297. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 16. Secret. No drafting information is on the source text, which was approved by Secretary Clifford on October 12. The meeting was held at the Palais Schaumberg. Bonn, October 11, 1968, 4 p.m. PRESENT United States Secretary Clifford Ambassador Lodge Germany Chancellor Kiesinger R/Adm. Guttenberg Press Chief Ahlers Interpreter Weber Kiesinger said Secretary Clifford was a most welcome guest. The German people, he said, attached great importance to NATO and to the United States alliance. They have an overwhelming conviction on that subject. He hoped that the nuclear planning meetings had been good. We must, he said, jointly study what happened in Czechoslovakia—without nervousness and without being hectic. He did not believe that Germany should be looking for a “big brother”—nor was it. We Germans, he said, are aware that we must do our part to the utmost of our capacity. In view of the existing military balance, notably as regards conventional forces, Germany’s best protection are the U.S. troops on Germany’s own soil. It is they who make the aggressor think twice. Kiesinger said he had asked himself many times whether the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia was undertaken solely because of events in Czechoslovakia or whether it was but one phase in a much larger scheme. The Soviets, he said, seem to be out-flanking us on both of our maritime flanks, using intimidation among other methods. Kiesinger said he had had many talks with eminent men both here and in his travels and still he was not sure what their aim really is. He was sure that they were trying to weaken NATO and that they have had some success. On the whole, he thought the second explanation was the right one—that Czechoslovakia is part of a larger scheme. We are thus at a decision point in history and “I say this as one who does not favor reviving the cold war and who realizes that the US and the Soviet Union must be in touch with each other. Indeed, we must find a way of proceeding whereby both things are done: that is, the great powers are in touch with each other and are also in close consultation with their allies.” Kiesinger quoted an unnamed European Prime Minister as having said recently: “If the Russians had waited two years, nothing would have been left of NATO.” Kiesinger realized that there was some weakening in both camps; the question was in which situation was the danger greater. We must thus expect serious crises in the future. It is quite likely that the Russians will be reckless again. Yet even the use of force cannot eliminate the urge of nationalism. He could not help but be impressed by what had happened to Czechoslovakia and by the fact that the Western world seems all too willing to neglect necessary security measures. “I fear there will be a rude awakening.” Secretary Clifford said that he brought regards from President Johnson who wished to convey thoughts to Chancellor Kiesinger in two areas; (1) with regard to Czechoslovakia and (2) with regard to NATO. In Washington “we think,” said the Secretary, “that the Soviet incursion into Czechoslovakia is exceedingly serious.” It is not merely a question of the intervention alone. The manner in which the Soviet Government reached this decision should also give us pause. The military performance was very efficient. The planes were well handled in bad weather. From a political standpoint, of course, it could hardly have been worse. There was no proof whatever of outside aggression against Czechoslovakia. Soviet intervention was dangerous, awkward and impulsive politically, while being sophisticated militarily. It showed that the hardliners had taken over in the Politburo. We don't know whether it is an isolated action or not. Does it threaten Romania? There are ten to fifteen divisions there which could be in preparation for a move into Yugoslavia. The Soviet may well feel that, having taken the first step, they might as well go ahead. We too are aware of the situation in the Mediterranean. Our Sixth Fleet is there and we have strengthened it. The Soviets have progressed with their Navy. They have a helicopter carrier, marines and landing craft, and a submarine building program. This is not a comforting picture. Secretary Clifford recalled Gromyko’s recent statement at the UN that “as far as Socialism is concerned the Soviets know no national boundaries.” All these events have brought about a complete collapse of the hopes of the many persons who thought that a new era was at hand. These events also show the transcendent importance of NATO. We reaffirm our obligation to it. If an ultimate Armageddon is to be prevented, it will be by NATO. We recognize, of course, that each member is a sovereign power and must make its decisions for itself. In the US Congress, the belief is held that the US has met its obligations to NATO and that there should be no need to keep forces there 23 years after the end of World War II. Indeed this belief is growing. Senator Symington has introduced legislation to cut the number of American troops down to 50,000. Senator Russell, the Chairman of the Armed Serv-ices Committee, is critical. The Administration now in power believes these viewpoints to be in error. We maintain many troops, in many places. But the pressure in the US to cut our contribution in NATO goes on because some of the NATO countries are not doing their share. Belgium and Canada are actually talking about reducing. The British talk about bringing troops back for service in NATO but we see very little coming to NATO. We, in the Administration, must be able to tell Congress of what Europe is doing. There is real pressure from the people. This is our problem, said the Secretary, and “I am telling you about it.” More must also be done in the balance of payments field. We have a $700 million deficit. The conferences on this subject at the lower levels are dragging badly. The problem will be there no matter who is in power. We understand that our enlightened self-interest is involved in NATO. The deterrent to the Soviet Union today is that an invasion against Germany would be an invasion against the US. The Soviet Union is not persuaded by weakness. Our expenses in the strategic nuclear field are growing. In reply, Kiesinger asked Clifford to present his respectful compliments to President Johnson. He said he was quite aware of the situation which Secretary Clifford had described and wished to say two things: (1) Germans are reconsidering their contribution to NATO, notably as regards troops and (2) when the government passed the last defense budg-et it did so with the reservation that “we might have to increase it.” An increase of as much as 15% would be serious. In spite of prosperity, public revenues have not risen commensurately. Germany, he repeated, was not looking for a “big brother.” The German Defense Ministry was preparing a “white paper.” He personally believed Germany should increase, he said. The question of offset was an old problem. It involves a very considerable amount of money. The government is about to review it. Our representatives, of course, were bound by their instructions. An inter-departmental committee has been created to take a new look. Please tell the President, he said, that in both areas “we are doing new thinking.” A 15% increase in the defense budget and a 3.4 billion for offset, make a total of 7 billion DM out of 81 billion DM in the total budg-et. This means new taxes, as cuts in other parts of the budget are not possible. We need the backing of the whole population. DeGaulle had said on his last visit to BonnSeptember 27–28. that France has more forces in Germany than the United Kingdom. Will the French too ask Germany for offset payments? Seven to eight hundred million Deutsche Marks for the French added to amounts for other countries could amount to 8 or 9 billion DMs. He said he wished to expose the whole problem. “I want,” he said, “to meet United States interest and NATO. We will try.” Secretary Clifford said that yesterday at the meeting British Defense Minister Healey had said that the big deterrent to Soviet aggression was our tactical nuclear weapons. Clifford said it is not the tactical nuclear weapon; it is actually the presence of 300,000 soldiers. He had told Healey he was rendering great disservice to NATO by saying this. Should this idea ever get back to Congress there would be trouble. It is an invitation to disaster and it shows the difference of concepts on this problem. Mr. Clifford said in conclusion that he could not suggest what the Germans should do. He said they must decide for themselves and do what is most important for their country. Kiesinger said he saw the problem just as Clifford did but he was also aware that the German farmers “want billions.” 298. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 28 GER B. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Johnpoll and Leddy, cleared by Puhan, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to London, Moscow, Paris, and Berlin. Washington, October 22, 1968, 0037Z. 259256. For Ambassador from Secretary. Subject: Proposed UK letter to Abrasimov. Refs: A—Bonn 18289; B—Bonn 18302; C—Berlin 2519; D—State 255038.The Embassy in Germany reported on the proposed British approach to Abrasimov in telegram 18289 from Bonn, October 10. (Ibid.) Telegram 18302 from Bonn, October 19, recommended that the United States associate itself with the British letter. (Ibid.) Telegram 2519 from Berlin, October 19, questioned whether the United States should initiate corres-pondence with Abrasimov. (Ibid.) In telegram 255038, October 14, the Department of State authorized the Embassy to tell British officials that a meeting with Abrasimov would be useful. (Ibid., POL 17 UK-GER W) I see no substantive problem with the proposed UK letter, which is an excellent elaboration of the allied position already communicated to Abrasimov in tripartite letters delivered last November (Bonn’s 4915, 7 Nov. 1967).Not printed. (Ibid.,POL 15–2 GER W) I do, however, have a problem with the proposed procedure for specifically associating the US with the UK letter. As you know, the US is well out in front on the question of Berlin. We have recently made our position clear to the Soviets in the strongest possible terms through communications with Gromyko and Dobrynin. We have also visibly demonstrated our concern over Berlin through the appearances and statements in Berlin of yourself, Secretary Clifford and Secretary Cohen. Another specific démarche by us without any apparent reason would seem to me to fall clearly in the category of over-reaction on the part of the US. The situation of the British and the French, who have not taken the same forceful steps as we have, is of course somewhat different. At the same time a letter limited to just the two and omitting the US would certainly raise questions in the minds of the Soviets and the East Germans. I wonder whether we could not handle the matter in this way: Let the British send the letter to Abrasimov as a purely unilateral document setting forth the points which Jackling would have raised orally with Abrasimov if the scheduled meeting between the two had taken place; but amend the text of the letter slightly to show that the views set forth therein are in line with the tripartite views expressed to Abrasimov in the Nov. 8, 1967 letter. This would have the effect of showing that the UK position is simply an elaboration of established tripartite policy, without the need for specifically associating the US and France with the sending of the letter. I suggest that this might be accomplished by inserting the following sentence immediately after the first sentence of the 4th paragraph of the Jackling letter: “The same views were expressed by the Ambassadors of France and the US.” These two sentences would then read, “In this connection I should like to remind you that my predecessor wrote to you a year ago to put on the record my Government’s views that the Federal Government has a legitimate concern for the welfare and viability of Berlin. The same views were expressed by the Ambassadors of France and the US.” The rest of the letter would then continue as presently drafted. Rusk 299. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk in BrusselsSource: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Walt Rostow, vol. 105. Secret; Priority; Limdis. The telegram was sent to Rusk at the U.S. Mission to NATO. Repeated to Berlin, Bonn, London, Moscow, and Paris. Washington, November 14, 1968, 0150Z. 271355. Tosec 34. Subject: Katzenbach-Dobrynin discussion re travel to Berlin. 1. Acting Secretary called in Dobrynin November 13 to make following points re Berlin: (A) USG has become aware of number of rumors to effect that action might be taken in near future that would add to difficulties surrounding German travel between FRG and West Berlin. (B) There was no need to repeat in detail what Secretary Rusk had already told Ambassador Dobrynin and FonSec Gromyko in many conversations regarding importance we attach to West Berlin and the maintenance of that city’s viability. (C) While we did not know whether there was substance to rumors or not, it should be understood that any actions in this direction could not help but be taken seriously by USG and affect progress on solutions to problems of interest to both USSR and USG. 2. Dobrynin noted that foregoing comments were based on rumors. Nevertheless, he wished to repeat that Soviet Government was not going to be initiator of actions against Berlin. He also wished to make clear, however, that if FRG continued its provocations re West Berlin that the Soviet Government would reserve the right to take its own measures. He said points made by Mr. Katzenbach would be conveyed to Moscow. 3. Neither Katzenbach nor Bohlen felt Dobrynin was particularly reassuring. Despite his statement about rumors not being worthy of a USG démarche he said nothing to discount their possible substance. 4. Foregoing conversation has not yet been passed to Germans, French or British here but we assume Secretary may wish to do so in Brussels. At close of conversation, Dobrynin indicated he plans to return to Moscow at end of this month. Katzenbach 300. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 S. Secret; Immediate. Repeated to Bonn, London, Paris, Moscow, USEC, and Berlin. Brussels, November 14, 1968, 1217Z. 5773. Secto 9. Following is summary of Secretary’s hour and a half bilateral with Willy Brandt November 13. Summary is uncleared, subject to revision. Talk covered the following areas: 1. German request on possible GDR harassment of Berlin access 2. Interzonal trade and Berlin 3. Current French attitudes 4. Defense 5. European special trade arrangements 6. Soviet Union and conspiring Czechoslovakia 7. Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia 8. Continuity of US policy 1. German request on possible GDR harassment of Berlin access—The Secretary mentioned that Chancellor Kiesinger had spoken to Ambassador Lodge, Lodge reported this conversation in telegram 19184 from Bonn, November 12. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Germany, vol. 16) and apparently the British and French in Bonn, concerning the possiblity of a US warning to the Soviets against East German actions on access to Berlin. The Secretary said it would be helpful in the future if in such cases we could get the raw materials of such reports to make some evaluation of what was happening and whether the Soviets or the East Germans were behind it. We maintain a 24-hour watch on subjects like this and if we had German raw materials, we could feed them in for use with our own. The Secretary said we would in any case be seeing the Soviets on this subject in Washington on November 13.See Document 299. 2. Interzonal trade and Berlin—The Secretary asked Brandt about the current situation of interzonal trade. Brandt replied interzonal meetings were continuing on a regular basis of once a week meetings alternately in East and West Berlin. The other side was not interested in an increase of trade, although he did note that some East German trade experts were interested in increase. The Secretary said he was concerned about Berlin despite assurances Soviets have given on this subject. He was uneasy about the situation in Eastern Europe and of course Berlin is a vital point. Brandt said in addition to over-all problems of Eastern Europe, he worried about the internal situation in Berlin. The economy was not bad, but as years go by without upturn in outlook for city, we might reach point where worsening psychological situation resulted in real trouble. The IMF meeting was a case in point. This was not a decisive question in itself but had represented a German effort to bring in new activities not related to status. If the decision is negative, it will add to fears that Berlin is not the place to have even non-political meetings. Brandt said the question of whether Bundesversammlung should meet in Berlin should be seen in same light. The French are not enthusiastic. The British have today advised the Germans against the meeting in Berlin. Perhaps none of these meetings are vital for Berlin, but the West has nothing to put against these elements to counteract the negative trend. The Secretary said we had thought it a good idea if the IMF meeting could take place in Berlin. He has talked to Mr. McNamara along these lines. But apparently when matters got down to the point of decision, even some NATO Allies are begging off and the prospects are not too good. The Secretary said advice on the Bundesversammlung was more a matter for his successor than for himself. In response to his inquiry, Brandt indicated there had been three previous meetings of the Bundesversammlung in Berlin and that the NPD had not participated in these meetings although Von Thadden and his colleagues had been present as representatives of the Deutsche Reichspartei. The Secretary said that since the last three meetings of the Bundesversammlung were held in Berlin, not to have the next one there could create a problem. Brandt said Bundestag President Gerstenmaier had told him he intends to convene the Bundesversammlung in Berlin, but had not decided on a date, which will be some time between January and March. Gerstenmaier told Brandt the British had sent an Embassy officer to make same representation to him as it had to FonOff. Gerstenmaier had replied to him that if Allies are against the meeting, he would prefer to have a joint position from them rather than their individual nation views. The Secretary said he gathered French attitudes on Berlin had been especially restrictive lately. Brandt said that the French had been somewhat more cooperative in the last 10 days or so. But this did not go very far. He had made a long list of things which had been blocked up to date in the Bonn Group, sometimes as much as a year, because of French uncooperativeness. 3. Current French attitudes—Brandt asked Secretary for his view of reports of general shifts in French attitudes. The Secretary said he heard these reports from other sources, but not the French.Their bearing has improved, but there is no sign of a change of substance or policy. Our problem with the French is the same as it was 10 years ago: whether or not to have a love affair with France at the expense of the rest of Europe. Had Eisenhower accepted de Gaulle’s Directoire proposals in 1958 or Kennedy in 1961, we could have had a lovely relationship with the French, but what of the rest of Europe. The Secretary said some reports claim US disagreement with the French over nuclear questions. But we never have had any indication from de Gaulle, the French Prime Minister, or from any other official speaking for the French Government of French interest in questions of nuclear cooperation between France and the United States. Brandt said that pursuant to a suggestion by the Secretary the Germans had made efforts after Czechoslovakia to renew the Franco-German study group on military questions. Senior German military officers reported that their French colleagues had views quite similar to theirs on questions of European defense, but this had little political fallout. The Secretary said that we had found French officials more cooperative in some small things. It must be assumed in cases like French participation in the recent naval maneuvers in the Mediterranean that they take place with the knowledge and consent of de Gaulle. If there is a little quiet improvement, we should let it develop. 4. Defense—Brandt said that the Germans would give specifics of their decisions in the DPC meeting November 14. An increase of 740 million DM had already been approved for the 1969 budget prior to Czechoslovakia. But in a Cabinet meeting earlier the same morning the Germans had decided on steps which would bring a total increase between 2.3 and 2.5 billion DM for defense in the medium term financial plan. Most of the decisions involved qualitative improvements rather than increasing manpower, although decline in latter would be halted. The Cabinet had also explicitly endorsed the necessity to find a satisfactory offset solution: Brandt asked whether it would be helpful for the United States to have a statement on balance of payments in the NATO communiqué. The Secretary replied it would be helpful to have such a sentence included. Czechoslovakia had muffled the attack within the Senate on US troops in Europe. But Senator Mansfield and his colleagues would return to the attack. Two points are involved. One is what the Europeans are doing for their own defense. The German record here is good. The second problem is the balance of payments. If we were able to deal with these two problems, we could hold back this withdrawal viewpoint, which is linked with isolationism. The Secretary noted that the JCS motivated by purely military consideration had revised its ideas as to the desirability of rotation of the two withdrawn brigades of the 24th Division. The Secretary said he was not referring to the exercises of the brigades in Germany, which should take place at least once a year, but military experts believe that if the brigades should rotate their station each 6 months as now agreed they would lose a good deal of valuable training time in each move as they were readied to move from the US to Germany and return. The question was whether we could not leave one brigade on station in Germany and have the others join on exercises but not to rotate them. The Secretary said he raised this issue to maintain good faith because rotation had been a part of the trilateral agreement on this subject which had been worked out between Mr. McCloy and the Chancellor. He asked Brandt to think it over. He noted that Lemnitzer had discussed it with de Maziere. Brandt replied he would discuss the matter with Schroeder. 5. European special trade arrangements—The Secretary said difficulties were building up on the question of proposals for a European special trade arrangement which could “blow us out of the water” as regards a liberal US trade policy. Brandt said that US had given the German FonOff a rather strong memorandum on this subject Nov 11.Not found. He said Debre had made the point in the last meeting in Brussels that the trade arrangements were not a substitute for British membership in the Common Market but facilitated and prepared the way for membership. Secretary pointed out that the German paper established situation from which we would draw no political advantages and for which we have to pay high price in trade. In effect we would be paying a high price, “but would not get the horse.” In the scheme proposed, the participants would agree to pay high prices on agricultural products in return for concessions on industrial goods. The United States would lose on both counts. The Secretary said that the démarche which Brandt had received on this subject had been personally reviewed and signed by him. He described the dangers of a possible revival of protectionist sentiments in the US. Brandt said French had been moving toward a more constructive position on trade arrangements and technical cooperation. If we take approach however that it has to be all or nothing, then it would be nothing, and situation would get worse. His purpose was to get the British to the table with the French and Germans and to see what practical progress could be made. Secretary replied this was all right in theory as long as it was not a table conspiring against the US. 6. Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia—The Secretary said that when the Soviets decided to invade Czechoslovakia, they knew that they would clearly incur very high costs, including the hatred of the Czech people, division in the Communist world and a very strained relationship with the West. The men who made this decision despite the cost must have had something serious in their minds. Was it fear for maintaining their position or reversion to a more primitive Stalinism? We did not know the answer but must watch this situation very carefully. We must not permit Soviet leaders to feel they can move forward to take up elements of slack in the international situation. Secretary said that was why he would be hesitant to advise that the Bundesversammlung should not take place in Berlin. If this were to happen, the Soviets might draw the wrong conclusion. The Secretary said Soviet system was not stable in long-range terms. Communist and Eastern European countries cannot survive peaceful coexistence without change. Communist scientists were given some freedom and inevitably asked for more. Soviets gone to extreme lengths to emphasize their desire to continue normal relations with us after Czechoslovak intervention. Yesterday Kosygin had made the same points with McNamara. Brandt commented that the Soviets had not moved very far in their relations with the Germans, but polemic attacks had decreased and they appeared ready to discuss specific issues like renunciation of force agreement. The Secretary noted the contradiction between Soviet action in Czechoslovakia and their line on business as usual. Shortly before the invasion they had taken a rather forthcoming position on missile talks. Their next move had been to inform us of the intervention. The Secretary said we had nothing going on with the Soviets behind the scenes except that we were keeping them informed of Vietnam talks in Paris; Czechoslovakia had cut off discussion of other topics. 8. Continuity of US policy—The Secretary said he had participated in a long talk on foreign policy between the President and Mr. Nixon. Richard Nixon was elected President on November 5. The talk pointed up the fact that there was no major issue between the two administrations about NATO policy or German-American relations. There would be continuity in US policy. In reply to a question from Secretary, Brandt said he thought German elections would take place Oct 12, 1969. In reply to a question from the Secretary Brandt said that April 11–12, 1969 would be acceptable date for him for NATO twentieth anniversary. Rusk 301. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State Source: Department of State, Central Files,POL 15–2 GER W. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Berlin, London, and Paris. A handwritten note on the source text, dated January 2, 1969, from William D. Korimer of the Division of Language Services reads: “The Moscow Embassy translation of the attached Soviet statement has been compared with the original and found to be acceptable with changes or corrections indicated. See A–2334 from Moscow, 12/27/68.” Airgram A–2334, forwarding the original Russian text of the oral statement, is ibid. Moscow, December 23, 1968, 1515Z. 6938. Subject: Soviet oral protest on Bundesversammlung. 1. Following is unofficial translation of oral statement of protest on above subject handed me by First Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov this afternoon.In telegram 6932 from Moscow, December 23, Thompson forwarded an account of his discussion with Kuznetsov. Thompson disputed that holding the Bundesversammlung in Berlin could be considered “provocative,” since three of the four previous meetings had been held in the city. Thompson also questioned whether it was wise for the Soviet Union to continue its “vicious propaganda” against the Federal Republic, when the Federal Republic was obviously trying to improve relations with the Soviet Union. After reiterating Soviet opposition to the Bundesversammlung, Kuznetsov explained that “the Soviets were not closing the door to seeking a realistic basis for settlement of the German problem in the interest of securing peace in Europe. There was an opportunity now for the US and the FRG to show that they wanted to stop using West Berlin for provocative and hostile actions.” (Ibid., POL 15–1 GER W) 2. Begin text. The Soviet Government considers it necessary to state the following to the Government of the USA. 3. The West German authorities have announced their intention to hold a Federal assembly for the election of the new President of the FRG in West Berlin in March 1969. According to communications from Bonn there will also participate in the elections representatives of the pro-Hitlerite, neo-Nazi National Democratic Party, which is more and more expanding its activity in the FRG directed against the interests of peace and security in Europe. In spite of warnings and in defiance of good sense certain circles of the FRG are in this manner embarking on a path of deliberate aggravation of the situation around (vokrug) West Berlin. 4. The new provocation, which is being prepared by the Government of the FRG, can only have the effect of seriously burdening international relations. It is evident that in Bonn they are calculating precisely on this and assume that tension will favor their revanchist efforts to consolidate their hold on West Berlin. 5. There is not one Allied document which would permit the FRG to turn that city into a source of hostile activity against the Soviet Union and the governments friendly to it or to misuse communications, including air communications, for the transport there of the participants in unlawful political demonstrations and for the fusion of West Berlin with the Federal Republic. The Soviet Union at one time concluded with the Western Powers agreements concerning the presence of Occupation authorities in West Berlin, but it did not give its consent to any annexation of this city to the FRG. 6. In Moscow, naturally, efforts to sanctify the provocative activity of the FRG with respect to West Berlin by means of decisions of the organs of the NATO military bloc have not gone unnoticed. But it ought to be clear to everyone that neither NATO nor anyone else can give to the FRG rights in West Berlin which have not belonged to it, do not belong to it, and will not belong to it. 7. The Soviet Union and the GDR have displayed a maximum of restraint in the face of the challenge made by the FRG through its actions in West Berlin in October and November of this year. Possibly this was wrongly understood. If developments will proceed as they are now proceeding, and if the militaristic and neo-Nazi forces of the FRG continue to display in the center of the GDR their revanchist claims and their open disrespect for the interests and legal rights of the socialist countries, they must assume all responsibility for the consequences of this and will not have grounds for complaints concerning appropriate retaliatory measures to suppress such illegal activity. 8. It is desirable that nothing should be left unsaid (nedomolvok) between our governments in questions concerning West Berlin. 9. The Soviet Union has no claims on that city. The Government of the GDR has also more than once stated that it does not intend to encroach on West Berlin or to interfere in its internal affairs. 10. The three Western Powers in their turn, have repeatedly stated that West Berlin does not belong to the FRG and cannot be administered by its authorities. The Soviet Union proceeds precisely from this fact, since a different situation would exclude the possibility of mutual understanding between us on this question. 11. The entire complex of these questions has been repeatedly discussed between the Governments of the USSR and the USA and each side has underlined its desire to avoid an aggravation of the situation in and around West Berlin. Such an approach also corresponds to the broader interest of our states and to the interests of peace in Europe. The FRG must not be permitted to ignore these interests and to use West Berlin to create international complications whenever it chooses. 12. It would be best if the Government of the FRG through sober reflection were to abandon efforts to remake European political geography in its own way since such a course promises no good, first of all, for West Germany itself. The Soviet Union would welcome such a change in the policy of the FRG as well as efforts by the USA directed toward restraining the West German authorities from the provocative and dangerous steps which are being planned by them. 13. However, if events require that the Soviet Union take certain steps in connection with the intrigues of revanchist and neo-Nazi circles of the FRG in West Berlin, it will of course not hesitate to do so. 14. The Soviet Government assumes that these considerations will be examined with full attention by the Government of the USA and with a recognition of the obligations and responsibilities of our countries in international affairs and in the maintenance of peace. End text. Thompson Index Abrasimov, P. A., 296, 357–359, 444–446, 490 Berlin, 621, 624–625, 770–771 Berlin access restrictions, 659–660, 674, 688–690, 701–703, 705, 707, 710–712 FRG policies toward the Eastern bloc, 501–503 Acheson, Dean, 93, 103, 298–299, 402 Action Committee for the United States of Europe, 153 Adenauer, Konrad: Berlin Wall, 304 CDU/CSU internal disputes, 141, 204 de Gaulle attitude toward, 481 Death and funeral of, 512n , 514–515, 523, 632 European unity, 145–146 French-FRG relations, 530 FRG foreign policy disputes, 68, 77 FRG political situation, 406–407 FRG Soviet bloc policy, 502, 564 Gaullism, 169–171, 274, 323 GDR-FRG relations, 327, 329 Johnson, view of, 536 Military briefing, 427 Morgenthau Plan, 532 Nonproliferation treaty, 492 Reunification of Germany, 240 Soviet Union, 101, 147, 531, 534 Standstill proposal of, 6, 14 Troop level reductions, 405–406 U.S.-FRG relations, 389, 519, 533, 662 Adriatic Sea, 764 Adzhubei, Aleksei, 53, 147 Aeroflot, 298, 614 Africa, 236, 239, 562, 728 Agriculture, 236 Ahlers (FRG), 767 Air pollution, 156, 236 Akalovsky, Alexander, 175, 185 Albertz, Heinrich, 460, 586 Algeria, 120 Algiers conference, Oct.–Nov. 1965, 285 Alliance for Progress, 232 Alphand, Herve, 26, 225, 228, 249–250, 253–255, 261, 326, 712 “The American Challenge,” 729 Anderson, Robert, 46 Anschluss, 474 Antarctic Treaty, 365 Antiballistic missiles, 583, 587, 602, 620, 636, 740 Anti-Semitism, 665 Apel, Erich, 281, 336 Appling, Hugh G., 249 Arab-Israeli conflict, 112, 138, 543, 548, 636, 703, 739 Arab states, 53, 54, 112–113, 233, 237, 240–241, 245, 285, 338, 498, 544, 567 Arms control. See Disarmament; Nonproliferation treaty. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (ACDA), 497n Arndt (FRG), 23, 670 Asian Development Bank, 353–354 Atlantic Alliance (see also North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO )): French renunciation of, 561–562 FRG position, 140–141, 652, 666 Loosening of, 602 Nuclear force, 223–224, 242, 378–379 Atlantic Policy Advisory Group (APAG), 234–238, 240–241 Ausland, John C., 1n , 64, 82, 89, 98n Australia, 115–116 Austria, 47, 474, 595, 605, 693–694 Austrian State Treaty, 1966, 195 Bahr, Egon, 88–89, 91, 94, 566, 588–589, 763–764 Baker, Vincent, 344n Balance of payments, U.S. (see also Military offset payments), 368, 434, 626–627, 658, 667, 725–726, 732, 769, 775 Ball, George W., 17n , 127, 132n , 241, 623 Berlin, 246, 298, 455, 691–695 Eastern Europe, 269–270, 284, 287, 591 European Economic Community, 248 European unity, 145 Kennedy Round, 350–351 Military offset payments, 377, 386–389, 413, 420–421, 428–430 NATO, 284 Nuclear defense, 330–331, 423, 425 Oder-Neisse border issue, 60 Reunification of Germany, 8, 58, 172, 225, 227, 264–269, 283–284, 327 U.S.-FRG relations, 46–52, 654–655 Vietnam conflict, 341, 345 Western trade with the GDR, 271–272 Bank of England, 644 Barber, Arthur W., 344 Barghoorn, 40 Barnes, E.J.W., 82, 267 Barzel, Rainer, 194, 201, 230–232, 234, 236, 241 Military offset payments, 632, 634 Nonproliferation treaty, 632, 634–637 Political situation in the FRG, 140, 385–386, 409–410 Reunification of Germany, 355–356, 523–525 Troop level reductions, 523 U.S.-FRG relations, 372–374, 652, 654 Vietnam conflict, 630–632 Basic Law, 452 Bator, Francis C., 331, 350, 372, 420–421, 429, 504n , 512–513, 553–554, 558–560, 563, 569 Bavaria, 749 Beaumarchais, Jacques de, 82, 225, 267, 326, 630 Behrends, Wolfgang, 172 Behrendt, Heinz, 670 Behrens, Fritz, 280 Beitz, Berthold, 228, 288, 489, 586 Belgium, 238, 241, 425, 475 Bell, David E., 87 Benary, Arne, 280 Berg, Fritz, 141, 550 Berger, Hans, 366 Beria, Lavrentia, 227 Berlin (see also East Berlin; Washington Ambassadorial Group): Access issues: Airline service from Hannover, 686, 698 Autobahn arrests of West Germans, 411 Barge and rail traffic, 299–301, 753–754 British position, 660, 673–674, 685, 713 Contingency planning for threats around, 753–755 Czech position, 714 Four-power arrangement of 1949 on, 700 Berlin—Continued French position, 660, 681, 685, 712–713 FRG position, 684, 773 GDR measures regarding, 658–662, 678–680 Italian position, 714 Pass arrangements, see under East Berlin Quadripartite talks on, 708–716 Soviet-FRG talks on, 688–690 Soviet position, 669–670, 738, 759 Transport of civilians by military vehicles, 712 U.S.-FRG talks on, 691–696, 701–708 U.S. position, 122, 663–665, 672, 674, 681, 685 U.S.-Soviet talks on, 682–683, 699–700, 772 Yugoslav position, 714 Allied Declaration on, 759–761, 763 Allied reserve rights in, 458 Allied troops in, 101, 185 Brandt-Abrasimov meetings, 357–359, 444–446 British letter regarding, 770–771 Bundestag meetings in: Committees, Oct.–Nov. 1968, 759–760 Defense Committee, 625, 629, 672, 698 Plenary group, 246, 248, 293, 335, 358, 453, 461, 672 Soviet position, 502, 700, 703, 710 Bundesversammlung meetings in, 166, 774, 777, 778–780 Civil unrest in, 548–549, 586, 756–757 Contingency planning, 752–757 Crisis of 1961, 356, 365, 634, 704 Defense, 756–758, 761–762, 770–771 Eastern Europe support for new crisis in, 643–644 Economic situation, 650–651 Four-power dialog, 181, 287 Free-city status, 131, 245, 335, 444, 613–614, 624–626, 779 French obstructionism in, 611, 774 FRG, ties with: Application of treaties, 270 Globelgesetz, 94, 165–166, 686 GDR-FRG relations and, 162–163, 299–301, 303, 305, 606 GDR helicopter flights, 293, 296–299, 304–305, 309–310 GDR pressure on Soviets over, 66 Inclusion in FRG agreements of, 381–383 Interzonal trade agreement, Aug. 1960, 687 Morale, 548–551, 651, 739 Non-use of force agreement exclusion, 547 NPD, banning of, 764 Police trade union meetings in, 698 Quadripartite talks on, 708–715 Reichstag building, 686–688 Reunification of Germany, 605 RIAS funding cuts, 651–652 Soviet cultural exchanges, 358–359 Soviet memorandum, 621–622 Soviet position, 181, 287 Berlin as separate entity, 131, 245, 335, 444, 613–614, 624–626, 779 Continuity, 620–621 Soviet pressures on: Air harassment, 650, 754–756 Increase in, 735 Lessening of, 467 Military maneuvers around, 247–248 Propaganda campaign, 747–750, 759–760 Soviet position, 761–762 U.S. position, 297–298, 340 Vietnam conflict, as counterbalance, 297 Soviet Trade Center, 650 SPD branch, problems in, 651 Status of: Allied-FRG differences over, 163–165, 469–470 Soviet position, 131, 245, 335, 444, 613–614, 624–626, 779 U.S. position, 165–169, 614, 627–628 University reform, 651 U.S.-Soviet talks on, 205, 245 USMLM house demonstration, 293, 296–297, 299 Viability of, 586, 709, 714 Voting rights for Bundestag Deputies, 451–455, 458–461, 467, 478, 483, 551 Wall, erection of, 304, 596 Wall shootings, 293, 411, 467 Berlin clause, 120, 269 British position, 382 GDR position, 281 Negative clause, 381–383, 686 U.S. position, 134, 167, 270, 381–383 Berlin Task Force, 678, 685 Berlin Wall, 293, 304, 411, 467, 596 Bern Union (European Payments Union), 49, 287 Bewerunge, Ulrich, 284 Bilderberg Group, 500 Birrenbach, Kurt, 234, 391, 440, 495, 647, 677, 734–735, 737–740, 743, 749 Bismarck, Otto von, 154, 595 Bismarck, Philipp von, 610 Blessing, Karl, 421–422, 430, 541, 627, 648 Blumenfeld, Eric, 234, 498 Boeker, Alexander, 691–696, 704 Bohlen, Charles E., 225, 227, 229, 257, 260, 263, 326–327, 470, 661–662, 699–700, 772 Boie, Gen. Werner, 345, 511 Bonn Working Group, 195, 198, 270 Botho, Prince, 631 Bowie, Robert J., 420, 429, 496, 542, 544, 569, 608 Boyesen, Jens, 234 Brandt, Willy, 543, 567, 761n , 765 Berlin: Access restrictions, 659, 673, 674n , 678, 688–690, 693, 695, 698, 701–716, 759, 773 Civil unrest in, 586 GDR actions in, 763–764 Incidents of harassment in, 305 Meetings with Soviet Ambassador regarding, 357–359, 444–446 Morale in, 548–549 NPD banning in, 764 Pass arrangements, 7, 23, 38, 94, 162 Status of, 163, 469–470, 614–615 U.S. position, 627–629 Viability commission, 586 Voting rights for Deputies in the Bundestag, 451, 458–461, 478 Czechoslovakia, 738, 741–742 Defense budget levels, 775 Defense strategies, 577 Eastern borders issue, 151, 464–465 Eastern Europe-FRG relations, 151–159, 216–218, 486, 498, 546–547, 561–562, 566 East-West relations, 488–490, 544–545, 610 Elections, 296, 323 EEC, 485–486, 545, 557, 568, 641 European special trade arrangements, 776 French-FRG relations, 477, 638, 765–766, 775 FRG defense budget levels, 555 FRG foreign policy, 68, 456–459, 473–478 GDR-FRG relations, 282, 468–469, 546–547 International liquidity, 574 Military offset payments, 484–487, 626–627, 765 Multilateral Force, 94 NATO, 555, 568, 614, 764 Nonproliferation treaty, 475–476, 485, 542–543, 585–586, 593, 622–623 Non-use of force agreements, 614 Nuclear weapons, 247 Polish-FRG relations, 91–92 Reunification of Germany, 94, 259, 328, 466–468 Soviet bloc, policy toward, 622, 627–628 Soviet-FRG relations, 547–548, 565–566, 588, 612, 670, 777 Soviet-U.S. relations, 565 Troop level reductions, 505–506, 576, 592 Tsarapkin talks, 547, 582, 588, 608, 612–614, 622, 628, 664, 673 U.S.-FRG relations, 497, 515, 569, 573, 718, 773–777 Vietnam conflict, 619, 642, 646 Visits: Bucharest, Aug. 1967, 566, 572 To Khrushchev in East Berlin, proposed, 60 Morocco, Feb. 1968, 626 Paris, Feb. 1968, 638–641 Washington, May 1964, 87–94 Washington, April 1965, 247–249 Washington, Feb. 1967, 486, 491 Washington, Aug. 1967, 544, 565–569, 573 Yugoslavia, 1968, 715 Yugoslavia, 489 Braun, Baron Sigismund von, 411 Brentano, Heinrich von, 219n Brezhnev, Leonid I., 295, 690, 702 Brooke, Gerald, 615 Brotesser, K. F., 411 Brown, George, 466–467, 469–470, 546–547, 548, 566, 612, 614–615, 680, 682 Bruce, David K. E., 244, 658 Brunner, Guido, 411 Brzezinski, Zbigniew, 285, 496, 595n , 627 Buchs, Gen., 512 Bulgaria (see also Bulgarian subheadings under other subjects), 269, 281, 361, 412, 432, 507, 566, 643, 722, 738 Bundesbank, 386, 434, 627 Bundestag: Berlin access restrictions, 686 Defense budget levels, 745 Kiesinger problems with, 521–522 Meetings in Berlin: Committees, Oct.-Nov. 1968, 759–760 Defense Committee, 625, 629, 672, 698 Plenary group, 246, 248, 293, 335, 358, 453, 461, 672 Soviet position, 502, 700, 703, 710 Nonproliferation treaty, 532 Preferential economic treatment of Berlin by, 706 Troop level reductions, 523–524 Voting rights for Berlin Deputies, 451–455, 458–461, 483, 461, 467, 478, 551 Bundesversammlung, 166, 774, 777–780 Bundy, McGeorge, 27n , 30n , 39n , 40, 95n Berlin: Bundestag meeting in, 246 Incidents of harassment in, 298, 305, 309–310 Pass agreements, 162 FRG foreign policy as election issue, 248 Johnson-Brandt meeting, 87–89 Nuclear defense policy, 331 PRC–FRG relations, 119 Reunification of Germany, 6, 18–19, 68, 139, 209–210 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 121, 126 Soviet-FRG relations, 73 U.S.-FRG relations, 93, 103 Burdett, William C., 15, 72 Butler, Richard A., 18–19, 24, 35–36, 45, 59–61, 66, 68, 71–72, 82–83, 85, 189 Caccia, Harold, 72, 245 Calhoun, John A., 151–152 Cambodia, 719 Canada, 242, 567, 730 Carstens, Karl, 33, 38, 66, 82, 85–86, 380, 396, 585 Berlin, 167, 301, 680 CDU/CSU internal disputes, 204 Czechoslovakia, 734, 743 GDR relations, 238 Kennedy Round, 350 Military offset payments, 366, 429 Multilateral Force, 242–243 NATO, 496, 498 Nuclear defense, 423 PRC–FRG relations, 119 Reunification of Germany, 267, 269, 442–443 Soviet-FRG relations, 167, 336, 490 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 108, 121, 125 Troop reduction proposals, 450n UN role for the GDR, 365 U.S.-FRG relations, 234, 273, 368 Vietnam conflict, 345, 369 Voting rights for Berlin Deputies in Bundestag, 451, 454–455, 458 Casper, Walther, 234, 236, 652–653, 716 Castro, Fidel, 28, 374 Ceausescu, Nicolae, 599 Central Europe (see also individual countries): Arms control in, 313–314 Division of Germany as threat to, 329 Security measures for, 313–314 Trilateral talks on defense of, 561n Troop reduction, 24–25, 36, 73–75 Central Intelligence Agency (CIA): Berlin Task Force, 678 Special Reports: SC No. 00692/65B, 276–282 SC No. 00756/66B, 354 SC No. 00766/66A, 357 SC No. 00792/67A, 593 U.S. helicopter flights over East Berlin, 160 Ceylon, 31, 38, 62, 242 China, People’s Republic of (PRC) (see also PRC subheadings under other subjects; Sino-Soviet conflict), 273n British trade with, 545, 707 Communism, survival of, 734 French diplomatic recognition, 21–22, 138, 116, 120 Geneva Accord violations by, 109 FRG, relations with: Agreement on Industry and Commerce, Beijing, Sept. 1957, 102 Trade, 113, 119–120, 167 U.S. position, 101–102, 391, 545 Independent nature of, 314 Military threat of, 143, 404 Nuclear capability, 587 United States, relations with, 716, 719 U.S. citizen travel to, 704 Western aid to, 22 China, Republic of, 22 Christian, George, 527, 534, 563 Civil aviation, 156 Clay, Gen. Lucius D., 93, 299 Cleveland, Harlan, 591, 606n , 658 Clifford, Clark, 656, 675, 721–725, 731n , 767–770 Cline, Ray, 504–505 Cohen, Wilbur J., 771 Commission on Germany and Central Europe. See under Peace and reunification planning. Common Agricultural Policy, 48n , 126–127, 234 Common Market. See European Economic Community (EEC). Congo, Republic of the, 241 Congress, U.S. (see also Senate, U.S.): Defense Appropriation Bill, 1968, 732 East-West trade, 365 Executive branch difficulties with, 521–522 Johnson Debt Default Act, 1934, 49 Multilateral Force, 378 NATO, 768 Nonproliferation treaty, 636 Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act, 351 Soviet downing of U.S. aircraft, 40 Trade Expansion Act, 1962, 351 Troop level reductions, 398–404, 519–521, 528–529, 534, 724, 729 Conscientious objectors, 280 Coordinating Committee on Export Controls (COCOM), 49, 545 Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA), 603–605 Council of Europe, 604 Council of Foreign Relations, 236 Couve de Murville, Maurice, 471 Berlin, 614, 680, 682 Eastern Europe, 361–362 European Economic Community, 545 European security, 362–365 GDR-FRG relations, 360–361, 469, 546–547 Nonproliferation treaty, 629 Non-use of force agreements, 614 Peace conference proposal, 556 Poland, 474 Reunification of Germany, 189, 197, 206, 225–229, 326–327 FRG draft initiative, 61, 66 Quadripartite Foreign Ministers talks on, 335–337, 340, 466 Three-power initiative on, 82–83, 85 Western Three Declaration, 263, 267–268, 342 Soviet Union, 362, 469 Vietnam conflict, 141 Western trade with the GDR, 271–272 Yugoslav-FRG relations, 612 Crawford, R. S., 244 Creel, Robert C., 17n , 46, 58, 60, 61, 63–64, 89, 92, 103, 104n , 108, 119, 121, 128n , 132n , 264, 267, 270, 284 Crowley, Edwin D., 397n Cuba, 20n , 28, 80, 92–93, 109, 112, 113, 116, 286, 365, 374, 525, 704, 707, 731, 745 Curtius, Klaus, 411 Cyprus dispute, 20n , 79 FRG peacekeeping forces for, 27–28, 100, 241 U.S. position, 126–127 Cyrankiewicz (Poland), 489 Czechoslovakia (see also Czechoslovakia and Czech subheadings under other subjects), 432 Berlin crises, 643–644, 692, 697, 703 Film production in, 156 GDR, relations with, 714, 722, 748 FRG, relations with, 156–157, 269, 336, 412, 458, 489, 507, 544, 665 Cultural exchanges, 156–157 Improvements in, 719 Sudeten Germans, 110, 120, 396 Territorial claims, 148, 150–151, 211 Trade missions, 89, 486, 546–547, 566, 572, 613 Liberalization in, 84, 665, 745 Soviet invasion (1968), 692, 697 Bulgarian position, 722 French-FRG talks on, 741–742, 745 FRG position, 730–735, 737–739, 767–768 GDR position, 700, 711, 722 Hungarian position, 705, 722 NATO reaction to, 746 Polish position, 722 Romanian position, 705, 722 Soviet position, 703, 719, 732–733 U.S. position, 704, 736, 739–740, 743, 751, 768, 776–777 Yugoslav position, 705 Soviet support for territorial integrity of, 603 Western relations with, 287, 364 Dahlgruen, Rolf, 421–422 Danube River shipping, 156 Davis, Nathaniel W., 58, 98n , 643–644, 685 De Brebisson, Gen., 585 De Courcel, Geoffroy Chodron, 267 De Gaulle, Charles, 27n , 557, 570, 732 Adenauer attitude toward, 170, 323 Atlantic Alliance, 561, 563, 571 Czechoslovakia, 735, 743, 745, 751 Détente, 482 Eastern Europe, 153, 302 Erhard government, fall of, 447–448, 571 European Economic Community, 325, 482, 545, 557, 567, 639–641 European unity, 135–138, 140–141, 145–146, 224, 276, 619 French-FRG treaty, 481–482 French-FRG relations, 20, 134–138, 210, 220–221, 273–274, 292–293, 477–478, 513, 567, 572, 623, 638–641 French role in Europe, 473–474 FRG view of, 235, 563, 570 German border issues, 395 Indochina, 110 International monetary affairs, 222, 575 Kennedy Round, 202, 324, 627 Kiesinger, meetings with, 472, 481–482, 499–500, 529 Military offset payments in the FRG, 388, 769–770 Multilateral Force, 112, 201, 243, 293 Nationalism, 662 NATO, 274–275, 289–290, 425, 571, 575–576, 595, 599, 631, 745 Political situation in France, 732 PRC-French relations, 120 Reunification of Germany, 193, 206–207, 220–221, 223–225, 285, 406, 720 Soviet-French relations, 644 Soviet-FRG relations, 412 Troop level reductions, 398–399, 405, 534 U.S.-French relations, 203, 487, 580, 775 U.S.-FRG relations, 389, 529, 533, 632 Vietnam conflict, 482, 631 Visits: Bonn, 1966, 392 Bonn, July 1967, 505, 556–557, 563–564 Canada, July 1967, 567 East Asia, Aug.–Sept., 1964, 21 Latin America, Sept.–Oct. 1964, 21 Mexico, Mar. 1964, 21 Soviet Union, 1966, 362 Western Three Declaration on Germany, 254, 256, 260n , 261, 263 De Jong, Piet, 747–748, 762 De la Grandville, Jean de la Chevadiere, 82, 267 De Maziere, Gen., 571, 776 Debre, Michel, 574–575, 627, 741–742, 759, 763, 776 Dechamps, Bruno, 234 Defense, U.S. Department of: Berlin Task Force, 678 GDR helicopter flights over Berlin, 310 Military offset payments, 420 U.S. helicopter flights over East Berlin, 161 Defense Production Committee (DPC), 512, 775 Deming, Frederick L., 420, 626–627 Denmark, 47, 141, 233, 238, 694, 715, 765–766 Detente: Erhard government, fall of, effect on, 449 French position, 482 FRG position, 103, 470, 480, 482, 596, 702, 728, 738–739 NATO as instrument of, 620 U.S. position, 308, 562, 599–600 Dibelius, Bishop Otto, 280 Die Welt, 137, 192, 209, 254, 274, 372 Diehl, Oskar, 544, 684 Dillon, C. Douglas, 413n , 416 Dirksen, Everett M., 732 Disarmament, (see also Nonproliferation treaty; Nuclear weapons), 239, 313–314, 525, 751–752: Denuclearization of Germany, 176 FRG position, 5, 80, 206, 376–377 McCloy/Zorin statement of principles on, 344 Negotiations with the Soviet Union, 9, 176, 178 Soviet position, 178, 245, 262 U.S. position, 492 World conference proposal, 365 Disosway, Gen. Gabriel P., 39, 161 Dobrynin, Anatoly F., 56n Berlin, 661–662, 682, 699–701, 703–704, 771–772 Nonproliferation treaty, 746–747 Reunification of Germany, 175, 185 Romania, 758 Soviet downing of U.S. aircraft, 41–43 Soviet-FRG relations, 483, 747–749, 762–763 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 123 Dollinger (FRG), 550 Dominican Republic, 264n , 291, 374 Douglas-Home, Alex, 18–19, 153 Dubcek, Alexander, 738, 745–746 Duckwitz, Georg F., 485, 611, 613, 629, 652, 654, 680, 686–688, 701, 708 Dufhues (FRG), 141 Duke, Angier Biddle, 126 Dulles, John Foster, 466 East Africa, 241 East Berlin (see also Berlin): Pass arrangements for West Berliners, 1, 279, 293 Berlin position, 23, 94 FRG political conflict over, 38, 88 FRG position, 7–8, 22–23, 94, 467–468 FRG public opinion on, 7 U.S. helicopter flights over, 160–162, 219–220, 309–310 U.S. military traffic violations in, 57 Eastern bloc. See Eastern Europe; Soviet Union. Eastern Europe (see also East-West trade; individual countries): Brandt memorandum, 151–159, 216–218 British policy toward, 153 Cultural exchanges, 155–157 Economic reforms in, 603 European Economic Community, relations with, 154–155, 598 French-FRG talks on, 456 French policy toward, 153, 238, 361–362, 487 FRG, relations with, 4–5, 103–104, 325, 394–396, 457–458, 486 Berlin clause, 120, 134, 167, 269–270, 381–383 French role in, 581–582 GDR position, 84, 468 German reunification as factor in, 315–316 Improvements in, 380, 483, 546–547, 627, 730–731 Non-use of force, 467, 475, 547, 607 Soviet role in, 468 Trade, 84, 106–107, 544 U.S. position, 90, 320–322, 498, 590–591, 606–607, 633–634 FRG policy toward, 50–51, 480, 566, 589–591, 609–610, 657–658 Soviet and GDR position, 501–503 U.S. position, 495–496, 504, 561–562, 663, 665–666 FRG-U.S. talks, 565–567 Ideological evolution in, 602–603 Liberalization in, 314 NATO, effect of, 746 Netherlands policy toward, 238 Northern and Southern blocs in, 432 Political assembly, establishment of, 604 Radio jamming, 92 Reconciliation in, 601, 603–604 Reunification of Germany, 339 Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, effect on, 740 Soviet position, 750 Soviet threat to Berlin, 643 Soviet Union, relations with, 338, 664 United States, relations with, 67, 286: U.S. trade with, 49, 190, 227 U.S. policy toward, 227, 236, 561 Western policies toward, 151–159, 216–218 Western relations with, 375 East-West relations. See Eastern Europe; individual countries) East-West trade, 48–51, 155, 190, 248, 284–289, 302–303, 365, 544–545 Echo der Zeit, 654 Eckhardt, Felix von, 170 Economic Commission for Europe, 155–156, 509, 604 Economic relations between the Germanys, extension under peace plan of, 4, 8 Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Conference, Geneva, 28–29, 31, 80, 492–493, 495, 629 Eisenhower, Dwight D., 115, 406, 517, 530, 534, 636, 775 Elections: In the FRG, Sept. 1965: Berlin passes, 88 Foreign policy as issue in, 248, 304 GDR attempts to influence, 133, 296 Grand coalition, 307, 323 Multilateral Force, 213 Reunification of Germany and, 72, 76–78, 88–90, 111–112, 183, 195–196, 205–206, 238 Soviet position, 110, 296 In the FRG, Apr. 1967, Schleswig- Holstein, 492, 530, 532 In the FRG, 1968, Baden- Wurttemburg, 671, 676 In the FRG, Oct. 1969, 777 In Italy, 1968, 674 Referendum on German reunification, proposal, 3–4 In the U.K., 1964, 72, 231 In the U.S., 1964: East Berlin helicopter flight issue, 161 Soviet position, 110 Three-power initiative on German reunification as issue in, 70, 72 In the U.S., 1966, 515–516 In the U.S., 1968: Berlin access restrictions, 697, 704 Czechoslovakia, 734 FRG defense spending, 744 Elizabeth II, Queen, 292 Emminger, Otmar, 541, 574–575 Erhard, Ludwig: Berlin, 22–23, 162, 299–305 British-FRG relations, 476 Cuba, 80 Cyprus, 79, 126–127 Disarmament, 80 Eastern Europe, 158–159, 190, 216–217, 284–289, 375 Economic aid to the GDR, 36 Economic aid to less-developed countries, 80 European unity, 134–140, 145–146, 276 French-PRC relations, 21–22 French-FRG relations, 20–21, 134–138, 274, 292–293, 379, 476, 530 FRG budget, 387 FRG-Israeli arms deal, 230 FRG Soviet bloc policy, 502 Indonesia, 438 International liquidity, 541 Johnson view of, 536 Johnson-Khrushchev exchanges, 97 Kennedy Round, 350–352, 376, 437 Khrushchev visit proposal, 167 Meetings with Johnson: June 1964, 111–118 June 1965, 291–293 Military offset payments: FRG position, 124, 353, 408, 417, 478, 531 Loan prepayments, 367–368 U.S. position, 348–349, 366, 368–369, 374, 387–388, 392–393 Multilateral Force, 52, 189–190, 201–204, 231, 243, 408 NATO, 289–290 Nuclear defense, 423–428 Nuclear sharing, 353 Political weakening and fall of, 195–197, 385–386, 390–391, 407–410, 446–449, 494, 530, 571 Reunification of Germany, 188–189, 193, 327 Four-Power Council on, 209 FRG draft initiative, 12, 14, 17–18, 37–38 Three-power initiative on, 95–96 U.S. position, 212, 223 Western Three Declaration on, 254, 342 Soviet-FRG relations, 73, 101, 147, 537 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 108–109, 125–126 Troop level reductions, 73–75, 417–420, 435, 552n U.S.-FRG relations, 27–29, 34, 43–44, 111, 115–118, 356, 368–369, 374, 476, 513, 654, 662 U.S.-Soviet relations, 431–432 Vietnam conflict, 370 Balance-of-payment problems arising from, 347 FRG support for, 27–28, 80, 124–125, 273, 341, 345–346, 349, 354, 369 Visits: France, Jan. 1965, 193, 197, 201, 203–204, 206, 213–214, 216, 220–222 Soviet Union, proposed, 53–54, 60 U.S. (LBJ Ranch), Dec. 1963, 27, 29, 34, 68, 75–76, 81, 114, 187, 210, 323 U.S., June 1964, 52–53, 87, 107–119, 123–129 U.S., June 1965, 273 U.S., Dec. 1965, 341, 345–354 U.S., Sept. 1966, 380, 392, 408–410, 417, 420–433, 436–439, 478, 562 Western credits for the Soviet Union, 10 Erler, Fritz, 211, 234, 247–248, 407, 477, 548 Eshkol, Levi, 53 Ethnic minorities: Germans in Poland, 462–463 Sudeten Germans, 110, 120, 149–150, 396, 474, 595 Yugoslavs in the United States, 362 Euratom: French role in, 616 IAEA negotiations with, 459, 594, 629, 633–635, 638 Nonproliferation treaty, 586 European Conference of Transport Ministers, 156 European Economic Community (EEC), 273 Austrian membership, 605 British membership: French-FRG understanding, 639–641, 646–647, 652 French position, 482, 545, 557, 623, 776 FRG position, 456, 482, 485–486, 557, 567, 571, 631, 668, 728–730 Netherlands position, 557 Reunification of Germany aided by, 602 U.S. position, 44, 248 Common Agricultural Policy, 48n , 126–127, 234 Czech invasion, effect of, 750–751 Eastern Europe, relations with, 154–155, 598 Enlargement of, 638, 641 European special trade arrangements, 776 French threat to, 234, 292, 325 GDR membership, 605, 666 FRG position, 104, 390 Heads of States and Governments Conference, 221 Highway construction, 156 International liquidity, 541, 575 Italian position, 557, 640 Kennedy Round, 79, 351, 376 Political integration, 145, 426, 557, 568, 602, 640–641 Soviet position, 490 Yugoslav membership, 604–605 European Free Trade Association (EFTA), 482 European Payments Union, 49 European Security Commission, 604 European Security Conference proposal, 715 Evangelical Church, 280 Farace (Italy), 244 Fast Deployment Logistic Ships, 724–725 Fechner, Max, 280 Federal Reserve Bank, 433 Fedorenko, Nikolai T., 185 Finland, 751 Finletter, Thomas K., 9 Finn, Richard B., 70, 172, 247n , 284, 345, 350, 360n Fisher, Adrian, 498, 569 Force de frappe, 112, 136–137, 145–146, 190, 240 Ford Motor Company, 223 Formed Society (Formierte Gesellschaft), 291, 353 Fortas, Abe, 747 Foster, William C., 485, 492, 495, 515, 518, 519, 616–617, 637, 747 Fouchet, Daniel, 137n Fouchet Plan, 137, 145 Fowler, Henry H., 350, 519, 520, 560, 573 International liquidity, 509–510, 541, 574–575 Military offset payments, 420–422, 429–430, 675 Troop level reductions, 563, 576 France (see also France and French subheadings under other subjects), 674 Agricultural policy of, 352 European special trade arrangements, 776 Force de frappe, 112, 136–137, 145–146, 190, 240 FRG, relations with, 220–221, 447–448, 631 Franco-German Treaty of Organization and Principles of Cooperation, Paris, Jan. 1963, 21, 457, 481–482, 561, 741 FRG position, 5, 20–21, 134–138, 210, 292–293, 457, 476–477, 530, 561, 571–572, 618–619, 623, 638–641 Intelligence exchange, 556 Military issues, 379, 571, 765–766, 775 Secret understanding, reports of, 623, 646–647, 652 U.S. position, 273–276, 475–479, 500, 507, 513, 667–668 International monetary affairs, 222 Political situation, 697, 704, 732 Popular Front government in, 676 Poverty in, 236 PRC, diplomatic recognition, 21–22, 138, 116, 120 Reunification of Germany, 26, 720 ROC, relations with, 22 Soviet Union, relations with, 273n , 474, 644 Agreements with, 362 Berlin issues, 624–626 de Gaulle visit, 362 Long-term credits, 9–10 United States, relations with, 203, 476, 481–482, 487, 580, 774–775 Franklin, Maj. Gen., 152 Freeman, Gen., 161 Fried, Edward R., 569, 593–594, 728, 730–731 Friedensburg, 304 Friendship Pipeline, 50 Fulbright, J. William, 93, 103, 398, 399n , 400–401, 403, 520 Garran, Peter, 82 Gaud, William S., 350 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) (see also Kennedy Round ): Eastern bloc membership in, 604 UN Conference on Trade and Development, effect on, 46–47 Genocide, 632–633 German reunification. See Peace and reunification planning; Reunification of Germany. German Democratic Republic (GDR) (see also Berlin; East Berlin; Eastern Europe; GDR subheadings under other subjects; Peace and reunification planning; Reunification of Germany): Absorption by Western European community, 597–599 Allied recognition of, 238 Amnesty, 279 Belgium, relations with, 238 Berlin: Access rights to, 453, 752–755 Arrests of passholders, 293, 296 Bundesversammlung meetings in, 779 Convoys, delaying of, 56 New crises in, 644 Pass agreements, 162–163 British trade with, 272 Ceylon, 31, 38, 62 Change in, 276–282 Czechoslovakia, relations with, 714, 722, 748 Denmark, relations with, 238 De-Stalinization, 281–282 Eastern Europe, relations with, 603 Economic reform in, 278 Escapes from, 411–412 FRG, relations with: Adenauer’s rejection of, 327 British position, 470 Declaration of the Federal Government on Amelioration of Living conditions in All of Germany, 524 Diplomatic recognition, 6, 329, 546, 606 Direct negotiations, 282, 547, 549–550, 589 Improvements in, 719 Interzonal trade, 7, 23, 158–159, 469, 670, 687, 694–695, 697, 703, 707, 709, 773–774 Joint bodies, establishment of, 604–605 Levies on GDR truck and barge traffic, 685, 687 Non-use of force declarations, 592, 613 Normalization of, 318–319, 507, 604–605 In post-Ulbricht era, 483 Ransom of political prisoners, 279 Soviet role in, 585, 613 Technical areas, 566 U.S. position, 582 Visa requirements, 678–683, 689, 691, 697–698, 753 Youth, 234 FRG economic aid to, 34, 36, 54 Human rights violations, 412 Intellectuals in, 279–280 Isolation of, 238, 317–319, 664 Italy, trade with, 694 Juridical reforms, 279 Local identity and pride in, 233, 277–278, 317 Military maneuvers in, 287 National viability, 316–317, 322 Neutral nations recognition, 53 Nonproliferation treaty, 664 Olympic participation, 336 Pensioner visits, 296 Political situation, 92, 468 Prisoners, ransom of, 411 Rail tariffs, 296 Religion in, 280 Self-determination for people of, 364 Socialist Unity Party of East Germany (SED), 280–281, 294–295, 358, 407, 468, 546, 756 Soviet troop withdrawal, 105, 227 Soviet Union, relations with, 295–297 Berlin issues, 66–67, 679, 691–692, 694–695, 698 De-Stalinization, 281–282 Soviet-GDR Treaty of Friendship, Mutual Assistance, and Cooperation, June 1964, 108–109, 114, 120–123, 125–126, 133, 168, 702 Tanzanian recognition, 233n Travel reforms, 278–279 U.S. investment in, 202 U.S. RB–66 aircraft, downing of, 39–43, 56–57, 160–161 U.S. T–39 aircraft, downing of, 16, 56, 160–161 Viability of, 596 Vietnam conflict, effect of, 411–412 Western recognition of, 177–178 Western trade with, 270–272, 287–288, 303, 469, 707–708: Youth in, 277–278 Zanzibar, 31, 38, 62 Germany, Federal Republic of (FRG) (see also Elections; FRG subheadings under other subjects; Military offset payments; Peace and reunification planning; Reunification of Germany; Political parties in the FRG ; Political situation in the FRG ; Troop level reductions): Antiballistic missile deployment in, 587, 602 Bundeswehr, 391 Calm period in, 581 Danube shipping, 156 Defense budget levels, 383–384, 387–388, 414, 417, 430, 552–556, 562, 570–571, 576–577, 743–745, 751–752, 775 Demonstrator train passage, 671 Development Aid Service, 81n Economic aid program of, 28, 46, 51, 80, 96, 100, 353–354, 486–487, 540, 571 Emergency Law, 676, 683, 700, 704, 714 Extremism in, 506, 668–669, 697 Foreign policy of, 65–69, 77, 251–252, 323–324, 456–459, 473–478, 506–507, 733 Franco-German Treaty of Organization and Principles of Cooperation, Paris, Jan. 1963, 21, 457, 481–482, 561, 741 Franco-German Treaty on the status of the Saar, Oct. 1956, 3 French defense of, 385, 474, 534 Gaullist conservatives in, 68–69, 145–146, 168–171, 201, 273–274, 290, 476 Anti-American thinking among, 117, 390–391, 504–505, 561 French support, 196–197, 406 U.S. opposition, 195–196, 553 Government Declaration of Oct. 28, 1963, 158–159 Independent policy, 677 Labor unions, 676 Malaise in, 192, 201–204, 209–210, 213–214, 233–234 Military procurement decisions, 416, 656, 726–727 Munich Transportation and Communications Exhibition 1965, 52 Nationalism, 386 Non-use of force agreements, 467, 475, 547, 556, 592, 607, 613–615 Nuclear access, 349, 353, 602 Reparations payments, 144 Soviet bloc policy, 502, 564, 596, 622, 627–628 Soviet propaganda campaign against, 737, 747–750, 758–760, 777 Student unrest, 676 Threat from, 331–333 United States, relations with, 27–30, 111, 128–129, 187, 230–232, 372–374, 569, 573, 671, 675–677 Anti-Americanism, 103, 117, 390–391, 480, 504–505, 561, 718–719 Atlantic Alliance, 562–564 Atlantic imperium concept, 647 Calm period in, 581–582, 587 Candor in, 518–519, 525 Confidence-building in, 558–560 Confidentiality in, 368–369, 527–528 Consultations, 43–44, 272–276, 374, 515–518, 520, 538–539, 544, 583–584, 727, 735–736 Dependency, 662 Economic talks, 46–52, 352–354 Establishment of personal relationships, 512–513 Financial demands, 379 French position, 481–482, 487–488, 529, 632 FRG position, 20–21, 442–443, 475–477, 479, 487–488, 508, 631 FRG sensitivity over U.S. pressure, 100–102, 487–488 Hot line installation, 436–437 Intelligence exchange, 556–557 Loan prepayments, 367–368 Military cooperation, 577–578 Need for improvement, 319–320, 322, 389–392, 493–498 During the Nixon administration, 777 Press attacks on, 534 Public opinion as issue in, 528–529, 533–534 Rumors, effect of, 644–649, 652–655, 695 Technology, 583 U.S. position, 471–472, 514, 657–658, 777 U.S. social unrest, effect on, 658 Vietnam conflict, 28, 129–130, 516, 658 U.S. investment in, 222–223, 583 U.S. policy toward, 473, 662–669, 674–675 Czech invasion, effect of, 750–752 FRG doubts about, 530–531, 537 Western role of, 320 Gerstenmaier, Eugen, 407, 551, 629, 631, 774 Gilman, Robbins P., 123 Ginsburgh, Gen. Robert, 643 Gladstone (UK), 673 Glassboro Summit, June 1967, 558 Globalgesetz procedures, 94, 165–166, 686 Gold, 574, 644–645, 647, 667 Goldberg, Arthur, 682 Goldwater, Barry M., 111, 115–116, 118 Gomulka, Wladyslaw, 91, 489 Gore-Booth, Paul, 335, 337, 340 Government and Relief in Occupied Areas (GARIOA), 368 Grain prices, 47–48 Great Society, 232, 236, 291, 353, 373 Greece, 126–127, 361, 567, 764, 765 Greenfield, James L., 172 Greenhill, Denis A., 16, 45, 64, 72 Greenwald, Joseph A., 46, 48, 127n Grewe, Wilhelm 182, 485 Groepper, Horst, 167 Gromyko, Andrei A., 59n Berlin, 287, 337, 621, 761–763, 771–772 Czechoslovakia, 750n European security, 365 GDR-FRG relations, 547 Soviet-FRG relations, 612, 702 Nonproliferation treaty, 424, 573–574, 636 Reunification of Germany, 84 Allied calls for, 195, 250 Disarmament as prelude to, 245, 262 Europeanization of, 265 Four-Power Council on, 185–186, 334 Soviet position, 194, 199, 356 Soviet-U.S. talks on, 175–179, 185–187, 212 U.S. position, 188, 207 Socialism, 768 Soviet downing of U.S. aircraft, 42 Soviet propaganda attacks, 758, 760 Troop level reductions, 399 U.S.-Soviet relations, 423–424, 431–432 Gronouski, John A., 465, 642 Guam, 399, 403 Gulf of Aqaba, 636 Gulf of Tonkin incident, 145 Guttenberg, Karl Theodor Baron von und zu, 77, 329, 440, 514, 525, 569, 573, 618, 633, 680, 734, 767 Hadow, Michael, 244 Hager, Kurt, 279 Hallstein, Walter, 325 Hallstein Doctrine: Among the Arab states, 54, 233 Decay of, 38, 67, 237, 315 In Eastern Europe, 134 German private views of, 240, 249 Romanian-FRG relations and, 465 Hamilton, Tom, 371 Hand, J. M. Colton, 345, 347, 348, 350, 352 Harich, Wolfgang, 280 Harkort Task Force, 687 Harlech, Lord, 24–25, 35–39, 45, 59, 61, 64–68, 72 Harmel, Pierre C., 543 Harriman, W. Averell, 108, 132n , 230 Harris, John, 244 Hartman, Arthur, 752n Hase, Karl-Guenther von, 108, 119, 234, 284, 292, 350, 533, 536, 657 Israeli-FRG arms deal, 230 Military offset payments, 368, 429, 655–656 Nuclear defense, 423 Replacement as press chief, 544 Reunification of Germany, 191, 208n , 254 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 121, 126 U.S.-FRG relations, 128–129, 368, 491, 527, 544, 569, 573 Vietnam conflict, 345, 369, 655 Hassell, Kai-Uwe von, 147, 204, 324, 331–332, 386, 423, 435, 571 Gaullist attacks on, 196, 406 FRG defense budget, 1967, 383–384 Military offset payments, 29, 81, 353, 371, 377, 384, 429 U.S.-FRG relations, 234, 476 Vietnam conflict, 87, 113, 345 Havemann, Robert, 280, 336 Healey, Denis, 770 Heck, Bruno, 491 Heimatrecht, 211, 321, 394–396, 463–464 Heller, Walter W., 509 Henderson, John N., 72, 244 Herter, Christian A., 47, 114, 126, 350–351, 437 Heusinger, Gen., 657 Heye Report, 143 Highway construction, Geneva declaration, Sept. 1950, 156 Hillenbrand, Martin, 301–304, 386–392, 554 Hinton, Deane R., 46 Hirschfeld, Thomas J., 466n , 497n , 611n Hohmann, Karl, 108, 119, 121, 126, 284, 345, 350, 409–410 Holthoff, Horst H., 691 Home, Lord, 18–19, 153 Honecker, Erich, 281 Hong Kong, 557 Hood, Lord, 82, 85–86, 267, 708 Horn, Edgar, 46 Hornig, Donald F., 350 Hrautwig (FRG), 301 Hughes, Thomas R., 132n Humphrey, Hubert H., 247, 323–325, 404, 505–506, 508–510, 514–515, 541, 620n , 763 Visit to Europe, Mar.–Apr. 1967, 505–506, 508, 519 Hungary (see also Hungarian subheadings under other subjects), 432 Berlin crises, 643 Czech crisis, effect of, 722 FRG, relations with, 89, 269, 281, 412, 486, 489, 507, 610, 719 Soviet invasion, 1956, 364, 731 Soviet Union, relations with, 105, 603, 738 Western relations with, 364 Imhof, Johannes V., 26, 617–620 India, 273n , 494 FRG economic aid to, 96, 486–487, 540 Pakistan, relations with, 706 U.S. economic aid to, 539–540 Indochina, 110 Indonesia, 438 Intermetal, 605 International Access Authority, 62 International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), 459, 594 FRG membership on board of, 585 Inspection by, 616 Talks with Euratom, 459, 594, 629, 633–635, 638 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 49, 706 International liquidity, 508–511, 519, 522, 533, 537, 540–542, 562, 574–575, 655 International monetary affairs, 222, 574–575, 648–649, 667, 675 International Monetary Fund (IMF): Debt default, 49 Eastern bloc membership in, 604 Liquidity, 540, 574–575 Meeting in Berlin, proposed, 706, 774 Meeting, Rio de Janeiro, Sept. 1967, 574 International Olympic Committee, 336 Interzonal trade (IZT), 7, 23, 158–159, 469, 670, 687, 694–695, 697, 703, 707, 709, 773–774 Iran, 567 Israel (see also Arab-Israeli conflict), 53, 54, 96, 100, 112–113, 230, 233, 240, 338, 543, 544, 548 Italy (see also Italy and Italian subheadings under other subjects), 112–113, 236, 243, 437, 646, 674, 694, 704 Ivanov, 40 Izvestia, 670, 747 Jackling (UK), 771 Jacobson, Jerome, 46 Jahn, Gerhard, 551 Jaksch (FRG), 149 Jaksch Report, 158 John Birch Society, 506 Johnpoll, Alexander C., 542, 606n , 672n , 738, 741n , 763, 770n Johnson, Charles K., 108, 125n , 126, 132n Johnson, Lady Bird, 30, 81, 354 Johnson, Lyndon B., 18n , 620n , 743n Arab-Israeli conflict, 636 Atlantic Alliance, 140 Balance-of-payments problems, 667 Berlin: Access restrictions, 679, 685, 695, 699, 716, 717n , 760 Bundestag meetings in, 246 Helicopter flights over East Berlin, 161 Incidents of harassment in, 247, 305, 309–310 Soviet-GDR threat to, 757, 763 Cyprus, 79 Czechoslovakia, 731–732, 736, 740, 768 Eastern Europe, 302, 375, 496 European defense, 427, 637 French-FRG relations, 292, 478 French-U.S. relations, 580 FRG defense budget levels, 383 FRG foreign policy, 733 FRG-Israeli arms deal, 230 Gold, 644–645 India, 539–540 Indonesia, 438 International monetary situation, 509–510, 541–542, 575, 649 Kennedy Round, 437, 538 Letters to Khrushchev, 56–58, 73–75, 97 Meetings: Brandt, May 1964, 87–89, 93 Erhard, June 1964, 111–118 Erhard, June 1965, 291–293 Military offset payments: FRG position, 348–349, 353, 417, 769 Renegotiation of agreement on, 429–430, 433–436 U.S. position, 29, 348, 353, 413–414, 417–421, 428–429, 626 Multilateral Force, 145–146, 213, 224, 231, 407–408 NATO, 570, 729, 768–769 Nonproliferation treaty, 439, 493, 535, 616, 747 Nuclear defense, 330–331 Nuclear sharing, 736–737 Political situation in the FRG, 385 Regionalism, 729 Reunification of Germany, 8, 76–78, 95–96, 188, 205, 209–210, 264–265, 327, 342, 522–526, 531 Senate relations with, 398–404 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 126 Soviet-FRG relations, 73, 538–539 Soviet-U.S. relations, 16, 175n , 531 Speeches: Cleveland, 236 Georgetown, Dec. 3, 1964, 184, 188, 199, 223, 236 Inaugural Address, Jan 20, 1964, 220 Lexington, VA, May 23, 1964, 105, 153 May 7, 1965, 264 New York, Oct. 7, 1966, 442–443, 462–463, 474, 596 State of the Union, Jan. 1965, 187–188, 191, 203, 223 Troop level reductions, 398–404, 417, 519–521, 533–534, 536–537, 724, 732 By the FRG, 552, 563–564, 579–580 U.S.-FRG relations, 27–30, 43–44, 187–188, 222, 372–374, 471–472, 514–519, 530–531, 750, 777 Calm period in, 587 Confidentiality in, 527–528 Erhard visits, 115–118, 273, 291–293, 347–349, 352–354, 436 FRG position, 488n , 508 Kiesinger-Johnson relationship, 471–472, 504–505, 512–513, 540, 631, 635, 637, 645–649, 652–653, 675–676, 732 Kiesinger visit, 501n , 558–560, 569 Public opinion as factor in, 528–529, 533–534 Washington Post article on, 129–130 Vietnam conflict: Balance-of-payment problems arising from, 346–347 FRG support for, 28, 79–80, 341, 345, 349, 354 U.S.-FRG talks on, 343 Visits: Bonn, Apr. 1967, 512–540 FRG invitation, 191, 236, 325, 410, 449, 457–458, 472, 480 Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), 298n , 416, 775 Jordan, 241 Judd, Thomas M., 72 Kastl, Hans Jorg, 172, 284, 345, 350 Katzenbach, Nicholas deB., 455n , 591n , 606n Berlin, 674–675, 678–679, 772 Czechoslovakia, 738–740 U.S.-FRG relations, 528, 652, 654n , 658 Kennedy, Jacqueline, 93 Kennedy, John F., 115, 148, 153, 158, 170, 173, 188, 323, 351, 404, 534, 704, 775 Kennedy, Robert F., 93, 142, 398, 404, 491, 494 Kennedy Round, 27 Agricultural policy, 44, 47–48, 79, 127–128, 202–203 Disparities issue, 47 Eastern Europe role in, 155 EEC agreement on, 79, 351, 376 French position, 324–325, 545, 647 FRG position, 352, 376, 390, 437, 456, 482, 508, 631, 676 Tariff concessions, 627 Trade preferences for less-developed countries, 46 U.S. position, 350–351, 519, 538 Kennedy Space Center, 439 Kent, Sherman, 105n , 291n , 292n Khrushchev, Nikita S., 22, 113, 719 Berlin, 297, 466 Cuba, 745 GDR-Soviet friendship treaty, 108, 126 Improved relations with the West, 143 Removal of, 234, 282, 294–295 Reunification of Germany, 12, 36, 90–91, 105, 207 Sino-Soviet dispute, 365 Soviet downing of U.S. aircraft, 42, 56 Troop level reductions, 73–75 Ultimatum of 1958, 131 U.S.-Soviet relations, 404, 530 Visit to the FRG, proposed, 53–54, 60, 147, 167 Khrustalev (USSR), 502, 624 Kiel Canal, 756 Kiesinger, Kurt Georg: Antiballistic missile deployment, 587 Berlin access restrictions, 678–682, 684–687, 689, 696–699, 710, 716–717, 773 Bundestag, problems with, 521–522 Czechoslovakia, 733–736, 738, 743–746, 767–768 de Gaulle, meetings with, 472, 481–482, 499–500, 529 Defense budget levels, 562, 570–571, 576–577, 744–745 Détente, 482 Eastern Europe, 561, 596 East-West relations, 609–610 Economic aid to the Third World, 571 EEC, 482, 545, 557, 631, 639–641 European security, 666 French-FRG relations, 571–572, 619, 623, 720, 766 French-FRG treaty, 481–482 French-U.S. relations, 476, 580, 631–632, 647 GDR-FRG relations, 549–550, 582, 589, 613 Gold, 644–645 Independent policy of, 677 International liquidity, 508–511, 575 Kennedy Round, 627, 631 Military offset payments, 531–532, 677 Nazi youth organization membership, 513 Nonproliferation treaty, 483, 532, 535, 587, 593, 616–618, 622–623, 717 Non-use of force agreement, 491–493 NATO, 529, 570, 571, 575–578, 620, 767–770 Nuclear sharing, 736–737 Oder-Neisse border question, 464, 609 Political situation in the FRG, 507, 530 Reunification of Germany, 522–526, 531 Selection as candidate for Chancellor, 446n Soviet bloc policy, 622 Soviet-FRG relations, 588, 591, 608, 670 Soviet-U.S. relations, 531 Spanish bases, 766 Troop level reductions, 519–521, 529, 533, 536, 776 By the FRG, 552–553, 576, 579–580, 587–588 U.S.-FRG relations, 487–488, 497, 508, 514–519, 527–528, 530 Anti-Americanism, 504–505, 718–719 Calm period in, 587 Consultation, 538–539 Johnson-Kiesinger relationship, 471–472, 512–513, 540, 631, 635, 637, 645–649, 652–653, 675–676, 732 Public opinion as factor in, 528–529 Rumors, effect of, 645–649, 652–655 Vietnam conflict, 482, 619, 631 Visits: Paris, Jan. 1967, 529 Paris, Feb. 1968, 638–641 SAC headquarters, invitation for, 578 Southeast Asia, Nov. 1967, 608 Spain, 1968, 766 Turkey, Iran, Afghanistan, 1968, 746 Washington, Aug. 1967, 544, 558–564, 565n , 569–580 Washington, proposed, 495, 497–501, 517–518, 533 Kissinger, Henry, 331–332, 617–620 Kitchen, Jeffrey C., 132–134 Klein, David, 6, 68–69, 95n , 129, 132n , 162–163, 247n Klein, Gen. Julius, 409–410 Knappstein, Heinrich: Berlin, 620, 763 Brandt-Rusk talks, 89, 91–93, 763 British EEC membership, 728 Eastern Europe, 284 French-FRG relations, 292 Illness of, 735 International monetary affairs, 222 Israeli-FRG arms deal, 230 Kennedy Round, 350 Military offset payments, 371, 429 Nonproliferation treaty, 485, 731–732 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, 284, 568 Nuclear defense, 423 Polish-FRG relations, 489 PRC–FRG relations, 119 Reunification of Germany: French-FRG talks on, 224–225 FRG draft initiative, 6, 30–33, 38, 55, 61–62, 65 U.S.-FRG talks on, 67, 172, 191–194, 283, 355 Western Three Declaration on, 253–256, 258–260 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 108, 121, 125 Troop level reductions, 552–553 U.S. foreign direct investment, 222–223 U.S.-FRG relations, 67, 372, 514, 516, 569, 573, 671 Vietnam conflict, 345 Kohl, Helmut, 300 Kohler, Foy D., 606n Eastern Europe, 483, 591 FRG draft peace initiative, 8, 13–15 Oder-Neisse line, 148, 151 Reunification of Germany, 327, 333–334 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 121 Soviet-FRG relations, 142–144, 147 Troop reduction proposals, 450 Kohnstamm, Max, 201 Komarov (USSR), 502 Komer, Robert W., 87 Korber (GDR), 294, 300 Korber-Wendt talks, 1, 7 Korea, 404, 704, 719 Koren, Henry T., 8 Korimer, William D., 778n Kosygin, Alexei N.: Czechoslovakia, 733, 735, 740, 777 GDR-Soviet relations, 295 Glassboro Summit, June 1967, 558n Nonproliferation treaty, 492, 532, 535 Soviet-FRG-relations, 275–276, 702 Visit to France, 474 Kraemer, Fritz, 757 Krag, Jens Otto, 489 Krapf, Franz, 119, 167, 345, 350 Reunification of Germany, 33, 82, 264, 267 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 108, 121, 126 Kratzner, Myron B., 492, 495, 498 Krimer, William, 411 Krone, Heinrich, 68, 77, 170 Krupp, 288, 489 Kuhlmann-Stumm, 78 Kuss (FRG), 378 Kusterer, Hermann, 119, 284, 292, 423, 438 Reunification of Germany, 182, 355 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 121, 126 U.S.-FRG relations, 230, 291, 436, 527 Kutscher, Ernst, 168 Kuznetsov, Vasili V., 682–683, 700–701, 703, 778 Lahr, Rolf, 486, 589, 639 Lahusen, Carl, 737 Laloy, Jean, 234, 239, 242 Landfair, William E., 672n Laos, 241, 719 Latin America, 21, 28, 80, 236, 239, 374, 729 Lebanon, 241 Lebel, Claude, 225, 326 Lebensraum, 395 Leber (FRG), 550, 671, 753 Leddy, John M., 497n , 606n , 642n , 652n , 672n , 761n , 770n Berlin access restrictions, 691–693, 701, 705–708 Czechoslovakia, 738 Eastern Europe, 284, 288–289, 591 French-FRG relations, 292 Kennedy Round, 350 Military offset payments, 377, 420 Nonproliferation treaty, 746 NATO, 284 Reunification of Germany, 283, 327, 333, 340 Troop level reductions, 576 U.S.-FRG relations, 569, 573, 658 Vietnam conflict, 345 Lejins, Nora M., 105, 111, 115, 126 Lemnitzer, Gen. Lyman L., 160, 305, 776 Lend-lease ships, 756 Less-developed countries (LDCs): Capital transfers, 51 FRG economic aid to, 46, 51, 80, 96, 100, 353–354, 571 GDR initiatives in, 31 Leusse de Syon, Bruno de, 225, 249 Life, 285 Lilienfeld, Georg von: Berlin, 620, 684 Brandt-Rusk talks, 89 Eastern Europe, 284 Kennedy Round, 350 NATO, 284 Reunification of Germany, 59, 65, 70–71, 82, 172, 191, 355 U.S.-FRG relations, 442–443, 569, 573, 735 Vietnam conflict, 345 Lippmann, Walter, 103 Lisle, Raymond E., 496 Loch, Theo, 240 Lodge, Henry Cabot: Appointment as ambassador, 669n Berlin access restrictions, 678–682, 686–688, 696–699, 701, 773 Czechoslovakia, 733–736, 743–746, 750–752, 767 U.S.-FRG relations, 718–720 Spanish bases, 766 U.S. policy toward the FRG, 750–752 Long, Russell, 398–404 Lucet, Charles, 82, 85–86, 225, 257, 267 Luebke, Heinrich, 203, 264, 275, 366–367 Lufthansa, 298 Luxembourg, 352, 735 Macmillan, Harold, 406 Maitland, Patrick, 708 Majonica, Ernst, 78 Malaysia, 79, 374 Malenkov, Georgi M., 227 Malik, Yakob A., 682 Malin, Herbert S., 741n Malinovsky (USSR), 84 Manescu, Corneliu, 489, 566 Manila Conference, Oct. 1966, 439 Mann, Thomas C., 350 Manning, Robert J., 108 Mansfield, Michael J., 6, 403 Troop level reductions, 398, 400–401, 409, 477, 520–521, 523, 572, 723, 765, 775 Mansholt, Sicco L., 325 Mansholt Plan, 48 Mantelgesetz procedures, 165 Marks, Leonard H., 651 Marshall, George, 149 Marshall, John, 705, 711 Marshall Plan, 13, 159, 368 Marx, Werner, 440 McCafferty, Arthur, 39n McCarthy, Eugene J., 103 McCloy, John J.: Adenauer’s Gaullist views, 170 Berlin, 298–299 Disarmament, 344 Foreign policy of the FRG, 473–478 U.S.-FRG relations, 93, 501n , 518, 647 Military offset payments, 419, 429 Troop level reductions, 399, 776 McGhee, George C., 1n , 30n , 368n , 392n , 477n , 527n Adenauer’s Gaullist views, 169–171 Berlin: Access restrictions, 658–660, 664, 669–670, 673–674, 691–692 Bundestag voting rights for deputies from, 451–455, 458–461 Civil unrest in, 586 Demonstrator train passage from, 671 Incidents of harassment in, 299–301, 309–310 Morale in, 550–551 Soviet position, 624–625 Viability commission, 586 PRC–FRG relations, 119 East Berlin, 160–162, 219–220 Eastern Europe, 190, 216–217, 284, 325, 380, 394–396, 501–503, 549–550, 582, 589–591, 606–607 East-West relations, 565, 609–610, 657–658 EEC, 639–641 Elections in the FRG, 323 European security, 584–585 French-FRG relations, 292, 475, 631 French-U.S. relations, 481–482 FRG defense budget levels, 553–554 International liquidity, 509–511, 540–542 Kennedy Round, 324–325, 350 Loan prepayments by the FRG, 367 Military offset payments, 366, 370–372, 377–378, 393, 413–414, 417–420, 429, 484–487, 626–627, 677 Multilateral Force, 52, 189–190, 213, 231, 324, 378 NATO, 379–380 Nonproliferation treaty, 479–480, 483, 485, 491–493, 585, 616–617, 677 Nuclear defense, 423, 426 Pass arrangements for West Berliners, 22–23 Polish-FRG relations, 462–465 Political situation in the FRG, 406–407, 446–449, 551–552 Reunification of Germany, 86–87, 105–107, 139, 188–189, 191, 197–201, 261–263, 306–308, 327 Draft initiative by the FRG, 8–13, 18n , 45, 65, 133 Four-Power Council on, 208–209, 214–216 U.S.-FRG disagreements over, 204–207, 209–210 U.S.-FRG talks on, 172, 193, 283 U.S. position, 210–212, 380 Soviet bloc policy of the FRG, 627–628 Soviet downing of U.S. aircraft, 40 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 108, 121, 126 Soviet-FRG relations, 142–144, 146–147, 550, 591–592 Troop level reductions, 75, 378, 399, 405–406, 450n , 552n , 576, 677 Vietnam conflict, 145, 345, 369, 642 U.S.-FRG relations, 27, 29, 43–44, 187, 214, 272–276, 471–472, 514, 516, 518 Calm period in, 581–582, 587 Confidentiality in, 368 Final report on, 675–677 FRG sensitivity over U.S. pressure, 100–102, 487–488 Kiesinger visit, 499–501, 569, 573 Need for improvements, 493–497 Rumors, effect of, 645–649, 654–655 U.S. investment, 583 Washington Post article on, 129–130 McIntyre, Stuart H., 45n , 95n , 253, 255, 258, 260n , 267 McKee, Gen. William F., 39 McKillop, David H., 225 McNamara, Robert S., 95n , 104n , 349n ABM deployment, 587 Atlantic nuclear defense policy, 330–331 Berlin, 247n , 248, 298n , 310 Czech invasion, 777 East Berlin, 161, 309 European security, 427 French-U.S. relations, 203 FRG defense budget levels, 383–384, 577 Helicopter flights over East Berlin, 219 Military offset payments, 114, 124, 367, 371–372, 388, 413–416, 420–421 Renegotiation of agreement on, 428–430, 433–436 Von Hassel-McNamara talks on, 29, 81, 353, 377 NATO, 498, 576–577 Soviet downing of U.S. aircraft, 16 Troop level reductions, 378, 399–402, 404, 519–520, 521, 528–529, 563, 576 U.S.-FRG relations, 93, 103, 234, 373, 520, 560, 573, 578 Vietnam conflict, 87, 94, 96, 113, 124–125, 343, 345–346 McNamara Committee, 378, 384–385, 476, 635 McNaughton, John T., 309, 345, 420 Mediterranean Sea, 764, 768, 775 Mende, Erich, 201, 301, 304, 411–412, 451 Mendelevich, Lev I., 682 Merker, Paul, 280 Messmer, Pierre, 203, 385, 629 Mexico, 21, 232 Meyer, Andre, 257 Middle East (see also Arab-Israeli conflict; Arab states), 236, 239, 241, 273n , 548, 557, 562, 565, 570, 578, 764, 703, 704, 740 Military offset payments: British position, 114, 384, 484, 615 Budgetary considerations in the FRG, 424, 632, 745 French position, 388 FRG position, 81, 114–115, 124, 353, 376, 408, 478, 531–532, 619, 769–770 U.S. response to, 417–420, 428–429, 485 FRG contributions to Vietnam, linkage with, 369–372 Long-term solution for, 655–656 Passenger aircraft, purchase of, 416 Public discussion of, 369 Tripartite talks on, 393, 416, 424–425, 429, 506, 511–512 U.S.-FRG talks on, 348–349, 366, 424–426, 626–627, 632–634 Confidentiality requests by the FRG, 368–369, 371, 374 Developmental aid, 366 Fall of Erhard government, effect on, 448–449 Military equipment purchases, 353, 367, 384 Prepayment of loans, 367–368 Renegotiation of agreement on, 428–430, 433–436, 765 U.S. planning for, 377–378, 562, 675 U.S. position, 29, 100, 114, 232, 386–389, 392–393, 413–416, 420–422, 667, 677 Von Hassel-McNamara talks on, 29, 81, 353, 377 Wheat shipments to India as part of, 486–487 Military-Sponsored Air Service (MSAS), 755 Miller, Irwin, 271n Miller Committee, 271 Mittag, Guenter, 281 Modern Air Transport, 753 Moffat, Jay P., 741n Mondello, Marion, 240 Mongolia, 603 Monnet, Jean, 201, 475, 519 Monnet Committee, 153 Morgenthau Plan, 532 Morizet (France), 255 Moro, Aldo, 532, 535 Morocco, 566 Morris, Kenneth J., 651 Moyers, Bill, 330n Mueller-Roschach, 234, 238 Mulley, Frederick William, 612 Multilateral Force: Berlin position, 94 British-FRG talks on, 202, 231 British position, 190, 203, 243–244 French-FRG conflict over 242, 243 French position, 145–146, 181, 189–190, 293 FRG position, 44, 52, 104, 112, 189, 192, 201–204, 207, 242, 324, 407–408 Italian position, 224, 243–244 Soviet position, 61, 177, 201 U.S. position, 114, 139, 189, 190, 202, 213, 223, 233, 236, 243, 378–379 Munich Agreement, 1938, 110, 148, 151, 380, 489, 572, 613 Munich Conference, 519 Muskie, Edmund, 403 Nasser, Gamal Abdul, 53–54, 113 National Intelligence Estimates, 9 NIE 23–65, 251–252 NIE 23–67, 506–507 National Security Action Memoranda: No. 109, 752 No. 322, 189, 201, 213 National Security Council Meeting No. 586, 662n , 674–675 Netherlands (see also Netherlands subheadings under other subjects), 238, 735, 747 Neues Deutschland, 549 Neutrality of Germany, 36, 85, 582 Neuwir (FRG), 149 New York Times, 123, 399n , 400, 479, 520, 735 New Zealand, 115–116 News leaks, 506 Nguyen Cao Ky, 655 Nguyen Khanh, Gen., 28 Nicholls, Jack, 234, 237, 241, 243 Niekisch, 551 Nitze, Paul, 721, 723–727 Nixon, Richard M., 115, 763, 777 Nonproliferation treaty: Article I, 616–617 Article II, 616–617 Article III, 594, 587, 616, 617 Belgian position, 586 Berlin access restrictions, effect on, 694 Bundestag discussion, 521 French position, 586, 616, 629, 634, 640–641 GDR role in, 664 FRG draft, 616 FRG position, 532, 585–587, 593–594, 616–617, 677, 683, 694 CDU/CSU position paper, 440–441 Internal political disagreements, 410, 491–493, 618, 620, 622–623, 731–732 Nuclear protection, assurance of, 480 U.S. view of, 439, 483, 485, 494, 502, 507, 581–582, 666 Italian position, 485 Japanese position, 587 NATO action on, 542–543 Negotiation of changes in, 535 Polish-FRG relations, 463 Soviet position, 424, 450, 677, 681, 712, 732 Soviet-U.S. talks on, 746–747 Swedish draft, 616, 629 U.S.-FRG consultation on, 508, 537, 570, 633–637 U.S. position, 378–379, 449, 475–476, 479, 495, 497–498, 519, 573–574 Non-use of force agreements, 467, 475, 547, 556, 592, 607, 613–615 North Atlantic Treaty, 751 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO): Algeria, 543 Athens guidelines on consultation on nuclear weapons, 736 Belgian role in, 769 Berlin access restrictions, 660, 664, 685, 688, 715, 717 British position, 766, 769 Canadian role in, 769 Capability of, 725, 729 Crisis consultation, 543–544 Cyprus conflict, 79, 127 Czech crisis, 739–743, 751 Danish position, 765–766 Declaration proposal, 63 Defense reviews, 577 Détente and, 620 Dismantling of, 572, 582, 599 Evolution of, 558 Extension of, 578, 764–765 Fallex exercise, 170 Force requirements of the FRG in, 94–95 French policy, 248, 425, 571, 631, 720 FRG-U.S. talks on, 289–290, 764–766 U.S. position, 373, 379–380, 391, 477, 561, 567–568 French withdrawal: French position, 745 FRG position, 575–576, 582, 595, 646 U.S. position, 274–275, 561, 567–568 FRG draft peace initiative, effect of, 12 FRG membership in, 342 FRG policy, 456, 473, 481, 529, 555–556, 559, 570, 666–668, 719, 767 Greek role in, 567, 764 Integration of FRG forces in, 144, 241, 475, 503 Italian position, 765 Middle East, 578, 764 Ministerial meetings: 33d, May 1964, 25, 45, 63, 67, 69, 76, 82–86, 112, 262, 269 34th, Dec. 1964, 172, 179, 182, 189, 198, 203n , 262, 307 35th, May 1965, 195, 236, 242, 247, 250, 264–272, 307 37th, June 1966, 360–365, 362 38th, Dec. 1966, 460n , 466–471, 546 39th, June 1967, 520, 543, 546–550 40th, Dec. 1967, 612–615 41st, June 1968, 691–693, 695–696, 698, 701–716 42d, Autumn 1968, 742, 744 Netherlands position, 766 Nonproliferation treaty, 543 Norwegian position, 766 Nuclear issues, 394–395 Soviet position, 423–424 Nuclear Planning Working Group, 435n Portuguese role in, 764 Rearmament of the FRG, 597 Resolution on limiting Soviet bloc credits, 50, 51n Soviet military threat to, 749–750 Soviet position, 613–614, 779 Spanish role in, 766 Strengthening of, 571 Summit meeting proposal, 735–736 Troop level reductions, 372, 404, 416–420, 607 Turkish role in, 764 Twentieth Anniversary, 777 U.S. commitments in, 341, 570, 675, 725, 777 U.S.-FRG relations and, 284, 390 Vietnam conflict, effect on, 525 Visa fees for GDR citizens in member nations, 685, 692, 705, 707, 709 Warsaw Pact, security arrangements with, 176, 239, 566 Weakening of, 493 Norway, 766 Nuclear attack, 408, 427, 631–632 Nuclear defense, 330–331, 423–428 Nuclear energy, 459 Nuclear Planning Group (NPG), 577–578 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, Aug. 1963, 31 FRG ratification of, 90–91, 476 U.S. position, 286 Nuclear weapons: British position, 770 Development of, 465 FRG ownership/control of, 247, 321, 556, 598, 602 NATO and, 394–395, 423–424 Polish position, 462 Peaceful Nuclear Explosive Devices (PNEDs), 747, 750 Sharing of, 349, 353, 423–424, 426, 431–432, 577–578, 727, 736–737 Observation posts, 19, 31, 38, 100 Obst, Harry, 283–284, 347–348, 423, 438, 630n , 728 FRG-U.S. relations, 291–292, 352, 436, 514, 527, 569, 573 Troop level reductions, 552, 579 Oder-Neisse line question: British position, 37 FRG position, 60–61, 142–143, 628 Grand coalition approach to, 307 Polish-FRG relations, 91–92, 142–143, 211, 321, 395, 432, 462–465, 589 Polish position, 609 Potsdam Accords on, 5, 37, 63, 126, 150, 334, 613, 670, 748 Soviet position, 613 U.S. position, 63–64, 71, 148–151, 211, 380, 443, 605 Offset payments. See Military offset payments. Okinawa, 399 O'Mahony, Joseph E., 46 Organisation Gehlen, 730–731 Organization of American States (OAS), 264n Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD): Development Assistance Committee, 28 East-West joint ventures, 604 East-West trade, 287, 302–303 Great Society concept, internationalization of, 236 International liquidity, 575 As model conduit for aid to the Soviet bloc, 11 U.S. balance-of-payments problems, 627 Ormsby-Gore, David, 15–16 Osterheld, Horst, 108, 119, 121, 126, 284, 304, 368, 369, 479, 488, 569, 573, 734 Ostpolitik, 497n Pacem in Terris Conference, New York, May 1965, 280 Pakistan, 96, 273n , 567, 706 Palliser, Michael, 234, 239, 243 PanAm, 684 Panama Canal, 756 Papandreou, Andreas, 765 Paris Agreement, 1954, 440, 461 Paris Working Group, 236 Pastore, John, 403 Peace and reunification planning (see also Reunification of Germany): Adenauer standstill proposal, 6, 14 Commission on Germany and Central Europe, 98–99 Five-power proposal, 140 Four-Power Council on German reunification: Allied communiqué on, 197–201 British position, 67, 85, 183 Four Western power discussion on, 179–181 French position, 183–185, 189 FRG position, 3, 106, 182–184 Soviet position, 36, 133, 182–187, 334 U.S. position, 60, 63, 132–134, 173–174, 183–185, 195–197, 208–209, 214–216 Free elections, 228 French draft statement, 253, 261 French peace conference proposal, 556 FRG draft initiative, 2–5, 55, 65–69, 106 British position, 133 British-U.S. talks on, 15–16, 24, 64–68 French position, 6, 26, 61, 65–66, 76–77, 133 FRG-U.S. talks on, 30–33, 37–38, 213–214 International Access Authority, 62 Soviet position, 33–34, 65 Unilateral nature, 6, 8–15, 17–18, 26, 34–35, 45, 58–68, 86–87, 228 Humanitarian commissions, 4, 186, 228 Italian role in, 139–140 Package proposals, U.S. position, 107 Soviet treaty proposal, Feb. 1954, 84 Soviet-U.S. bilateral talks, 185–187 Three-power initiative on German reunification, 70–72, 76–78, 80–87, 95–96, 107 Treaty proposal criteria, 237–238 U.S.-British initiative on Germany, 18–19, 24–25, 35–39, 45 U.S.-French disagreement on, 139–140 U.S. leadership in, 247 U.S.-FRG disagreements over, 204–207, 209–210 Western Three Declaration on Germany: French position, 249–250, 257, 261, 263, 265 Quadripartite talks on, 267–269 U.S.-FRG talks on, 253–256, 258–260, 264–266, 342 Peace Corps, 81n , 373 Peaceful Nuclear Explosive Devices (PNEDs), 747, 750 Pearson, Lester B., 567 Pelen, Pierre, 26 Pell, Claiborne, 6 Penberthy, Grover W., 1n , 35, 58 Pfleiderer, Otto, 541 Phillips, Richard I., 225 Pipinelis, Panayotis, 765 Podgorny, Nikolai V., 702 Poland (see also Oder-Neisse line question; Polish subheadings under other subjects): Anti-Semitic demonstrations in, 665 Berlin crises, 643–644 Czech crisis, effect of, 722 Film production in, 156 GDR, relations with, 361, 432 FRG, relations with: Berlin clause, 269, 281 Bishops' messages, 334, 339, 343 Difficulties in, 489, 665 FRG position, 457–458, 589 Improvements in, 412, 474, 545 Investment, 228 Nonaggression pact, 94, 134 Private contacts, 546–547 Trade, 89, 342–343, 463 U.S. position, 462–465 German minority in, 462–463 Loss of German territory to, 595–596 Nuclear energy, 459 Soviet troop withdrawal from, 603 Soviet Union, relations with, 361, 432 Stagnation in, 738 U.S. relations with, 362 Western relations with, 364 Polaris submarines, 247 Political parties of the FRG (see also CDU/SPD Grand Coalition under Political situation in the FRG): Berlin, 551, 672 Christian Democratic Union (CDU), 406–407, 594, 666, 694, 697 Party convention in Berlin, 703, 710, 759–760 SPD/SED debates, 361, 407 Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union (CDU/CSU) coalition, 7, 33, 90, 307, 328–329, 440, 457, 610, 620, 622, 632 Economic issues, 551–552 European unity disputes, 140–141, 145–146, 168–171 Gaullist element in, 171, 201, 273–274 GDR-FRG relations, 549 Internal disputes, 140–141, 146, 195, 204 U.S. support for, 189 Weakening of, 204, 390 Christian Social Union (CSU), 104, 594, 666 Communist Party, 358 Deutsche Reichspartei, 774 Dortmund Convention, 444 Franco-German cooperation, 138 Free Democratic Party (FDP), 7, 33, 307, 329, 451, 460, 632 National Democratic Party (NPD), 480, 506–507, 531–532, 536, 668–669, 676, 705, 738 Berlin travel ban on members of, 659, 663, 761, 764, 774, 778 Social Democratic Party of West Germany (SPD), 7, 33, 157, 191, 205, 307, 328–329, 358, 386, 390, 407, 444, 451, 457, 460, 464, 475, 532, 551–552, 602, 619, 622, 632, 651, 666, 694, 697 Grand Coalition role, 551 SPD/SED debates, 360–361, 407, 468 Hanoi visit by SPD delegation, 642 Italian Communist Party, talks with, 646, 652 Reunification of Germany Weakening of, 530, 671, 676 Political situation in the FRG (see also Political parties in the FRG ): Adenauer views of, 406–407 Berlin pass issue, 1, 7, 88 Bundestag voting rights for Berlin Deputies, 451–455, 458–461, 467, 478, 483, 551 CDU/SPD grand coalition and, 243, 307, 323, 446n , 456–459, 506–507, 551–552, 596, 620, 632, 662–663, 676, 710 Extremism, 507, 668–669, 697 Gaullist approach to foreign relations, 117, 145–146, 168–171, 273–274, 290, 476, 504–505, 553 Rapallo thinking, 168–169, 274, 572 Weakening and fall of Erhard government, 195–197, 385–386, 390–391, 407–410, 446–449, 494, 530, 571 Western commitment to German reunification, 130–131, 192–194 Polk, Gen., 152, 161 Pollak (FRG), 670 Pompidou, Georges, 556 Poseidon missiles, 602 Potsdam Accords (see also Oder-Neisse line), 5, 37, 63, 126, 150, 334, 613, 670, 748 Prass, Johannes, 569, 573 Pravda, 167, 670, 747–748 PRC. See China, People’s Republic of. Protectionism, 776 Puhan, Alfred, 191n , 247n , 455n , 497n , 642n , 741n , 770n Berlin, 620, 691, 694–695, 701, 708 Czechoslovakia, 738 Eastern Europe, 284 U.S.-FRG relations, 230, 372, 442, 569, 617 Kennedy Round, 350 Military offset payments, 429 NATO, 284 Nonproliferation treaty, 593–594 Reunification of Germany, 172, 192, 225, 283, 355 Vietnam conflict, 345 Quick, 73 Radio in the American Sector (RIAS), 94, 651–652 Rankin, Jeanette, 400 Rapacki, Adam, 238–239, 432, 489, 609 Rapacki Plan, 91, 590 Rasner, Will, 410 Read, Benjamin H., 72, 552n , 618, 662n , 685 Red Cross, 349 Reedy, George E., 119, 121, 126, 292 Rehs (FRG), 149 Reinkemeyer (FRG), 66 Reunification of Germany (see also Oder-Neisse line question; Peace and reunification planning): Allied communiqué on, 195, 197–201, 249–250, 307, 343–344 British EEC membership as aid to, 602 British-FRG talks on, 284 British position, 63, 131, 200, 205, 526 British-U.S. talks on, 244–246 Bulgarian position, 315 Cold War and, 597 Czech invasion, effect on, 733–735 Czech position, 315, 600, 605 Disarmament as prelude to, 245, 262 Dissolution of alliances and, 599–600 Division of Germany, made palatable, 601–605 Eastern European position, 105, 107 Europeanization of, 265, 274 French-FRG talks on, 193–194, 220–221, 224–225 French position, 31, 63, 200, 220–221, 363, 720 FRG view of, 173, 201, 223, 406 U.S. view of, 140, 205, 229, 235, 526 French-U.S. talks on, 225–229, 249–250, 326–327 GDR position, 121–122 FRG position, 31–33, 83–84, 191, 240, 473, 568 German reassociation, 605–606 Historical perspective, 595–597 Hungarian position, 105, 315 Italian position, 242 Long-term perspective, 731 Memorandum on, 327–330, 333–334 NATO role, 240 Neutralization of Germany, 36, 85, 582 Peaceful achievement of, 237 POLAD Meeting on East/West Relations, 397 Polish position, 105, 315–316, 322, 600 Post-election prospect for, 306–308 Quadripartite Foreign Ministers talks on, 335–340, 466–468 Reaffirmations of commitment to, 106, 311–313, 442–443 Referendum on, proposed, 3–4 Romanian position, 105, 315 Soviet-German deal, 600 Soviet position, 84, 107, 194, 199, 234, 312, 315–316, 322, 329, 356, 503, 596 Soviet-U.S. talks on, 175–179, 185–187, 212 Statement of principles on, 344–345 Tension as obstacle to, 363–365 Transitional planning for, 2–3 U.S.-FRG talks, 172–174, 191–194, 275, 283–284, 355–356 U.S. position, 14–15, 104, 188–189, 200, 210–212, 316, 322–323, 380, 522–526, 531, 665–666 Western concessions toward, 11 Western integration and, 597–599, 602 Western reaffirmation of responsibility for, 106 Reuter, Ernst, 470 Rey, Jean, 545 RIAS. See Radio in the American Sector. Rieger, Walter, 728 Roberts, Chalmers, 579n ROC. See China, Republic of. Rockefeller, Nelson A., 118 Romania (see also Romanian subheadings under other subjects), 432 Berlin crises, 643–644 Czech crisis, effect of, 722 FRG, relations with, 269, 281, 412, 486, 489, 507, 566, 613, 665 FRG, trade with, 89, 730 Hallstein Doctrine, 465 Soviet threat to, 733–734, 739, 745, 758, 768 Soviet Union, relations with, 338, 361, 566, 603, 703 United States, relations with, 682n Western trade with, 287 Romney, George, 115 Roosa bonds, 417, 419, 422 Roosevelt, Franklin D., 404 Roshchin, 617, 637 Rostow, Eugene V., 569, 658, 684, 691–692, 694 Rostow, Walt W., 104n , 311n , 417n , 497n , 743n Atlantic Alliance, 561 Berlin, 643, 757–760 Berlin access restrictions, 679–682, 691, 694, 716–717 British EEC membership, 728–729 Commission on Germany and Central Europe, 98–99 Czechoslovakia, 731 Eastern Europe, 496, 633–634, 643, 730–731 FRG defense budget levels, 554 FRG malaise, 233–234 FRG policy toward the Soviet bloc, 622 International liquidity, 540 Kennedy Round, 631 Military offset payments, 413, 420, 428–429, 486, 626–627, 633 Multilateral Force, 407–408 Nonproliferation treaty, 439, 593, 622, 633–637 Political situation in the FRG, 385–386, 632 Reunification of Germany, 132, 195–197, 215, 327, 333, 522–526 Southeast Asia, 438 Soviet propaganda campaign against the FRG, 758–760 Technical cooperation on space, 436–437 Troop level reductions, 563 U.S.-FRG relations, 93–94, 103, 372, 374, 481n , 488n Confidence-building in, 560 German political struggle over, 504–505 Kiesinger visit, 501n , 569, 580 Rumors, effect on, 652–653 Vietnam conflict, 630–632 Roth, William, 350 Ruete, Hans, 172, 182, 429, 630, 659–660, 688–690, 701, 708 Rumania. See Romania. Rusk, Dean, 95n , 119–120, 104n , 126–127, 478n , 520, 545, 567, 731n , 765, 766, 770n Berlin, 451, 611, 614, 620–621, 759–760, 761–764 Access restrictions, 672, 680, 682–683, 693, 695, 698–708, 711–714, 716, 772–773 Incidents of harassment in, 298–299, 310 Brandt, talks with, 89–93 Czechoslovakia, 738–742 Defense budget levels, 576–577 Defense strategies, 577–578 East Berlin, 160, 309 Eastern Europe, 151, 216, 218, 284–288, 361–362 FRG relations with, 394, 396n , 488–489, 547, 590, 606–607 EEC, 145, 545, 776 European security, 364–365, 566–567 French-FRG relations, 292–293, 765–766 French-U.S. relations, 203, 774–775 German border issues, 245 GDR-FRG relations, 411–412, 469, 546–547 FRG loan prepayments, 367 International liquidity, 575 Kennedy Round, 350–351, 376, 437 Military offset payments, 366–367, 370–371, 377, 428–429, 765 Multilateral force, 52 NATO, 289–290, 543, 575–578 Nonproliferation treaty, 476, 542–543, 573–574, 622–623, 636, 746–747 Nuclear defense, 330–331, 423–426, 428 Oder-Neisse line issue, 60–61 Polish-FRG relations, 342 Reunification of Germany, 105–107, 188, 210, 568 Four-Power Council on, 179, 182–183, 198, 216 French-U.S. talks on, 225–229, 326 FRG draft initiative, 8, 15–16, 26, 58–61, 62–68 Memorandum on, 327, 333–334 Quadripartite Foreign Ministers talks on, 335, 337–338, 340, 466 Soviet-U.S. talks on, 175–179, 185–187 Three-power initiative on, 70–72, 76–78, 82–85 U.S.-British initiative, 18–19, 24–25, 45 U.S.-FRG talks on, 172–174, 191–194, 283, 355–356 Western Three Declaration on, 259–261, 342 Romania, 758 Soviet downing of U.S. aircraft, 41–43 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 108–109, 114, 121–123, 126 Soviet-FRG relations, 146–147, 526, 747–749 Soviet-U.S. relations, 431–432, 490, 565 SPD/SED debates, 360–361 Troop level reductions, 202, 399–401, 416, 520–521, 568 By the FRG, 563–564, 576 U.S.-FRG-relations, 273, 442–443, 456, 514, 657, 750, 773–777 Anti-Americanism, 103, 718–719 Confidence-building in, 560 Confidentiality, 368–369 Consultations, 516, 518, 520, 544 Kiesinger visit, 569 Need for improvements, 493, 497–498 Rumors, effect of, 648, 652–655 Washington Post article on, 129–130 Vietnam conflict, 247, 341, 345–346, 369–370, 470, 619, 642 Yugoslav-FRG relations, 612 Russell, Richard, 403–404, 723, 768 Saar agreement, Oct. 1956, 3n Sahm, Ulrich, 569, 573, 592 Saragat, Giuseppe, 531 Scandinavia, 635 Schaetzel, J. Robert, 103, 104n , 367–369, 645, 647–648, 653 Scheske, Ulrich, 172, 182, 242–243 Schiller, Karl, 23, 459, 509–510, 541–542, 550, 574–575, 627 Schilling, Wolf, 701 Schmid, Carlo, 60 Schmidt, Helmut, 551, 622, 749 Schmuecker, Kurt, 46 Schneider, Freddy, 721, 731 Schnippenkoetter, Swidbert, 440, 569, 573, 594 Schoellhorn, 509, 541 Schricke (France), 708 Schroeder, Georg, 234 Schroeder, Gerhard: Balance-of-payments meeting, 726–727 Berlin, 205 CDU/CSU internal disputes, 204 Cyprus, 126 Czech crisis, 721–722, 730–732, 738 Defense budget levels, 744–745 Eastern Europe, 218, 269–270, 284, 394–396 European security, 362–365 European unity, 145–146 French-FRG relations, 274, 292, 619 French political situation, 732 FRG foreign policy, 65–69, 169–171, 195–196, 733 GDR-FRG relations, 238 Grand Coalition, 620 Kennedy Round, 350, 352 Khrushchev visit proposal, 167 Military offset payments, 368, 429, 619, 655–656 Multilateral Force, 192, 324, 476 NATO, 284, 498, 725 Nuclear defense, 423, 426–428 Oder-Neisse line, 148–149 Personality of, 331–332 Polish-FRG relations, 342–343 Political weakness, 65–67, 70–71, 78 PRC–FRG relations, 119–120 Reunification of Germany, 94, 105–107, 168, 226, 568 Allied communiqué on, 197–198, 307 Four-Power Council, 182–184, 197–200 FRG draft peace initiative, 59–62, 65–67 Quadripartite Foreign Ministers talks on, 335–336, 338–340 Three-power initiative on, 70–71, 76–78, 82–85 U.S.-British initiative, '9, 24, 37–38, 45 U.S.-FRG talks on, 172–174, 193, 283–284 U.S. position, 188–189, 191, 194, 212 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 121–123, 125 Soviet-FRG relations, 101, 181 SPD/SED debates, 360–361 Troop level reduction, 435, 520, 570, 588, 722–724, 732, 776 UN membership for the GDR, 365 U.S.-FRG relations, 211, 234, 273, 356, 368, 491, 504, 515, 618 Vietnam conflict, 145, 341, 345, 369, 721–722, 724 Western Three Declaration on Germany, 261–262, 264–269, 342 Western trade with the GDR, 270–272 Schuetz, Klaus, 89, 91, 94, 304, 484, 649–650, 764 Berlin, 615, 620–621, 650–652, 703 Berlin access restrictions, 662, 664, 680, 683 Emergency Law, inapplicability of, 683, 704 NATO, 496, 498 Schulze-Boysen, Hartmut, 569, 573 Schwarzhaupt (FRG), 373 Scranton, William, 115, 118 Seebohm, Hans C., 110, 149, 211 Seibt, Dankmar, 121, 284 Semenov, Vladimir S., 175, 185, 450 Senate, U.S. (see also Congress, U.S.): Appropriations Committee, 723 Armed Services Committee, 528n Democratic Policy Committee, 398n , 399, 402, 405, 520–521 Foreign Relations Committee, 402, 528n , 677 FRG trade with the PRC, 391 Government Operations Committee-Subcommittee on National Security and International Operations, 378, 402 Nonproliferation treaty, 747 Presidential relations with, 398–404 Spanish bases, 766 Troop level reductions, 775 Servan-Schreiber, Jacques, 728–729 Seydak (FRG), 473 Seydoux de Claussone, Francois, 296, 300–301, 303, 640, 708, 712–713 Shriver, Sargent, 81 Shullaw, J. Harold, 244 Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, 110n Simon, Klaus, 172, 264, 283–284 Singapore, 557 Sino-Soviet conflict, 9, 13, 15 Eastern European response to, 153 French position, 474, 482 GDR exploitation of, 336 FRG position, 364–365, 405 Ideological evolution, slowed by, 602 Radio jamming, 92 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 131 Soviet preoccupation with, 91, 338, 565 U.S. position, 703, 719 Smirnov, Andrei A., 53 Smith, Arnold, 240 Smith, Bromley, 429n , 436n , 438n , 674n Smith, Gerard, 103, 104n , 146 Smith, Kingsbury, 407 Soenksen, Claus, 569, 573 Solomon, Anthony, 350 Sonnenfeldt, Helmut, 691, 694–695 Southeast Asia (see also Vietnam conflict): Amount of weaponry in, 415 Regionalism, 728 U.S. involvement in, 234, 296, 425, 438, 525, 531, 725, 738 Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), 66, 520, 576 Soviet bloc. See East-West relations; East-West trade; Eastern Europe; Soviet Union. Soviet Union (see also Access issues under Berlin; Sino-Soviet conflict; Soviet Union and Soviet subheadings under other subjects): Berlin clause, 167 Bulgaria, relations with, 361, 738 Communist leaders meeting, Mar. 1965, 181 Communist Party 23d Congress, 357 Eastern Europe, relations with, 338, 664 Economic situation, 9, 603 France, relations with, 9–10, 273n , 362, 474, 624–626, 644 GDR, relations with, see under German Democratic Republic FRG, relations with, 53, 60, 76, 269, 502–503, 710 Exchange of renunciation-of-force declarations, 380, 591–592, 702 French position, 412 FRG position, 486, 547, 550, 552, 565–566, 612 Humanitarian issues, 467, 525–526 Improvements in, 545, 547–548 Karlovy-Vary meeting, 738 Non-use of force agreement, 547, 614–615 Soviet isolation of the FRG, 595 Soviet position, 335–337, 507, 524, 550, 588 Soviet propaganda attacks, 747–750, 758–760, 777 Tsarapkin visit to Trier leftists, 670 U.S. position, 73, 101, 142–144, 146–147, 275–276, 321–322, 607–608 Hungary, relations with, 105, 603, 738 Ideological evolution in, 602–603 Mediterranean naval presence of, 764, 768, 775 Most-favored nation status for, 50 NATO, effect of, 746 Nonproliferation treaty, 424 Prisoners, 423 Result of weakness in, 404 Romania, relations with, 338, 361, 566, 603, 703 Trade: Italian pipeline sales, 51 U.S. wheat sales, 84, 90 Western long-term credits, 9–12, 49–51, 248 Troop level reductions, 25, 529, 545, 568, 585 United Kingdom, relations with, 9, 615 United States, relations with, 175n , 404, 423–424, 431–432, 534, 682n Civil Air Agreement, Nov., 1966, 40, 423, 490 Consular agreement, 490, 538–539, 565 Downing of U.S. aircraft, 16, 39–43, 56–57, 160–161 FRG position, 493–494, 530–531, 565, 583 Improvements in, 142–144, 538–539 Troop level reductions, 398–399 Vietnam conflict, effect on, 490, 565 U.S. policy, 239 Spaak, Paul-Henri, 239 Spain, 766 Spangenberg (FRG), 357, 359 Special Committee on U.S. Trade Relations with Eastern European Countries and the Soviet Union, 271n Special Drawing Rights, 645 Special National Intelligence Estimate (SNIE) No. 11-5-64, 17 Der Spiegel, 280 Spiers, Ronald I., 182, 264, 344–345 Spivy, Gen. B. E., 511–512 Springer, Axel, 593–594 Springsteen, George S., 701, 708 Stackelberg, Baron Herbert A. von, 105, 737 Staden, Berndt von, 108, 191, 222, 253–256, 258, 345, 442, 569, 573, 620 Stalin, Josef, 178, 597 Starchinov (USSR), 358 Stennis, John, 399, 401, 403–404 Stern, 655 Stewart, Michael (UK Foreign Secretary): Berlin access limitations, 708, 713, 715, 759 Berlin clauses, 270 British trade with the GDR, 272 European security, 362–363 NATO, 765 Reunification of Germany, 244–245, 264, 267–269, 334 SPD/SED debates, 360–361 Visit to Moscow, Nov.–Dec. 1965, 337 Stewart, Michael (Charge d'Affaires UK Embassy), 244 Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., 326, 397n , 429, 455n , 606n , 611n , 652n , 672n , 674–675 Stoltenberg, Gerhard, 492, 495, 593 Stoph, Willi, 174, 281, 544, 546–547, 549, 582, 585, 589, 613 Straits of Tiran, 543, 548 Strauss, Franz Josef, 68, 77, 101, 619, 728–731 CDU/CSU internal disputes, 141, 195 French-FRG relations, 476, 618 GDR-FRG relations, 329, 703 Nonproliferation treaty, 593–594, 618, 620, 633, 640–641, 666 Political situation in the FRG, 385–386, 447 U.S.-FRG relations, 504–505, 513, 525 Visit to the United States, June 1964, 103–104 Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), 671 Sudeten Germans, 110, 120, 149–150, 474, 595 Suez war, 1956, 54, 241 Sukarno, 438 Sukhodrev, Victor, 185 Sullivan, William H., 378 Sulzberger, Arthur, 406 Sutterlin, James S., 370 Sweden, 39, 288–289, 494, 693 Sweet, Paul, 499 Switzerland, 47, 288–289 Symington, W. Stewart, 401, 403–404, 723–725, 732, 768 Talbot, Phillips, 244 Tanzania, 233, 242 Tariffs, 47, 626–627, 631, 730 TASS news agency, 60 Taxation, 705, 769 Taylor, Gen Maxwell, 93 Thailand, 79, 374, 398–403 Thant, U., 682n Thomas, Stefan, 234 Thompson, Llewellyn E., 1n , 17n , 95n , 132n , 344n , 478n , 606n , 607n Berlin, 298–299, 659–661, 682, 760–761, 778–780 Commission on Germany and Central Europe, 98 East Berlin, 219, 309 Eastern Europe, 284, 591 German border issues, 245–246 FRG loan prepayments, 367 Kennedy Round, 350 NATO, 284 Presentation of credentials, 450n Reunification of Germany: Four-Power Council on, 179–184 French-U.S. talks on, 225, 228, 249–250, 326 FRG draft initiative, 6, 16, 30–33, 58–67 Memorandum on, 327, 333 Soviet-U.S. talks on, 175, 185 Three-power initiative on, 70, 82, 85–86 U.S.-FRG talks on, 172, 283 Western Three Declaration on Germany, 253–256, 258–260, 264–267 Soviet-FRG relations, 524 U.S.-FRG relations, 93, 368 Vietnam conflict, 345, 369 Thurmond, Strom, 401 Tito, Marshal Josip Broz, 295, 297, 567, 705, 734 Togliatti, Palmiro, 281 Toon, Malcolm, 672n Treasury, U.S. Department of the, 408, 420 Treaty of Rome, 568 Trebesch, Herbert, 345 Trench, Nigel, 15 Trezise, Philip, 626 Trilateral Commission, 459, 484–485 Troop level reductions: Aircraft, 523, 529, 536, 554 By Belgium, 425 By the British Army, 421, 425, 769–770 British position, 36 Complete withdrawal, 434–435 Congressional call for, 398–404, 519–521, 528–529, 534, 724, 729 By the FRG, 552–556, 562–564, 570, 572, 576, 579–580, 587–588 FRG position, 202, 405–406, 475, 505–506, 511–512, 529, 533, 587–588 U.S. response to, 417–420 Long Thrust forces, 101 Reciprocal, 378, 556, 592, 657, 722–723 Reversal of, 751, 775 Roundout forces, 101 Soviet-FRG agreement on, 607 Soviet position, 450, 503, 738 By the Soviet Union, 25, 529, 545, 568, 585 Symington amendment, 723–725, 732 Trilateral discussion and agreement on, 416, 565, 570 British proposal, 576 FRG position, 576 U.S. position, 24–25, 519–521, 537, 539, 570, 572, 583, 677, 732, 768–769, 775–776 U.S.-Soviet exchange on, 73–75, 97, 398–399 Truman, Harry S, 149n Tsarapkin, Semen K., 486 Berlin access restrictions, 682, 686, 689, 698 Brandt talks, 547, 582, 588, 608, 612–614, 622, 628, 664, 673 Carstens talks, 490 Czechoslovakia, 734, 738 Mende talks, 412 Soviet-FRG trade, 545 Troop level reductions, 592 Visit with Trier leftists, 670 Turkey, 96, 100, 126–127, 361, 567 Tykocinski, 295–296 Tyler, William R., 1n , 17n , 98n , 104n , 132n , 218n , 247n European unity, 145 FRG malaise, 233 U.S.-FRG relations, 103, 222 Oder-Neisse border issue, 60 PRC–FRG relations, 119 Reunification of Germany, 175, 182, 244 French-U.S. talks on, 225, 227–229 FRG draft initiative, 24, 26, 30, 55, 58–59, 61–68 Three-power initiative on German reunification, 70, 82 U.S.-British initiative on, 25, 35, 37–38, 45 U.S.-FRG talks on, 172, 192 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 108, 121, 126 U–2 spy flights, 93 Udall, Stewart, 354, 373, 583 Ulbricht, Walter: Berlin, 303, 643–644 Berlin access restrictions, 664, 679, 691, 694, 711, 717, 760 Brandt-Abrasimov talks, 444–445 Czechoslovakia, 700, 704, 712 East-West relations, 610 Eastern European-FRG relations, 84, 90, 120, 544 Economic reforms, 278 End of regime, 92, 282, 317, 319, 468, 483, 730 GDR-FRG relations, 546–547 Nationalism, 336 New constitution proposal, 621 Political style of, 174 Reunification of Germany, 107, 121 Socialist realism, 279 Socialist Unity Party of East Germany, 281, 295 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 109, 126, 131, 133 Unpopularity in Eastern Europe, 589 Western isolation of, 150, 157–158 UN Charter, 747n , 748, 758: Article 51, 748 Article 53, 613, 735, 738–739, 747–748, 758 Article 57, 613 Article 107, 735, 738–739, 747–748, 758 UN Conference on Trade and Development, 46, 47 UN Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 157 UN General Assembly, 193, 195, 365, 411–412, 423, 543, 546, 634, 761n Unger, Leonard, 225 Unification of Germany. See Peace and reunification planning; Reunification of Germany. United Arab Republic (UAR), 245, 295, 336 United Kingdom (see also United Kingdom and British subheadings under other subjects): Cuban trade with, 113, 116, 707 Economic aid to Asia, 353 Elections in, 25, 36 FRG, relations with, 21, 35–36, 476, 618–619 Military forces under UN control, 39 Nuclear weapons, 224, 349 Poverty in, 236 PRC trade with, 545, 707 Soviet Union, relations with, 9, 615 United Nations (see also UN headings): Development programs for Asia, 291 Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Conference report to, 629 GDR membership, 365, 412 Genocide/mass murder time limits, 632–633 Military forces under control of, 39 Move to Berlin, 93 Nonproliferation treaty, 634, 637, 664 PRC membership, 110 U.S. Information Agency (USIA), 678 U.S. Intelligence Board Watch Committee, 678 Vaes, 238–239 Valdes, Philip, 41 Valenti, Jack, 347–348, 352 Vance, Cyrus, 371 Van Well, 687, 708 Vatican II, 280 V–E day, 229 Viet Cong, 370 Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, 109, 374, 404, 642, 655, 716, 719: Vietnam, Republic of, 28, 241, 341, 370, 438–439, 674–675 Vietnam conflict: Balance-of-payment problems from, 346–347, 366 Bombing of the North, 423, 655 British treaty obligations, 470 Demonstrations against, 293, 668 Eastern European-U.S. relations, effect on, 286 French position, 477, 482, 632 GDR-FRG relations, effect on, 411–412 FRG support for, 141, 369–370, 417, 428, 630–632, 724 FRG position, 79–80, 102, 104, 145, 482, 619 Medical units, 96, 100, 112–113, 349, 354 Personnel, 341, 343 SPD views, 642, 646 U.S. position, 27–28, 94, 124–125, 247, 273, 341, 345–346, 390 Waning of, 582, 652 Gulf of Tonkin incident, 145 Nuclear weapons use in, 631 Paris talks, 777 Polish position, 432 PRC involvement, 369 Press coverage, 391 Soviet position, 423, 431 Soviet-U.S. relations, effect on, 490, 565, 719 Troop level increases, 114 U.S.-FRG talks on, 273, 343, 345–346, 369–370 U.S. position, 291, 432, 570, 740 U.S. withdrawal, 406 Vogel, 294–295 Wabeke, Bertus, 411 Walker, Gordon, 172–174, 197 Wallner, Woodruff, 658 Walsh, John, 717n , 762n Warnke, Paul, 721 Warsaw Pact, 132, 176, 198, 239, 566, 603, 607, 719, 748: Washington Ambassadorial Group: Four-power council on German reunification FRG draft peace initiative, 45, 59, 67, 228 Soviet-GDR friendship treaty, 122, 130 Three-power initiative on German reunification, 81–83 U.S.-British initiative on Germany, 36, 38 Washington Post, 129–130, 579 Water pollution, 156 Watson, Marvin, 504n , 560, 563 Weber, Hans, 46 Weber, Heinz, 105, 111, 115, 264, 283, 284, 347, 348, 352, 514, 542, 569, 579, 573, 767 Wehner, Herbert: Berlin, 23, 550–551, 669–671 Communist background of, 477 Eastern Europe, 504 GDR-FRG relations, 549, 552, 596 Grand Coalition, 551–552, 596 Health of, 407 Nonproliferation treaty, 618 RIAS funding cuts, 651 Soviet-FRG relations, 548, 550, 552, 596, 622 U.S.-FRG relations, 473, 475–477 Vietnam conflict, 619 West Berlin. See Berlin. Western Europe (see also Multilateral Force; North Atlantic Treaty Organization): British troop withdrawals, 400 Finlandization of, 751 French role, 473–474 Monnet declaration, 475 New order in, 582 Nuclear defense, 423–428 Security: Arrangements for, 590 Belgian position, 715 British proposal, 566–567 “Concepts of a Future European Security Arrangement” (French Center for Strategic Studies), 585 Consultations on, 427 Danish position, 715 East-West groups for discussion of, 604 Franco-German study of, 585 French position, 362–364 FRG position, 5, 556, 572, 582, 666–667 Karlsbad meeting, 544, 546 Middle East and, 578 Netherlands position, 715 Prepositioning of military equipment, 724 Quadripartite talks on, 362–365, 584–585 Settlement for, 239, 240, 241 Soviet proposals, 363, 365 U.S. troops in, 343 Soviet influence on southern border, 562 Soviet missiles in, 441 Statement of principles, 1961, 344 Strategies for, 577 Unity movement: CDU/CSU splits regarding, 140–141, 145–146, 168–171, 204 Fouchet plan, 619 French position, 134–138, 224, 252n FRG position, 139–140, 202–203 Italian position, 203 U.S. position, 44, 276, 729 U.S. obligations in, 470–471, 563 Western European Union (WEU), 480, 512, 764 Western Three Declaration on Germany (see also Peace and reunification planning): French position, 249–250, 257, 261, 263, 265 Quadripartite talks on, 267–269 U.S.-FRG talks on, 253–256, 258–260, 264–266, 342 Westrick, Ludger, 11, 22–23, 108, 119, 121–123, 125, 137, 140–141, 146, 167, 190, 301–304, 368, 369, 409–410, 423, 429 Wheeler, Bert, 400, 404 Wieck, Hans-Georg, 721 Wilson, James Harold, 39, 137, 190, 224, 353, 393, 401–402, 485, 571, 615 Wilson, Woodrow, 404 Winzer, Otto, 612 Wischnewski (FRG), 487 World War I, 595, 635 World War II, 525, 595, 707, 724 World War III, 403–404 Yalta Memorandum, Aug. 1964, 281 Yemen, 241 Yugoslavia (see also Yugoslavia and Yugoslav subentries under other subjects): EEC membership, 604–605 Emigrants in the United States from, 362 FRG, relations with, 50, 61, 69, 100, 489, 610, 612–613, 627, 665, 702, 719, 730 Highway construction in, 156 Independent nature of, 314 Labor flow to Western Europe, 604 Soviet threat to, 733–734, 739, 745, 768 Zanzibar, 31, 38, 62, 100 Zayae, Mildred, 6n Zimmerman, Capt., 727 Zorin, Valerin, 344, 712 Errata The following change has been made to Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, Volume XV, Germany and Berlin. Please be aware that printed volumes have not been revised. 1. Document 66, Page 148 (date of correction: January 2, 2013) The citation to "footnote 7" of Document 28 has been corrected to read "footnote 6".