filename	tr #	author pid	pub date	full textfrus1961-63v16.xml	Foreign Relations of the United States 1961–1963 Volume XVI Eastern Europe; Cyprus; Greece; Turkey Department of StateWashington Editor: James E. Miller General Editor: Glenn W. LaFantasie United States Government Printing Office Washington 1994 DEPARTMENT OF STATE PUBLICATION 10090Office of the HistorianBureau of Public AffairsFor sale by the U.S. Government Printing Office Superintendent of Documents, Main Stop: SSOP Washington, DC 20402-9398 Preface The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted. The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991. A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State’s Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.). The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government, including facts that contributed to the formulation of policies and records that provided supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted. The statute confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded. The editors of this volume, which was compiled in 1991 and 1992, are convinced that it meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing. Although this volume records policies and events of more than 30 years ago, the statute of October 28, 1991, allows the Department until 1996 to reach the 30-year line in the publication of the series. Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series This volume is part of a triennial subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series. This subseries documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the 3 years (1961–1963) of the administration of John F. Kennedy. In planning and preparing the 1961–1963 triennium, the editors chose to present the official record of U.S. foreign affairs with respect to Europe, the Soviet Union, and Canada in six print volumes and one microfiche supplement. Volume V, Soviet Union, includes documentation on U.S.-Soviet bilateral relations. Volume VI, Kennedy–Khrushchev Correspondence, includes the comprehensive record of correspondence between President Kennedy and Soviet Chairman Khrushchev. Volume XIII, Western Europe and Canada, documents U.S. policy regarding European economic and political integration, U.S. participation in NATO, and U.S. bilateral relations with Canada, France, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Volume XIV, Berlin Crisis, 1961–1962, and Volume XV, Berlin Crisis, 1962–1963, document U.S. involvement in the continuing Four-Power negotiations over divided Germany and the status of the Western-occupied sectors of Berlin. A combined microfiche supplement to volumes XIII, XIV, and XV will be published separately. Volume XVI, Eastern Europe (presented here), documents the basic record of U.S. relations with Austria, Finland, Poland, Yugoslavia, Greece, and Turkey, as well as documentation on general U.S. policy toward the Eastern European region and U.S. efforts to resolve the Cyprus problem. The statute of October 28, 1991, requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on all the major foreign policy decisions and actions of the U.S. Government. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. The editors judge that this volume was prepared in complete accordance with the standards and mandates of this statute. Sources for the Foreign Relations Series In planning and preparing this volume and the other five documenting U.S. foreign policy regarding Europe during the Kennedy administration, the editors concluded that the records of the Department of State would constitute the central core of the published record. In preparing this volume, Department of State historians have enjoyed complete and unconditional access to all records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized (lot) files of the policymaking levels; the files of the Department of State’s Executive Secretariat, which comprehend the official papers created by or submitted to the Secretary of State; the files of all overseas Foreign Service posts and U.S. special missions; and the official correspondence with foreign governments and with other Federal agencies. Any failure to include a complete Department of State record in the Foreign Relations series cannot be attributed to constraints or limitations placed upon the Department historians in their access to Department records, information security regulations and practices notwithstanding. The editors of this volume fully researched the papers of President Kennedy and other White House foreign policy records. These Presidential papers have become a major part of the official record published in the Foreign Relations series. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from other Federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. All of this documentation has been made available for use in the Foreign Relations series thanks to the consent of these agencies and the cooperation and support of the National Archives and Records Administration. Particular thanks are due to officials at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library for their assistance in preparing this volume. These Presidential files were supplemented by White House documents in Department of State files. The editors also had complete access to the papers of General Maxwell Taylor at the National Defense University, which proved to be a valuable source for documenting the formulation of policy under President Kennedy. In addition, the editors reviewed the body of declassified JCS files at the National Archives and Records Administration. Copies of individual classified JCS materials were obtained from the Joint Staff on a request basis. Completion of the declassification of this volume and the final steps of its preparation for publication coincided with the development since early 1991 by the Central Intelligence Agency, in cooperation with the Department of State, of access by Department historians to high-level intelligence documents from among those records still in the custody of that Agency. The Department of State historians have been provided selective access to particular special files of the Agency. The Department has used this access, as arranged by the CIA’s History Staff, in the compilation of this volume. The List of Sources, pages XIII–XV, identifies the particular files and collections used in the preparation of this volume. Scope and Focus of Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, Volume XVI The documentation printed in this volume presents the major actions and discussions of the U.S. Government toward the states of Eastern Europe (Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Yugoslavia), three states of the Eastern Mediterranean (Greece, Cyprus, and Turkey), and Austria and Finland. A single Eastern European regional compilation includes documentation on U.S. relations with Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Romania. In general, these documents illustrate the very limited contacts between the United States and these satellite nations and focus primarily on limited economic ties. Documentation on Hungarian efforts to secure a seat in the United Nations will be printed in volume XXV, General; United Nations. The documentation on Poland focuses on U.S. efforts to employ limited economic assistance as a tool to gain diplomatic leverage with an important Warsaw Pact state. Documentation relating to Yugoslavia deals with the continuing U.S. policy of providing support to this Communist state in order to ensure its independence from Soviet control. The Eastern Mediterranean was an area of growing tension and instability during the early 1960s. The Cyprus portion of the volume outlines U.S. efforts to promote intercommunal harmony and to establish a firm working relationship with the government of the newly independent Cypriot Republic. Documentation on Greece and Turkey deals with U.S. efforts to provide military and economic assistance to these two states and ensure their domestic political stability. This volume also provides coverage of U.S. relations with two important neutral nations bordering on the Soviet Bloc. Documentation on Austria deals primarily with U.S.-Austrian discussions regarding improvements in Austrian defense capabilities. Documentation on Finland outlines the U.S. response to the Finno-Soviet crisis of November 1961 and subsequent U.S. efforts to bolster Finnish security and independence, including the question of arms supply. Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, Volume XVI President Kennedy was personally involved in formulation of policy toward Yugoslavia, Cyprus, Finland, and Poland, and he also took an active role in the details of policymaking regarding the Soviet Bloc. The editors have sought to document all of this involvement. Secretary of State Dean Rusk outlined major policy proposals for the President and made significant decisions within the lines of established policy for all the states of Eastern Europe and the Eastern Mediterranean. He conducted intensive personal diplomacy with the leaders of states such as Poland, Turkey, and Greece. The Department of State and the Embassies in Athens, Ankara, Nicosia, Helsinki, Warsaw, Belgrade, Vienna, Budapest, Prague, Bucharest, and Sofia played continuous and important roles in the policy process. The editors have attempted to account for all of Secretary Rusk’s involvement and to document the most important meetings, decisions, and instructions he made. The editors have also sought to present the major pieces of information and recommendations made by staff to both the President and the Secretary of State. Editorial Methodology The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Incoming telegrams from U.S. Missions are placed according to time of receipt in the Department of State or other receiving agency, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted. Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume. Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. The amount of material omitted from this print volume and from the microfiche supplement because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated. All ellipses and brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes. The unnumbered first footnote to each document indicates the document’s source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. The source footnote also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates if the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and this information has been included in the source footnote. Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts have been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record. Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under Title IV of the Department of State’s Basic Authorities Act, amended on October 28, 1991, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and assists with any access and/or clearance problems that arise. Time constraints prevent the Advisory Committee from reviewing all volumes in the series. This volume has not been reviewed by the Advisory Committee. Declassification Review The declassification review of this volume in 1992 and 1993 resulted in the decision to withhold one-half of one percent of the documents originally selected. The remaining documentation provides a full account of the main lines of U.S. policy toward the states of Eastern Europe, Cyprus, Greece, Turkey, Finland, and Austria during the 1961–1963 period. The Division of Historical Documents Review of the Office of Freedom of Information, Privacy, and Classification Review, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information and applicable laws. Under Executive Order 12356, information that concerns one or more of the following categories, and the disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security, requires classification: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations; 2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security; 3) foreign government information; 4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods; 5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States; 6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security; 7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities; 8) cryptology; or 9) a confidential source. The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security and law. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments. Acknowledgements The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the John F. Kennedy Library, in particular Suzanne Forbes; the National Archives and Records Administration; and other specialized repositories who assisted in the collection of documents for this volume. James E. Miller collected, selected, and edited all the material presented in this volume under the supervision of Charles S. Sampson, Chief, General and European Division. General Editor Glenn W. LaFantasie supervised the final steps in the editorial and publication process. Rita M. Baker and Vicki E. Futscher did the copy and technical editing and Barbara-Ann Bacon of the Publishing Services Division (Natalie H. Lee, Chief) oversaw the production of the volume. Juniee Oneida prepared the index. William Z. SlanyThe HistorianBureau of Public Affairs February 1994 Contents Preface List of Source List of Abbreviations List of Persons Eastern Europe Region Poland Yugoslavia Austria Finland Cyprus Greece Turkey Index List of Sources Unpublished Sources Department of State Indexed Central Files. Up to January 1963, the Department of State used a central indexed decimal file system for a large part of its records. For this volume the most important files were: 396.1–BE: Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States 411.4841: Polish economic affairs 611.48: U.S.-Polish relations 611.49: U.S.-Eastern European relations 611.60E: U.S.-Finnish relations 611.68: U.S.-Yugoslav relations 611.69: U.S.-Eastern European relations 611.80A: U.S.-Cyprus relations 660E.61: Finnish-Soviet relations 748.5–MSP: Polish economic affairs 760E.5612: Finnish defense issues 763.56: Austrian defense issues 764.00: Eastern European political affairs 768.11: political files related to the President for Yugoslavia 780A.00: Cyprus political affairs 781.5–MSP: Greek defense issues 782.00: Turkish political affairs 782.56: Turkish defense issues 881.10: Greek political affairs Subject-Numeric Central Files. In February 1963, the Department of State changed to a system that divided records into broad categories within which there were subject and country breakdowns. The most important of these files for this volume were: POL US-Bul: U.S.-Bulgarian relations POL 15–5 Cyp: Cyprus POL 18 Cyp: Cyprus Lot Files. Documents from the central files have been supplemented by lot files of the Department, which are decentralized files created by operating areas. A list of the lot files used in or consulted for this volume follows: Bulgarian/Romanian Desk Files: Lot 67 D 313 Economic files arranged by subject for the years 1962–1965. Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366 Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State and Under Secretary of State for the year 1961. Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533 Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State and Under Secretary of State for the year 1962. Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110 Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State and Under Secretary of State for the years 1961–1964. This lot includes records on the President’s trips to Europe in 1961 and 1963. Czechoslovak Desk Files: Lot 65 D 305 Political files arranged by subject for the years 1958–1962. Czechoslovak Desk Files: Lot 67 D 298 Political files arranged by subject for the years 1961–1962. EE Files: Lot 65 D 121 Subject and chronological files of the Office of Eastern European Affairs for the years 1942–1963, primarily dealing with Yugoslavia. Hungarian Desk Files: Lot 71 D 313 Political files arranged by subject for the years 1949–1963. Polish Desk Files: Lot 67 D 19 Economic and political files arranged by subject for the year 1962. Polish Desk Files: Lot 68 D 3 Economic and political files arranged by subject for the year 1963. PPS Files: Lot 67 D 548 Subject files, country files, chronological files, documents drafts, and related correspondence of the Policy Planning Staff for the years 1957–1961. PPS Files: Lot 69 D 121 Subject files, country files, chronological files, documents drafts, and related correspondence of the Policy Planning Staff for the year 1962. Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204 Exchanges of correspondence between the President and heads of foreign governments and between the Secretary of State and foreign ministers for the years 1953–1964. Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 476 Correspondence of Presidents Kennedy and Johnson with various heads of state, 1961–1966. Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149 Memoranda of the President’s conversations for the years 1961–1964. Romanian Desk Files: Lot 72 D 406 Economic and political files arranged by subject for the years 1963–1969. Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330 Memoranda of the Secretary’s and Under Secretary of State’s conversations for the years 1961–1964 S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265 Master set of papers pertaining to National Security Council meetings, including policy papers, position papers, and administrative documents, but not the minutes of the meetings themselves, for the years 1961–1966 S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316 Master files of National Security Action Memoranda (NSAMs), 1961–1968. Yugoslav Desk Files: Lot 67 D 238 Economic files arranged by subject for the years 1950–1965. Yugoslav Desk Files: Lot 66 D 212 Economic files arranged by subject for the years 1952–1963. John F. Kennedy Library, Boston Massachusetts National Security Files President’s Appointment Books President’s Office Files Published Sources Kennan, George F. Memoirs, 1950–1963. Volume II. Boston, 1972. U.S. Department of State. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, 1962, 1963. Washington. ———. Department of State Bulletin, 1961, 1962, 1963. Washington. U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, 1962, 1963. Washington. List of Abbreviations AF, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State AID, Agency for International Development B, Office of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs BNA, Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State B/P, balance of payments CAP, Common Agricultural Policy CARE, Cooperative for American Relief Everywhere CCC, Commodity Credit Corporation CENTO, Central Treaty Organization CJCS, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff CNU, Committee of National Salvation CRO, Commonwealth Relations Office CSSR, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic CU, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, Department of State DAG, Development Assistance Group DefSec, Secretary of Defense Deptel, Department of State telegram Depcirtel, Department of State circular telegram DLF, Development Loan Fund DOD, Department of Defense DOD/ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs EDA, Union of the Democratic Left EEC, European Economic Community EFTA, European Free Trade Area EK, Center Union Party Embtel, Embassy telegram ERE, National Radical Union EUR/EE, Office of Eastern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State EUR/RA, Office of European Regional Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State EUR/WE, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State ExImBank, Export-Import Bank FedRep, Federal Republic of Germany FN, International Finance Division, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Depratment of State FonMin, Foreign Minister FonOff, Foreign Office FRG, Federal Republic of Germany FYI, for your information G, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs GA, General Assembly GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade GNA, Grand National Assembly; Greek National Army GNP, gross national product GOA, Government of Austria GOB, Government of Bulgaria GOC, Government of Cyprus; Government of Czechoslovakia GOF, Government of Finland GOG, Government of Greece GOH, Government of Hungary GOP, Government of Poland GOR, Government of Romania GOT, Government of Turkey GOY, Government of Yugoslavia G/PM, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs GTI, Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State HMG, Her Majesty’s Government ICA, International Cooperation Administration IMF, International Monetary Fund INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State IO, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State IRBM, intermediate-range ballistic missile JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff JUSMMAT, Joint United States Military Mission for Aid to Turkey L, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State LS, Office of Language Services, Bureau of Operations, Department of State M, Office of the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs MAP, Military Assistance Program MC, memorandum of conversation MFN, most favored nation MLF, multilateral force MOD, Ministry of Defense MRBM, medium-range ballistic missile MSP, Mutual Security Program NAC, North Atlantic Council NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State Niact, night action, communications indicator requiring attention by the recipient at any hour of the day or night Noforn, no foreign dissemination NSC, National Security Council OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OEEC, Organization for European Economic Cooperation OSD, Rep, Permanent Representative PM, Prime Minister POLAD, political adviser Polto, series indicator for telegrams from the U.S. Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations PriMin, Prime Minister R&D, research and development RA, Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State S, Office of the Secretary of State SACEUR, Supreme Allied Commander, Europe SC, Security Council SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State or his delegation to the Department of State SHAPE, Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers, Europe SOV, Office of Soviet Union Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State S/P, Policy Planning Council, Department of State S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State SYG, Secretary-General TA, technical assistance TGS, Turkish General Staff Topol, series indicator for telegrams to the U.S. Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations Tosec, series indicator for telegrams to the Secretary of State or his delegation from the Department of State U, Office of the Under Secretary of State UK, United Kingdom UKG, United Kingdom Government UNGA, United Nations General Assembly USA, United States Army USG, United States Government USIA, United States Information Agency USIS, United States Information Service USN, United States Navy USOM, United States Operations Memorandum USRO, United States Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations VOA, Voice of America VP, Vice President WE, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State List of Persons Acheson, Dean, former Secretary of State and Chairman of the President’s Advisory Committee on NATO Adenauer, Konrad, Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany until October 1963 Alican, Ekren, Turkish Deputy Prime Minister from October 1961 Anderson, Eugenie, Ambassador to Bulgaria from August 1962 Averoff-Tossizza, Evangelos, Greek Foreign Minister Balaceanu, Petre, Romanian Minister in the United States from 1961 Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State from December 1961 Bashev, Khristov, Bulgarian Foreign Minister Beam, Jacob D., Ambassador to Poland until December 1961 Blumenthal, W. Michael, Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations from December 1962 Bowles, Chester B., Under Secretary of State until December 1961 Bracken, Kay, Director, Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State, from November 1962 Brentano, Heinrich von, Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany until October 1961 Brezhnev, Leonid I., Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union Briggs, Ellis O., Ambassador to Greece until February 1962 Bundy, McGeorge, President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Burdett, William C., Director of the Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until September 1962; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State of European Affairs Cabot, John, Ambassador to Poland from March 1962 Caccia, Sir Harold, British Ambassador to the United States until October 1961 Canellopoulos, Panayotis, Greek Deputy Prime Minister until June 1963 Caramanlis. See Karamanlis Clerides, Glaufkos, Greek Cypriot attorney and intermediary in Cypriot intercommunal talks Cleveland, Harland, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Coombs, Philip H., Assistant Secretary of State for Educational and Cultural Affairs Couve de Murville, Maurice, French Foreign Minister Cyrankicwicz, Joseph, Polish Prime Minister David, Vaclav, Czechoslovak Foreign Minister Davis, Richard, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs de Gaulle, Charles, President of France Denktash, Rauf, President of the Turkish-Cypriot Communal Chamber Djilas, Milovan, Yugoslav political dissident Dillon, C. Douglas, Secretary of the Treasury Drozniak, Edward, Polish Ambassador to the United States Duda, Karel, Czechoslovak Ambassador to the United States Duke, Angier Biddle, Chief of Protocol, Department of State Eisenhower, Dwight D., President of the United States until January 20, 1961 Erkin, Feridun, Turkish Foreign Minister from March 1963 Fanfani, Amintore, Italian Prime Minister until April 1963 Finletter, Thomas K., Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Council from March 1961 Frederika, Queen of Greece Freeman, Orville L., Secretary of Agriculture Georgadjis, Polykarpos, Cypriot Minister of the Interior Gomulka, Wladyslaw, First Secretary of the Polish Communist Party Gorbach, Alfons, Austrian Prime Minister Gromyko, Andrei A., Soviet Foreign Minister Gufler, Bernard, Ambassador to Finland until April 1963 Gursel, Cemal, Chairman of the Committee of National Salvation until October 1961; thereafter President of Turkey Hajek, Jiri, Czechoslovak Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Hallstein, Walter, President of the Commission of the European Community Hare, Raymond A., Ambassador to Turkey from March 1961 Harriman, W. Averell, Ambassador at Large, February–November 1961; Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, November 1961–March 1963; Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from April 1963 Herter, Christian A., Special Representative for Trade Negotiations from December 1962 Home, Alexander Frederick Douglas, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs until October 1963; thereafter Prime Minister Horsey, Outerbridge, II, Ambassador to Czechoslovakia from November 1962 Inonu, Ismet, Turkish Prime Minister from October 1961 Jernegan, John, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs from September 1963 Johnson, Lyndon B., Vice President of the United States, January 21, 1961–November 22, 1963; thereafter President Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from May 1961 Kardamakis, Vassilios, Chief of Staff of the Greek Army Karamanlis, Constantine, Greek Prime Minister to June 1963 Kardelj, Edvard, Yugoslav Vice President Karjalainen, Ahti, Finnish Foreign Minister until April 1962; thereafter Prime Minister Katz, Julius, Office of Eastern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State Kekkonen, Urho, President of Finland Kennan, George F., Ambassador to Yugoslavia, May 1961–July 1963 Kennedy, John F., President of the United States, January 20, 1961–November 22, 1963 Khrushchev, Nikita S., First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union Kitchen, Jeffrey C., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Political Military Affairs from May 1961 Klaus, Josef, Austrian Finance Minister Knight, William E., II, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State Kohler, Foy D., Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until August 1962; thereafter Ambassador to the Soviet Union Kreisky, Bruno, Austrian Foreign Minister Kutchuk, Fazil, Cypriot Vice President Kyprianou, Spyros, Cypriot Foreign Minister Labouisse, Henry, Ambassador to Greece from March 1962 Liatis, Alexis, Greek Ambassador to the United States until March 1962 Lychowski, Tadeusz, Economics Minister in the Polish Embassy in the United States Makarios III, Archbishop, President of Cyprus Manescu, Corneliu, Romanian Foreign Minister Matsas, Alexander, Greek Ambassador to the United States from April 1962 Matthews, H. Freeman, Ambassador to Austria until May 1962 McCone, John, Director of Central Intelligence from November 1961 McGhee, George C., Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs December 1961–April 1963; thereafter Ambassador to Germany McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense Meloy, Francis E., Jr., Director of the Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, from June 1962 Menderes, Adnan, former Turkish Prime Minister Menemencioglu, Turgut, Turkish Ambassador to the United States Merikoski, Veli, Finnish Foreign Minister from April 1962 Micunovic, Veljko, Yugoslav Ambassador to the United States from October 1962 Mod, Peter, Hungarian First Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Nikezic, Marko, Yugoslav Ambassador to the United States until August 1962 Nitze, Paul H., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Secuity Affairs Norstad, Lieutenant General Lauris, Supreme Allied Commander, Europe, until December 1962 Papaligouras, Panayiotis, Greek Minister of Economic Coordination Papandreou, George, Greek Prime Minister from November 1963 Paul I, King of Greece Pipinellis, Panayiotis, Greek Prime Minister, June–September 1963 Pitterman, Bruno, Austrian Vice Chancellor Platzer, Wilfried, Austrian Ambassador to the United States Popov, Lyubomin, Bulgarian Minister to the United States Popovic, Koca, Yugoslav Foreign Minister Radvany, Janos, Hungarian Charge in the United States from February 1962 Rankin, Carl, Ambassador to Yugoslavia until April 1961 Ravndal, Christian, Ambassador to Czechoslovakia until May 1961 Rapacki, Adam, Polish Foreign Minister Reinhardt, G. Frederick, Ambassador to Italy from April 1961 Rossides, Zenon, Cypriot Ambassador to the United States and to the United Nations Rostow, Walt W., Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council from November 1961 Rowan, Carl T., Ambassador to Finland from May 1963 Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State Sarper, Selim, Turkish Foreign Minister until March 1963 Schleinzer, Karl, Austrian Minister of Defense Seppala, Richard, Finnish Ambassador to the United States Spasowski, Romuald, Polish Ambassador the the United States until June 1961 Stevenson, Adlai E., III, Representative to the United Nations Stikker, Dirk, NATO Secretary General from April 1961 Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., Political Adviser to the Supreme Allied Commander, Europe, April 1961–July 1963 Stone, Galen L., Deputy Director, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State Sulser, Jack, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State Sunay, General Cedvet, Turkish Army Chief of Staff Talbot, Phillips, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Thompson, Llewelyn E., Ambassador to the Soviet Union until July 1962; thereafter Ambassador at Large Thurston, Raymond L., Deputy Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Council Tito, Josef, President of Yugoslavia Todorovic, Mijalko, Yugoslav Vice President Trampczynski, Witold, Polish Minister of Foreign Trade Turkes, Colonel Alparslan, leader of extreme rightist movement in the Turkish officer corps Tyler, William R., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until August 1962; thereafter Assistant Secretary Vagnozzi, Monsignor Egidio, Aposotolic Delegate to the United States Vedeler, Harold, Director of the Office of Eastern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State Venizelos, Sophocles, Greek Minister of Foreign Affairs from November 1963 Voutov, Peter, Bulgarian Minister in the United States Wailes, Edward T., Ambassador to Czechoslovakia, July 1961–October 1962 Waldheim, Kurt, Director of Western Political Affairs, Austrian Foreign Ministry Wilkins, Fraser, Ambassador to Cyprus Winiewicz, Jozef, Polish Deputy Foreign Minister Zhivkov, Todor, Bulgarian Prime Minister from November 1962 Zolotas, Xenophon, Governor, Central Bank of Greece Eastern Europe; Cyprus; Greece; Turkey Eastern Europe Region 1. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Country Series, Hungary. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information. Washington, February 3, 1961. SUBJECT Letter from Cardinal Mindszenty The enclosed letter of January 12, 1961,Not printed. addressed to you by Cardinal Joseph Mindszenty has been forwarded to the Department by the Charge d’Affaires of our Legation in Budapest. In his letter the Cardinal expresses his gratitude for the refuge which the United States has afforded him within the Legation, appeals to you to decide whether to continue or to terminate that refuge, and sets forth his personal views on a number of political matters affecting Hungary. The situation of the Cardinal, who has remained in refuge within the premises of the Legation since November 4, 1956, is extremely delicate and constitutes an unusual exception to the established policy of the United States not to grant asylum in our diplomatic missions. In its treatment of this special situation, the Department has considered it very important to avoid any action which, by imparting a political rather than a purely humanitarian character to the refuge we have afforded the Cardinal, might cause embarrassment to the United States Government, prejudice the continued safe refuge of the Cardinal, and make the Legation’s position more difficult. In the light of these considerations, the Department has adhered firmly to the policy that it will not permit the Cardinal to use the Legation as a base for either political or ecclesiastical activities, to give interviews, or to engage in correspondence with persons outside the United States Government. The only exception to this policy is that the Department is prepared to transmit brief oral or unsealed written communications between the Cardinal and the Vatican which are not of a political or ecclesiastical nature but relate rather to the Cardinal’s position of refuge in the Legation or to his personal spiritual problems and state of mind with reference to his situation of refuge. Our policy, as stated above, has been made clear to both the Vatican and the Cardinal. We are convinced that continued adherence to this policy is in the best interests not only of the United States but also of the Cardinal himself. Our established procedure for acknowledging the occasional communications which the Cardinal has addressed to the President has been for the Department to instruct the Charge d’Affaires merely to inform the Cardinal orally that his message has been received in the White House. In a few instances, where the contents warranted, a variation of this procedure has been to instruct the Charge d’Affaires to inform the Cardinal that his message has been received by the President (or in the White House) and to add a word of appreciation or other brief reassurance. This procedure has served the judicious purpose of avoiding any direct and personal involvement of the President in correspondence with the Cardinal and, thus, of precluding embarrassments that might eventually arise from substantive written replies to the Cardinal’s comments on sensitive political matters. This Government’s position regarding the duration of Cardinal Mindszenty’s present refuge has been that it will continue to afford him refuge within the premises of the Legation so long as consideration for his personal safety and freedom requires such an arrangement. The Cardinal has been informed of this position on several occasions. In October 1958, at the Vatican’s express request and with the Cardinal’s reluctant acquiescence, the United States quietly made a formal request to the Hungarian Government through the American Legation that Cardinal Mindszenty be permitted to leave Hungary under assurances of safe conduct and proceed to Rome to participate in the election of the new Pope. This request was flatly rejected. It is recommended, in accordance with the policy and procedure outlined above, that you authorize the Department to instruct our Charge d’Affaires at Budapest to inform the Cardinal orally that (1) you have received with appreciation his letter of January 12; (2) you understand fully his situation; and (3) you wish to reaffirm previous assurances that the hospitality of the American Legation in Budapest remains available to him and that this Government will continue to afford him refuge in the Legation so long as consideration for his personal safety and freedom requires such an arrangement. If you approve the above recommendation, appropriate instructions will be sent to our Charge d’Affaires. Dean RuskPrinted from a copy that bears this stamped signature. 2. Telegram From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.49/4–461. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Prague, April 4, 1961, 2 p.m. 325. Camsky, subject Dean’s March 31 letter to Tims,Not found. is fourth case past six months of CSSR secret police whittling away veteran local employees, indicating systematic pattern. Heretofore we have laboriously absorbed loss using American ceiling complement. This cannot be done in case of language instructor; good teacher essential to long-range aims of Embassy. Moreover, next logical targets salami tactics are library assistants and publications procurement clerk who have access local circles now impossible for Americans. Replacement theoretically possible but loss present personnel would seriously impair efficiency and morale of Embassy, increase risk planned incident. Furthermore, if Camsky case should actually come off as described, receiving large-scale publicity treatment, adverse effect on development relations and on implementation our own aims in CSSR might be considerable; this is probably conjecture of instigators though we do not know how highly they are placed or how their actions are reconcilable with such actions Foreign Ministry as proposal cultural exchange. I feel strongly we must make clear to governing CSSR personalities that harassment our employees can also have adverse effect on CSSR national interests rather than having no adverse effect whatever as heretofore. US action now might protect remaining local employees, forestall further development Camsky case. Believe therefore we should make demarche based Kadainkova case, which is only overtone, making it stand for situation all local employees. Believe also essential that action be taken rapidly if at all before police make irrevocable move Camsky gambit; deadline may come tomorrow. Therefore recommend Department either authorize me see Hajek or that Department will call in Ruzek. After general exchange on status mutual relations, progress economic negotiations, et cetera (it preferable in interests of locals that employee issue not be sole subject of discussion) would mention Kadainkova note of March 28 (text, pouched Somerlatte April 1, merely summarizes my oral interventions, asks final favorable response), express hope for positive reply and then state that we did not believe that US Government would desire take final steps toward conclusion economic agreement, lifting personnel ceiling or reopening of Consulates, until clear assurances received that operations Embassy Prague will not be impeded through difficulties with local employees who have infringed no CSSR law and whose services satisfactory to us. We must reserve right to insist that law-abiding employees of Embassy should not be harassed or interfered with by Czech authorities in any way because of Embassy employment; we consider Mrs. Kadainkora’s case to stand for all local employees. If further details asked for would remark that participants aware facts of life in CSSR society and for that reason do not propose go further than state our problems in Prague not figments of imagination. Because it overt, possibility of using Kadainkova case in combination with Czech interest in economic agreements and increase of personnel presents what may be our last handhold to limit police operations and get some understanding on this point; if not used field will continue open. With present circumscribed access for Americans and unimpeded police operations against both American and local Embassy personnel, an economic agreement, lifting of personnel ceiling and opening of Consulates would be of dubious value to US.In telegram 277 to Prague, April 5, the Department of State instructed the Embassy to avoid linking economic issues with harassment of U.S. employees and instructed the Ambassador to stress the deleterious effects of harassment on the normalization of U.S.-Czech relations. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.49/4–461) In telegram 333 from Prague, April 7, Ravndal reported he had made a demarche to the Foreign Office as instructed that afternoon and that Vice Foreign Minister Hajek “got the point.” (Ibid., 611.49/4–761) Ravndal 3. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.69/4–1761. Confidential. Drafted by Spear and approved in S on May 3. Washington, April 17, 1961. SUBJECT Bulgarian Minister’s Courtesy Call on the Secretary PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Dr. Peter G. Voutov, Bulgarian Minister EE—Mr. Moncrieff J. Spear After exchanging greetings, Dr. Voutov said that he wished to review US-Bulgarian relations briefly. He then cited a number of Bulgarian initiatives as evidence of their good will in improving relations; these included the negotiations for the resumption of relations,The United States and Bulgaria agreed to a resumption of diplomatic relations on March 24, 1959. The United States had severed relations in February 1950. For text of the Department of State statement on the resumption of relations, see Department of State Bulletin, December 14, 1959, p. 866. the financial claims discussions and proposals for a cultural agreement. In addition, Dr. Voutov reported that the Bulgarians had established a trade mission here and were seeking to expand commercial relations. He also suggested that we should review our consular convention (sic) and up-date it. Although the Bulgarians had undertaken all these steps, unfortunately relations had not all gone smoothly. Claims Negotiations. Dr. Voutov then related his efforts to resolve the impasse in the financial claims negotiations in discussions with Mr. Kohler and reviewed the amounts involved in the claims discussions. He said that he had advised his Government of the $3.1 million value of the vested Bulgarian assets as well as testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations CommitteeApparently the reference is to 1959 hearings to amend the International Claims Settlement Act of 1949. For text of these hearings, see U.S. Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, International Claims Settlement Act. Hearings. May 29, 1959, Washington, 1959. indicating that the value of these assets should cover US claims against Bulgaria. Because of this, Dr. Voutov commented, he had been surprised when the negotiations were suspended and his Government had complained that it had been given a false impression. US-Bulgarian Trade. Dr. Voutov next observed that until Bulgaria was granted most-favored-nation (MFN) status there could be no real expansion of US-Bulgarian trade. A “platonic” declaration on trade expansion was of no use. He handed the Secretary an aide-memoire (a copy of which he had left with the Secretary of Commerce)Not found with the source text. spelling out the difference which MFN status would make to Bulgarian trade and added that while US-Bulgarian trade had historically been on the order of $1 million annually in each direction, if Bulgaria were granted MFN treatment it could buy goods worth $10 million annually, while US imports from Bulgaria would total $6–7 million. Dr. Voutov also mentioned that the Bulgarians would be requesting permission to open a trade office in New York. Cultural Relations. The Minister then listed the various US performing artists who had appeared in Bulgaria during the last year and said that the Bulgarians were ready to start discussions for the conclusion of an agreement on cultural exchanges. Irritants in US-Bulgarian Relations. Noting that he was rather discouraged by certain recent developments, Dr. Voutov referred to an article on the training of guerrilla forces (US News and World Report, March 13, 1961 with a photo of a class at Ft. Bragg studying Bulgarian military phrases). He commented that such schools did not help US-Bulgarian relations. The Bulgarians had no plans to overthrow the US Government and the US “shouldn’t do so either.” He also referred to press articles about a report on similar activities by General Trudeau. Dr. Voutov said that he had been instructed by his Government to raise this matter and added that Sofia had asked whether there was any connection between the appearance of these articles and the suspension of the financial claims negotiations. The Minister also made reference to statements in the Greek press denying that the development of US-Bulgarian relations prejudiced US-Greek relations. Status of Missions. Finally, Dr. Voutov noted that the elevation of the US and Bulgarian missions to the status of embassies had been foreseen in the agreement on the resumption of relations. Although he had subsequently raised this question on a number of occasions, he had had no answer and, frankly, he felt that legations were an anachronism. The Secretary’s Reply. The Secretary welcomed a chance to meet Dr. Voutov and hoped that they would have an opportunity for another talk when they were not so rushed. He continued that in our relations it was necessary to leave aside points of difference and try to discover common interests. This didn’t mean we should hide the fact that there were far-reaching differences in our positions, as for example in our views of the press, its role and how it should be handled. We shouldn’t minimize these differences. We took a very serious view of the December 1960 Moscow communique of the Communist Parties.For text, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, December 28, 1960, pp. 3–9, and January 4, 1961, pp. 3–8. However, assuming these points of difference, we must nevertheless try to find points for improvement of our relations. The trend of history was too uncertain, despite the Communists’ philosophy, for us not to seek such improvement by trying to remove unnecessary irritants in our relations. Turning to the specific points which Dr. Voutov had raised, the Secretary noted that expansion of US-Bulgarian trade involved a number of legislative problems for us, as well as the broader differences between state and private trading. Because of his background as head of the Rockefeller Foundation, the Secretary had a keen interest in international exchanges, and we were anxious to explore the possibilities in this field. We were prepared to start discussions on cultural exchanges and also hoped for a resumption of the financial negotiations. With regard to the status of our missions, the Secretary said that we were seriously considering this matter and that he was inclined to agree that legations were an anachronism. On the other hand, this was not just a bilateral problem for us. The Secretary concluded by saying that he would review with his colleagues the points which Dr. Voutov had raised and hoped that they would have an opportunity for another talk. 4. Telegram From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.49/7–2661. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Prague, July 26, 1961, 5 p.m. 39. Paid courtesy call on Foreign Minister this morning accompanied by DCM.President Kennedy had appointed Edward T. Wailes as Ambassador on July 14. During 50-minute conversation following subjects touched on appear of sufficient interest to report. 1. General relations—David said these not good. Number problems existed but he believed these could be resolved on basis recognition status quo, mutual respect for sovereignty, coexistence leading to peace on planet. Possible I would not like social system here, but realities should be recognized. He did not interestingly enough mention Berlin, disarmament or any other multilateral issue. 2. Economic negotiations—David agreed we were very close to agreement, but then remarked that both countries had lived without agreement since negotiations began in 1955, implying matter not of basic importance. To my comment agreement would be in interest both countries, he remarked he hoped remaining gap in principles of settlement could be closed shortly in order that delegations two countries could work out final language. 3. Trade—David said Czechoslovakia–US trade showed a rising tendency, but was still not satisfactory either in quantity or composition. He referred to US tariffs and controls, which he said were obstacles to improvement trade relations. He agreed Czechoslovakia exports to US twice or more than imports from US but insisted US controls responsible for keeping level low. He did not however specifically mention MFN or strategic controls. 4. Cultural exchanges—I mentioned this subject as one where progress appeared possible and referred to our proposal for October visit Santa Fe opera. David did not react to Santa Fe suggestion, but commented scientific exchanges not going too badly. Dukla Soccer Team was example of good exchange in sports, and indicated other possibilities could be developed in cultural exchanges. 5. Trade fair—He then cited trade fairs as useful field for development, and remarked he considered US country of highly developed technology. He emphasized industrial character of Brno Fair, describing it as world showplace advanced engineering. Implication was clear he hoped US would participate with sophisticated engineering items. 6. Czechoslovakian Chancery Washington—David asked how I found Chancery here in Prague and when I replied that both Chancery and residence were fine buildings, he remarked construction Czecho-slovakian Chancery Washington beset by many difficulties. I referred briefly to zoning regulations, Fine Arts Commission and said Department had approached local authorities in District behalf Czecho-slovakian Embassy. It was my impression major problems had been worked out. In addition above, I made usual statement about desire improve relations and find solution common problems in spirit mutual helpfulness. David said he and his Ministry would do all they could toward that end and would be of help when necessary with other organs of government. His manner throughout interview was cool and reserved except at end when he described fishing and hunting possibilities here. I am told this is his usual manner with US officials here, and geniality reserved for representatives Communist and uncommitted countries. As Dillon and I see it most interesting conclusions to be drawn from talk are these: (1) Czechoslovakians do not expect any really significant changes in relations with US. (2) They do however have certain policy aims of which most important probably are (A) US recognition that regime is legitimate and here to stay. This would imply in their minds US abandonment propaganda directed at people here, although naturally under their concept coexistence they would feel free wage ideological war against US wherever possible; (B) increased exports to US to supply badly needed free currency; (C) greater access to US science and technology for use in their own industries, both to make them most competitive and to save research and development costs. At conclusion of talk David informed me credentials ceremony would take place July 28, 10 a.m.Wailes reported on this meeting in telegram 42 from Prague, July 28. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.49/7–2861) Ravndal left post on May 6. Wailes 5. Airgram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CzechoslovakiaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.49/10–1461. Confidential. Drafted by Segall, cleared by Tims and Moot, and approved by Vedeler. Washington, October 27, 1961, 8:33 p.m. A–15. Ref: Prague’s A–85 of October 14, 1961.Not printed. (Ibid.) Department agrees that Embassy should make an oral protest if the Czechs reinstitute the type of aggressive surveillance and harassment described in the airgram under reference. The Department should be notified as soon as possible after a new period of intensified harassment is instituted by the Czechs, and this notification should include the Embassy’s judgment of the probable causes behind the action, a brief survey of the methods used, and the Embassy’s opinion whether a protest should be made. The Department would then be in a position to judge the value of lodging a similar protest with the Czech Embassy. The Department does not believe it would be either useful or practicable to threaten reciprocity as a means of compelling the Czechs to desist from harassment. Assuming that a future period of harassment will not go beyond the limits encountered in the past, we believe that any oral protest we make should follow the lines of the third paragraph of A–85 and the protests made by Ambassador Allison in May and August 1959 (Embtels 100 of August 24, 545 of May 7, 541 of May 6, 549 of May 11, and Deptels 81 of August 21 and 85 of August 22, 1959).In telegram 100, Allison reported on his protest against Czech harassment of U.S. Embassy employees. (Ibid., 121.49/8–2459) Telegram 545 detailed a conversation at the Czech Foreign Office on the same subject. (Ibid., 611.49/5–759) Telegram 541 outlined the contents of a letter of protest delivered to Czech authorities. (Ibid., 611.49/5–659) In telegram 549, the Embassy reported that the Czechs had ceased surveillance of U.S. personnel. (Ibid., 611.49/5–1159) In telegram 81, the Department of State informed the Embassy that it believed that the Czechs had manufactured an incident to justify harassment of U.S. officials in Prague. (Ibid., 121.49/8–1959) Telegram 85 reported on U.S. demarches with Czech officials in Washington over harassment. (Ibid., 121.49/8–2259) For future reference the Embassy is requested to forward all available details of the British and French protests referred to in A–85.No further documentation on this issue has been found. Rusk 6. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Confidential. Approved by the White House on December 20. Washington, December 12, 1961. SUBJECT Presentation of Credentials by new Rumanian Minister PARTICIPANTS The President of the United States Mr. Petre Balaceanu, Rumanian Minister Mr. Angier Biddle Duke, Chief of Protocol Mr. Richard H. Davis, Deputy Asst. Secretary, EUR The President received the new Rumanian Minister at 12:10 today for presentation of credentials. After a preliminary exchange of amenities, the President noted the economic background of the Minister and in response to a question about Rumanian exports, there ensued a brief exposition by the Minister of Rumania’s trade with the United States and Western Europe. The President remarked that we were, of course, interested in trade development but noted that when there is political harmony, trade increases. Unfortunately, existing political tensions were not particularly favorable for the growth of trade. Our controls on strategic goods affected only a small proportion of possible trade and, moreover, many goods which we would not export could be obtained elsewhere. However, as long as controls were part of the law of the land and political tensions particularly in regard to Berlin were high, prospects were not so favorable. He hoped that this would change if it were possible to get a Berlin settlement. The President asked the Minister whether the Common Market would affect Rumanian trade. The Minister replied that they were not particularly worried about this. In conclusion, the Minister promised he would devote his best efforts to improve trade with the United States and hoped thereby to contribute to better relations. 7. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CzechoslovakiaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.494/1–2962. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Katz, cleared in EE, and approved by Vedeler. Washington, February 1, 1962, 10:15 a.m. 290. Embtel 306.Telegram 306, January 29, offered the Ambassador’s views on negotiating strategy on trade and related issues. (Ibid., 611.4941/1–2962) Agree trade question of basic importance to Czechs. We have always considered proposed agreement essentially designed settle claims and other outstanding bilateral issues but have indicated that resolution these problems would contribute improved atmosphere more conducive expanded trade relations. Trade problem not so much matter bilateral US-Czech relations as reflection general international situation. Offer trade office and statement indicates our willingness take certain steps within limits imposed by general situation to improve bilateral trade relations. We willing confirm commitment re trade office and statement but are unwilling incorporate trade article in agreement as Czechs insist. Reasoning third paragraph Embtel 293Telegram 293, January 19, reported on U.S.-Czech discussions on a trade agreement. (Ibid., 611.494/1–1962) in response Czech reference 1959 draft is sound. Czechs rejected our offer which now superseded by pattern set in Rumanian and Polish agreements. We see no reason single out Czechs for special treatment, particularly since claims settlements with Rumanians and Poles more favorable than that envisaged in Czech agreement. We desire also keep Article 1 of “Principles”A statement of principles regarding the settlement of claims and other economic problems was signed in Prague by Ambassador Wailes and David on December 8, 1961. out of agreement in view Czech effort use every conceivable peg in argument for MFN. We have never considered that every article in “Principles” would be included in final agreement or that “Principles” so intended. Our argumentation keep reference to Treasury’s 655Not found. out of text of articles might be used illustrate this point. Suggest working sessions continue on other problems while issue Czech demand for inclusion reference trade office and statement in agreement left for Ambassador–Hajek discussion on side. If in your judgment other questions can be resolved (army crown account, claims, etc.) you may find advantageous opportunity mention that along with Aide-Memoire confirming commitments Article 1 of “Principles” to issue trade statement and permit establishment commercial section of Embassy in NY (trade office) we prepared adjust phrase “desiring … countries” in preamble US draft to read “desiring to resolve certain questions pertaining to mutual economic relations and to effect a settlement of outstanding financial issues between the two countries.”Ellipsis in the source text. While we would like agreement concluded nearest future fail see how we can go beyond this in attempting meet Czech position. Rusk 8. Telegram From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.494/2–262. Confidential. Prague, February 2, 1962, 6 p.m. 312. Hajek sent for me at 3:30 pm today and said he wished discuss frankly and seriously his concern re lack progress economic agreement negotiations. He said that feeling was current here among members of government that perhaps we did not want agreement or improvement in relations. Re alleged lack desire conclude agreement he referred my mentioning to him that Czech Embassy Washington been talking with press (Embassy telegram 298).Telegram 298, January 24, reads: “I spoke Hajek yesterday evening. He expressed surprise agreed Czech actions inappropriate. Indicated would wire Embassy instructions.” (Ibid., 611.494/1–2462) He checked into matter and finds Embassy was approached by press because of Olsen article New York Times and been quite noncommittal in what it told press other than negotiations had been going on for some years and involved steel mill and settlement certain claims. Hajek said that our raising this matter made him wonder whether we trying cast blame on Czech Embassy as excuse for getting out of agreement. Re doubts about our desire improve relations Hajek referred to speech by Ambassador Stevenson to Bnai Brith as published in Herald Tribune January 15 in which Ambassador reportedly showed unfriendly attitude toward Czechs along with Cuba and North Vietnam. He also mentioned very briefly speech by Ambassador Merchant in Canada which referred to Moscow’s domination over Czechs. After foregoing Hajek turned to question of inclusion in agreement of article covering trade statement and office. Said his government could not accept anything less than what we had agreed to in Principles which made commitment whereas he considered aide-memoire only meeting this point halfway at most. I gave him substance Department telegram 290Document 7. relating this particular subject and he said he frankly was not convinced by our views and would have to stand on Principles. I assured him of our good faith in wishing proceed with negotiations and pointed out that we unfortunately also had some doubts regarding their point of view in respect inclusion new language on debt claims in claims article. He said that only additions they wished to make were caused by fact we were limiting our original views as expressed in Principles and they had to meet these limitations by additional phraseology on their part. Conversation ended by Hajek stating they were in no hurry rush through agreement, that they would not be pressured into accepting changes from Principles and he hoped we could sit down next week on basis of Principles and work out something satisfactory. As it now stands, problem is that Czechs insist that agreement on trade office and statement have some status and force as economic agreement itself. Department on other hand opposes inclusion trade point in economic agreement. Hajek has however not indicated that Czechs insist on inclusion trade point in economic agreement. In interest advancing negotiations therefore suggest Department examine possibility of exchange of notes or of separate agreement signed by both sides limited to trade article and annex contained in Statement of Principles. Wailes 9. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Hungarian Desk Files: Lot 75 D 45, Refuge for Cardinal Mindszenty. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vedeler. Washington, February 13, 1962. SUBJECT Letter from Cardinal Mindszenty Regarding His Situation of Refuge PARTICIPANTS Monsignor Egidio Vagnozzi, Apostolic Delegate EE—Harold C. Vedeler WE—August Velletri Upon authorization of the Acting Secretary an informal meeting was arranged with Monsignor Egidio Vagnozzi, Apostolic Delegate, for the purpose of leaving with him a communication from Cardinal Mindszenty for transmission to the Holy See. Mr. Vedeler said that we had called to bring a copy of a letter from His Eminence Josef Cardinal Mindszenty.Not printed. The background of this communication was a statement of Gyula Kallai, Deputy Foreign Minister of the Hungarian regime, at a press conference concerning the status of Cardinal Mindszenty. The Deputy Foreign Minister had been asked at this conference on December 4 by a correspondent whether the Government of Hungary would discuss the Cardinal’s future and on what basis the problem might be settled. The reply was that the Hungarian Government was prepared to discuss the matter only in connection with any US-Hungarian negotiations on the improvement of relations between the two countries. The Cardinal had learned of this statement and had prepared a letter to Secretary Rusk in which he expressed his views concerning his situation of refuge. The Cardinal had asked that a copy of the letter be brought to the attention of the Apostolic Delegate so that his views could be made known to the Holy See. Mr. Vedeler then outlined briefly the following substance of the letter. The Cardinal had discussed three possibilities of change in his status: (1) freedom and resumption of ecclesiastical functions in Hungary; (2) release under conditions imposed by the regime which would include the taking of an oath of loyalty to the regime; and (3) departure from Hungary and resignation of his functions. All of these alternatives were excluded by the Cardinal who indicated he did not seek a change in his status under the existing circumstances. Principal reasons for his stand were the imprisonment suffered by Bishops in Hungary, by many members of the clergy and by thousands of the faithful; the deportation of Hungarians and the lot of their families; the damages to the Church caused by the regime and the interference in religious affairs in Hungary. The Cardinal also made the point that the Hungarian regime in any event had no serious intentions in his case and was only using his name as a decoy. He mentioned further that the Primate in Hungary could not be used as a counter or for barter purposes even when the end might be desirable. The letter thus gave as a whole a clear indication that the Cardinal considered the only course open to him for the present was to remain in refuge in the Legation. The Apostolic Delegate suggested that there was a fourth alternative which the Cardinal had not mentioned. This was for him to depart from Hungary to establish residence abroad without giving up his ecclesiastical functions although not exercising them in practice. The Apostolic Delegate’s belief, however, was that the best course was for the Cardinal to remain in Hungary in the existing situation since he was needed there as a source of inspiration and encouragement to the Hungarian people. In response to a question Monsignor Vagnozzi indicated that he believed the Holy See preferred this course. He said that the continuation of this situation depended to be sure on the attitude of the US toward the Cardinal’s refuge in the Legation. He recognized that this presented some problems for the US and asked about the attitude of the US concerning its willingness for the Cardinal to remain. Mr. Vedeler replied that he was authorized by the Department to say: (1) it was agreeable to the US for the Cardinal to continue his refuge in the Legation in the present circumstances; (2) the present time and situation were in our view not favorable for the US to take any initiative which would have the purpose of resolving the problem of the Cardinal’s refuge; and (3) we believed that any efforts of this nature should be deferred until developments in US-Hungarian relations would open up a prospect of success for such efforts. Mr. Vedeler then passed a copy of the attached letter from Cardinal Mindszenty to the Apostolic Delegate on a confidential basis. In accepting the communication Monsignor Vagnozzi said that he would send it to the Holy See and if there were any reply he would communicate with us. There was some discussion thereafter of the health of Cardinal Mindszenty at the present time. Mr. Vedeler said that the Cardinal was in reasonably good health in view of his age and his present circumstances. The US had arranged for visits of doctors from time to time for examination of his health and there had been no serious problem so far. If the Cardinal became ill so that he required continuing medical attention a problem would arise and we hoped that this might be avoided so long as the Cardinal remained in the Legation. With this the visit came to a conclusion and the Apostolic Delegate thanked us for coming. 10. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Garthoff, cleared by Kohler, and approved in S on March 21. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission. Rusk and Manescu were in Geneva to attend the 18-nation U.N. disarmament conference. Geneva, March 20, 1962, 3 p.m. SecDel MC/37 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary of State Mr. William C. Foster Mr. Foy D. Kohler Mr. Raymond L. Garthoff Rumania Foreign Minister Corneliu Manescu Vice Foreign Minister George Macovescu SUBJECT General Exchange of Views 1. On March 20 the Secretary met, at his invitation, with Foreign Minister Manescu and Vice Foreign Minister Macovescu at the U.S. Mission for forty-five minutes. General expressions of hope for improved relations between the US and Rumania were exchanged. At the close of session, the Secretary expressed the hope that it would be possible to proceed with the consular arrangements under discussion, to which the Foreign Minister heartily agreed, adding also the question of increased trade. 2. On disarmament, the Secretary stated the meetings to date had not been very encouraging, but that he has some hope. Manescu said he was glad to hear this, that he hoped the Conference would be fruitful. There was no discussion of regional disarmament (Manescu, in his speech that same morning, had reaffirmed Rumanian interest in a nuclear free Balkan zone), nor of any other disarmament problem. 3. In general East-West relations, Manescu mentioned as an irritant in US-Rumanian relations “Captive Nations Week” in the United States. The Secretary responded that we have no desire to interfere in any other countries’ internal institutions, including whatever the Russians want or even whatever they will tolerate, but that there were periodic congresses of communist states and communist parties proclaiming their dedication to communizing the world, and that “Captive Nations Week” was nothing in comparison. But we do care about what threats are placed on others. There are, he noted, no major problems in US–USSR bilateral relations—but we were not indifferent to the fate of others. 4. The Secretary noted that the US was not prepared to place trust in Moscow, nor did we expect Moscow to place trust in us. We favored reciprocal arrangements which would avert the necessity for having to rely on trust. The Secretary noted that we cannot start fresh each day on questions of trust, and we could not forget the past sixteen years. In 1946 the US had virtually disarmed—we had not a single combat-ready ground division or air group. We had tried to get real international control over all atomic energy, though we then had a monopoly. But we have had to rearm and quadruple our defense expenditures because of the whole series of crises which have filled the docket of the UN over these sixteen years. Moscow had made a serious tactical error; if it had not stimulated crisis after crisis, the American people would have been disarmed and isolationist in a decade. 5. The Secretary said that we don’t hold Bucharest responsible for all Bloc policies. We know there are broad differences between us not within Bucharest’s control. Manescu inquired what these differences were. The Secretary replied: Berlin and Southeast Asia, to mention two “little problems.” Manescu commented that we should not attribute to Moscow views to which they ascribe; that they (the Rumanians) also held such views on Berlin, for example, and that they were after all part of the socialist bloc. This was a fact that should be recognized after sixteen years. Also, that Rumania had twice this century suffered from Germany. 6. On Berlin, the Secretary noted that the arguments raised were circular: we should leave Berlin because the war was long over, and East Germany was a “fact.” But West Berlin and Western presence there was also a fact. Just as one cannot argue that East Berlin has been settled and only West Berlin can be discussed, so one cannot argue that East Germany is a fact and that West Berlin is not. Manescu noted the geographical status of West Berlin as an exclave in East Germany. The Secretary remarked that geographical facts should not be mistaken for political ones. 7. The Secretary emphasized: the West is in West Berlin, and has access to it, and intends to remain. It’s as simple as that. If this is fully understood, many other things will fall into place. If not, I would hate to predict the future. Manescu was visibly impressed by this statement. He noted that the talks between Ambassador Thompson and Foreign Minister Gromyko seem to have not succeeded, but they need not be the end. The Secretary agreed and stressed the importance of major adversaries remaining in contact on the points of difference between them. Manescu inquired how long we thought Western occupation troops would need to remain in Berlin. The Secretary declared that they would remain as long as necessary to prevent World War III. Manescu said a peace treaty was necessary. The Secretary stated that a treaty ending the last war was less important than any action which would threaten to precipitate a new war. There was another possible solution: an all German peace treaty. Manescu said this was a new idea; the Secretary remarked it was a very old one. The Secretary said we should not be accused of procrastination; the Soviets had proposed certain things three years ago, we had proposed others, and while we have not agreed to theirs, they likewise have not agreed to ours. Neither should be said to be stalling more than the other. Moreover, if one asks us to hurry, we must ask: hurry to what? 8. The meeting was in a friendly, if not quite relaxed, atmosphere. Foreign Minister Manescu remarked immediately after the meeting to one of the US participants, with evident sincerity, that he had found the meeting very interesting and very helpful. 11. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.49/3–2362. Confidential. Drafted by Garthoff, cleared by Kohler, and approved in S on March 23. The meeting was held at the Palais des Nations. Geneva, March 22, 1962, 10:45 a.m. SecDel MC/42 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Mr. Foy D. Kohler Mr. Raymond L. Garthoff Czechoslovakia Mr. Vaclav David, Foreign Minister Mr. Jiri Hajek, Vice Minister Interpreter SUBJECT U.S.-Czechoslovak Relations and Berlin The Czechs were cold, unyielding, and the most firm parrot of the Soviet line on Berlin and Germany of all Satellite representatives here. Disarmament was not discussed. The meeting was held on March 22 at the Palais lounge, on the initiative of the Secretary, and lasted about one hour. The Secretary hoped that we could improve our relations, which both agreed had not been very good. David suggested in a very wooden way that perhaps we could expand our cultural and technical exchanges, etc. The Secretary noted that larger issues impinge on U.S.-Czech relations, such as the Moscow–Prague relationship, the Berlin issue, and Czech-Cuban relations. On the last of these, we and other governments in the Western hemisphere were aware of Czech shipments of arms, and illicit Cuban transshipment to other countries. These issues affected our policy, and also sometimes affected public congressional debates in ways not reflecting policy. David stated that he had understood our present negotiations on a bilateral agreement did not require congressional ratification. The Secretary explained that that understanding was correct, that we were negotiating an executive agreement and he had not meant to imply that ratification by the Senate would be required. He was speaking, the Secretary said, about public policy debate which would doubtless attend publicity on such an agreement, and such debate would be affected by the prevailing political climate. On Berlin, David stated that there was no need for the issue to arise or have any influence on the U.S.-Czech relations. The Czechs had suffered from German aggression, were for liquidation of the remnants of World War II on the basis of the existence of the two German states, who were neighbors of Czechoslovakia. The Secretary noted that West Berlin and Western presence and access thereto was as much a fact as anything in Germany. The Secretary stated that the West was in West Berlin, had access to Berlin, and would leave only by its consent, which would not be given under present circumstances. David rejoined that the Soviet proposals for a Berlin settlement and for a German peace treaty were just and were supported by Czechoslovakia. The occupation regime, he stated, must be ended. On Cuba, David replied that Czechoslovakia had relations with states of various political systems, and had relations with Cuba on the basis of equality and mutual noninterference in internal affairs. (David started to make a comment on the question of arms, but changed his mind and with Hajek’s concurrence in an aside consultation David dropped the subject, so that it was not translated and did not enter the conversation.)In an informal meeting on March 16, Rusk had warned David that continued aid for Cuba’s illegal activities would seriously harm U.S.-Czechoslovak relations. (Ibid., 611.494/3–1762) The Secretary referred to the previous conversation of Mr. Kohler and Mr. Hajek on the question of current bilateral negotiations for an agreement (reported Secto 76)ed Secto 76, March 21, reported on a Kohler–Hajek luncheon meeting dealing with the Berlin crisis and bilateral issues. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2060) and asked if there were any points requiring further exchange of views. David, and then Hajek, addressed this point, insisting that the U.S. was departing from the agreed principles initialled on December 8. Hajek said that some differences were minor and could be explained as differences in interpretation, but that two were substantial. One was the question of inclusion of trade provisions in the general agreement so as to give them equal value (standing). The second point was an alleged U.S. narrowing of the scope of the agreed principles by our present definition of the claims to be covered. The Secretary said we were not deviating from the December agreed principles as we saw them. There was no conclusive agreement on the proposal for an exchange of letters on the trade provisions. On the question of claims, the Czech position was uncompromising. The Secretary proposed, and it was agreed, that the negotiators should continue to work out the agreement in full. The Secretary noted, however, that final conclusion of the agreement would depend upon the general climate at the time. The Secretary and David agreed that the agreement could be, in terms of disarmament language, a “first stage” in improvement of U.S.-Czech relations. 12. Telegram From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.494/3–3162. Confidential. Prague, March 31, 1962, 4 p.m. 400. Czech response March 29 (Embassy telegram 396)Not printed. (Ibid., 611.494/3–2962) to our March 12 presentation confirms view (Embassy telegram 336, February 14)Not printed. (Ibid., 611.494/2–1462) that it will be impossible reach agreement with Czechs unless we make concession on trade, at least to position outlined Department telegram 364.Dated March 10. (Ibid.) Also confirms my opinion that second minimum Czech requirement is claims article which follows principles of settlement using language “nationalized or affected by other Czech measures”. Geneva conversations (which connected economic agreement with Berlin, Cuban issues) indicate that US not prepared finally conclude agreement even on our own previously proffered terms. (Department will recall that on instruction (Department telegram 349)Telegram 349, March 23, outlined final U.S. requirements for conclusion of a trade agreement. (Ibid., 611.494/3–2362) Embassy had few days prior Geneva talks expressed readiness conclude agreement immediately.) Our present negotiating position thus understandably weaker, for Czechs now have no impelling grounds adjust their position for sake of gold or other benefits they would receive if agreement were to enter into effect near future. Nevertheless I would suggest one further effort be made move negotiations forward but only if Department prepared make concessions outlined above. I make this recommendation because (1) we cannot be certain that Czechs unwilling initial agreement without signing unless we do try; (2) if we make one further effort meet their position and negotiations break, onus will be more on them than at present and we will have sacrificed nothing of substance; (3) we may thus be able salvage agreed portions of agreement as starting point future negotiations; (4) increasing UK pressure applied not only in TGC but at high Foreign Ministry level may in time force us to release Czech gold independently outside of agreement, whereupon we would lose our leverage to achieve settlement. Suggest therefore I be authorized approach Czechs, advance as our final position: (1) Text of letter exchange on trade contained Department telegram 364; (2) text claims article incorporating language conforming principles settlement (March 15 draft). Under altered negotiating circumstances I cannot be overly hopeful this position will result in Czech agreement to text but for reasons stated believe it worth try. In event Department unable approve final position stated preceding paragraph or Czechs refuse accept it if advanced, believe suspension negotiations only course.In telegram 387 to Prague, April 14, the Department of State instructed the Embassy to seek an exchange of letters as a substitute for a trade article in the body of a U.S.-Czech agreement, but insisted on maintaining the U.S. position on claims. (Ibid., 611.494/4–1462) Wailes 13. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Hungarian Desk Files: Lot 75 D 45, Refuge for Cardinal Mindszenty. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vedeler. Washington, May 2, 1962. SUBJECT Situation of Cardinal Mindszenty PARTICIPANTS Monsignor Egidio Vagnozzi, Apostolic Delegate EE—Harold C. Vedeler WE—August Velletri At the request of the Apostolic Delegate the Department’s representatives called on him this morning to receive a message from the Vatican concerning the communication from Cardinal Mindszenty (a letter to Secretary Rusk which the Cardinal had requested be made known to the Apostolic Delegate), copy of which was given Monsignor Vagnozzi on February 13 for transmission to the Holy See.See Document 9. The Apostolic Delegate said that the Cardinal’s letter had been sent to Rome and a response to his (the Apostolic Delegate’s) report had now been received. Cardinal Cicognani had discussed the matter with the Pope, who agreed that in the present circumstances it is best for Cardinal Mindszenty to remain in his situation of refuge in our Legation. The Pope and Cardinal Cicognani also believed that the existing conditions were not suitable for undertaking efforts to solve the problem of the Cardinal’s refuge. They were pleased to have word (conveyed by the Department’s representatives at our previous meeting on February 13) that the Cardinal’s health was reasonably good for his situation. They expressed their appreciation for the Department’s willingness to have Cardinal Mindszenty continue his refuge in the Legation and for the care and attention given him by our Mission at Budapest. After communicating this message Monsignor Vagnozzi added that Vatican circles considered that under present conditions it was desirable for the Cardinal to remain in Hungary as the spiritual leader of the Hungarian people and that his departure from the country now might have a depressing effect on the spirit of the people. In connection with this subject Monsignor Vagnozzi referred to concern in Vatican circles about the possible visit by the Secretary General of the United Nations to Hungary in response to the invitation extended by the Hungarian regime. He mentioned a report that U Thant was going to Czechoslovakia, Poland and “another country”, possibly the Soviet Union. Mr. Vedeler said we understood that the Secretary General was planning a trip to Europe this year during which he would visit a number of countries including the Soviet Union. We did not know whether he was going to visit Hungary. As the meeting came to a close Mr. Vedeler expressed the Department’s appreciation for the message conveyed by the Apostolic Delegate and said that he would make a record of it which would be brought to the attention of the higher officers concerned in the Department. 14. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Official Use Only. Drafted by Andrews and approved in S on September 17. Washington, September 11, 1962, noon. SUBJECT Farewell Call by the Bulgarian Minister—Reference to Claims Issue PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Dr. Peter G. Voutov, Bulgarian Minister Nicholas G. Andrews, EE Dr. Voutov began by referring to his eight years of diplomatic service in Washington and in New York at the United Nations and by expressing his deep gratitude for what the Secretary and his deputies had done for him and for the Bulgarian mission. He noted that the last three years had been particularly important because a start was made toward repairing the damage in US-Bulgarian relations. Dr. Voutov said he conceived that his primary task had been to find the best way to develop relations. In looking back, he believed that, although many things still had to be done, relations had been normalized by the exchange of diplomatic missions, by the resolution of some consular problems and the initiation of cultural exchanges and trade. Bulgarians had been happy to have American singers, professors, sportsmen and tourists visit their country. While we were still at the beginning stage of our relations, this was not a bad beginning. With good will, both sides could do more in promoting an active attitude toward relations and in finding a basis for mutual understanding. Both big countries and small could contribute to better relations, each going its own way and respecting the way of others. In his fifteen years of diplomatic service, more than half had been spent in the US. This period had been a kind of school for him and he expected, in whatever his future position might be, to do his best to help his Government in the consideration of its policies towards the US. The Bulgarian Minister mentioned the recent graduation of his daughter, Svetlana, from Woodrow Wilson High School. She had just competed with 400 other Bulgarian and foreign students for one of the fifty available places in Sofia University and had come out first. Thus, at sixteen and a half years of age, she would be the youngest student in the University. In answer to a question, Dr. Voutov said that his son, who had been at Brightwood School, spoke Bulgarian badly, putting Bulgarian endings on English words. Dr. Voutov stated that he wished to mention the most important element affecting the development of relations—namely, the question of a financial settlement. He noted that negotiating delegations had met for several months before negotiations were suspended and that informal conversations had been held since that time. The amount of the claims was on the verge of agreement when the difference in the positions of the two Governments reached only $200,000. At the last moment, he said, a new figure for the value of Bulgarian assets was given because the Office of Alien Property had erred in its evaluation of Bulgarian blocked and vested assets and the US asked for $550,000 cash above the value of Bulgarian vested assets. Dr. Voutov assured the Secretary that Bulgaria wished to settle the claims issue but not at any price. He appealed to the Department and to the Secretary personally to do everything possible to settle this problem. In Bulgaria, the Government was prepared to give something above the value of vested assets but questioned what Bulgaria would receive in return. Dr. Voutov said that he knew about the most-favored-nation problem. An attempt was being made to trade in small quantities, as the Department of Commerce proposed, but even this was difficult. The Bulgarian trade mission was sitting in Washington instead of New York because the question of a trade office in New York was tied up with the claims settlement. Trade would help provide Bulgaria with foreign currency to pay off the claims. A cultural exchanges program also required foreign currency. Concluding, Dr. Voutov emphasized that both sides must make an effort to settle this problem of claims. The Secretary replied that he would review the claims problem. The Secretary said that, by way of a personal remark, he felt the Bulgarian Minister, as an individual, had tried his best, within the limited possibilities of the policies of the US and Bulgarian Governments and the larger questions in which they were involved, to improve relations between our two countries and the US appreciated this. The Secretary noted that there were no issues between the American and Bulgarian peoples. Historic ties of friendship existed between them. Furthermore, Bulgaria’s internal social system was its own affair and did not constitute an obstacle to good relations. However, there were some limitations of an overriding nature which the international scene imposed on both countries and which affected bilateral relations. These limitations necessarily placed obstacles and difficulties in the way of our relations. Nevertheless, the US would like to improve its bilateral relations with Bulgaria to the extent that these overriding international problems permit. This means that there are certain things which each side must be aware of. Dr. Voutov, he presumed, was familiar with the role of Congress in foreign affairs. We must have patience, persistence and good will in order to improve bilateral relations. The US has no hostility toward Bulgaria but the international problems in which Bulgaria is necessarily involved are of very much concern to the US. In conclusion, the Secretary told Dr. Voutov that he had made a contribution to improved relations. He hoped Dr. Voutov was leaving the US with a sense of satisfaction and expressed his personal regard and that of his colleagues for Dr. Voutov. Dr. Voutov replied he had always met with understanding in the Department. The Secretary mentioned he had been most disturbed last year over the street attacks on members of Dr. Voutov’s staff. He said he could well understand how the affair could be regarded in the Bulgarian view as something other than a coincidence. He had been distressed that these incidents had raised questions which had not been in our minds. Dr. Voutov replied that those far away (in Bulgaria) could not understand the affair or how it was possible. 15. Telegram From the Department of State to the Legation in HungarySource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2062. Secret; Priority; No Foreign; Limit Distribution. Drafted by McKisson and approved by Davis. Repeated to London. Washington, October 20, 1962, 2:22 p.m. 160. In hour-long meeting Hungarian Charge d’Affaires October 20 Davis presented on oral and confidential basis US position as outlined Deptel 150 rptd London 2178.Telegram 150, October 17, outlined U.S. views on the “progressive” steps needed to proceed to a normalization of U.S.-Hungarian relations. (Ibid., 764.00/10–1762) Radvanyi, who gave fullest attention presentation and evinced friendly attitude, said he would immediately report details his Government and hoped he would be able make early reply. Davis emphasized latter connection that if Hungarian Government should not find it convenient make official reply, our Legation in Budapest, as well as Department here, would be able judge whether or not actions were taken which would constitute reasonable basis for resolving UN problem and opening way for normalization bilateral relations. In course discussion, Radvanyi stressed efforts being made by Hungarian Government create better atmosphere and cited intention Hungarian university, on or about October 22, award honorary doctorate to Dr. Theodore Karman, eminent American physician now visiting Hungary. He said American Charge d’Affaires would be invited to ceremony as gesture good will. Department believes you should attend if invited. Memcon being pouched. Rusk 16. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.69/12–1062. Confidential. Prepared by Anderson on December 10 during a visit to Washington for consultations. A notation on the source text reads: “typed in the Department.” Sofia, November 28, 1962. SUBJECT Conversation with Prime Minister Todor Zhivkov I paid a protocol call on Prime Minister Todor Zhivkov on November 28, 1962, having requested an appointment prior to my departure for consultations in Washington. The Prime Minister received me very cordially, and our conversation was animated and extended, lasting fifty minutes. Also present were Deputy Foreign Minister Angelov, Foreign Ministry interpreter Gerasimov who did all the interpreting and Cultural Officer Bloomfield. Mr. Zhivkov began by thanking me for my visit and apologizing for his lack of diplomatic experience. He said that his background had been entirely political, and that since this is his first government postZhivkov was elected Prime Minister by the Bulgarian National Assembly on November 19. he has little knowledge of diplomacy and protocol. He added that inasmuch as my background is also mainly political we should be able to understand each other. The Prime Minister referred to his visit to the US in 1960,Zhivkov was a member of the Bulgarian Delegation to the 15th session of the U.N. General Assembly in New York September–December 1960. saying that he had enjoyed it greatly and that the State Department had been most helpful to him. He said that he had become good friends with the policemen who had protected him (of whom he had seen more than anyone else). He had been grateful for his tour of various industrial plants, cities, etc. in the US. He said he had been able to see everything he wanted. There were other preliminary niceties, while a waiter served us with Slivova and Turkish coffee. The Prime Minister told a rather indelicate story about a peasant from his home village, and I noted that the Foreign Office interpreter hesitated slightly before repeating a somewhat vulgar “peasant” remark. Bulgarian Government Shakeup After the usual toasts, I asked the Prime Minister to interpret for me the sweeping changes in the Bulgarian Government which had just occurred. Mr. Zhivkov began by saying that all these changes had been fully reported and explained in the press, and that the meaning of events was precisely that which had been publicized. (I am inclined to think that the fact that Zhivkov stressed that “all” had been published means the opposite.) He said that Prime Minister Yugov and Tsankov had been ousted because of (1) Crimes against the State. (2) Undermining Central Committee policies. (3) Hindering democratization of the Country. (4) Yugov pursuing “careerist” tendencies. Zhivkov maintained that these were the only reasons for Yugov’s ouster. I felt that he stressed this a little too much, and was overly anxious for me to believe that there were no other factors behind Yugov’s dismissal. He said that Yugov had failed to carry out the directives of the Party, and therefore he had to go, just the same as he, Zhivkov, would have to take his hat and go if he failed to carry out the Party’s orders. However, he added laughingly that he did not wish to leave the office he had just assumed and therefore he intended to carry out the Party’s directives. Mr. Zhivkov went on to say that the many other changes in the Government were necessitated not because of political factors, but because of the need to bring new, young blood into the Government and also to carry out the Party plans for more scientific and technical development. The Prime Minister noted the presence of several academicians in the new Government, and remarked also that the Party’s new plans require that experts be placed in charge. Mr. Zhivkov pointed particularly to new Foreign Minister Bashev, stating that he is well qualified with a background in ideological training and that he speaks four languages. He said that Former Foreign Minister Lukanov and also the former Minister of Transport Dimitrov, for example, were not dismissed because of any failures or wrongdoings (such as Yugov’s and Tsankov’s) but only because of poor health and overly-long tenure. He added that most of the former officials would be retained in the Government, but given lesser jobs. The Prime Minister stressed the need for Governmental reorganization, and mentioned in particular that the Foreign Office will be reorganized. Since he had emphasized Governmental plans, I asked him if this meant that the Government would assume a greater role than the Party in directing the affairs of the country. He said not at all, simply that the Government will have to carry out the policies and plans of the Party. He repeated that if he, as Prime Minister, did not carry out Party orders then he would be thrown out, the same as Yugov had been. (I believe that Mr. Zhivkov repeated this idea at least three times which makes me think that he is somewhat uneasy over the way in which he has reached the Premiership. Perhaps it is also a case of “uneasy is the head that wears the crown”.) Yesterday it was Yugov, today it is Zhivkov, and tomorrow—? Bulgarian Internal and Foreign Policy I then asked the Prime Minister what would be the principal changes one could expect in the internal and external policies of the new government. His reply as regards internal policies followed the same lines he had already mentioned, greater scientific and technical development carrying out the 20-year Plan etc. He was not specific, and did not mention agriculture. He referred briefly to the need to develop transportation and industry, but dwelt mostly on generalities about carrying out the Party’s directives and the 20-year Plan which had all been published, he said. Then Mr. Zhivkov turned to the question of foreign policy which, he said, would continue to follow the same lines of peaceful coexistence and friendship with all nations. He said: “We are even trying to improve relations with Turkey, which is an ally of the US. While the Ottoman Turkey oppressed Bulgaria for 500 years, we do not hold this against the present Turkish Government, with which we want good relations.” Although Mr. Zhivkov spoke for several minutes about Bulgaria’s continuing to adhere to “peaceful coexistence” policies, he did not mention the Soviet Union (or Yugoslavia) at this point, nor indeed throughout the entire conversation. Relations with the United States I asked the Prime Minister how the new Government’s foreign policy might affect Bulgaria’s relations with the United States. He began by replying emphatically that he wants to improve relations with the US, in particular in the economic and political spheres. As for political relations with the US, the Prime Minister said that the first problem is that Bulgaria is a small, poor nation and the US is a great, rich one. He said that Bulgaria is sensitive about being ignored or treated as if it were not important. He said that Bulgaria has felt that the US had not regarded Bulgaria with the principle of equality which even small nations deserve. He declared that in spite of our ideological differences the US had nothing to fear from Bulgaria, and that Bulgaria is not going to try to bolshevize the US. He added that neither is Bulgaria afraid of the US and it does not feel that we will be able to exert much influence on it. He said that I had been in this country several months now and must be aware of the feelings of the people. (This was apparently a veiled reference to Bulgarian-Soviet attachments, implying that the people heartily support the Soviet Union.) Zhivkov then went on to say that economic relations are the most important of all, and that up until now there has been practically no trade with the US. He said that Bulgaria’s export potentialities to the US would be, at best, “but a drop in the sea” to a big country like the US, and he could not understand why there could not be more trade between the two countries. I replied that this would be difficult to develop, but not impossible. I pointed out that the U.S. produces great surpluses of tobacco and foods, which might be the very things Bulgaria would like to sell to us. His response was almost pleading, “But it surely should be possible for Bulgaria to sell some canned foods and attar of roses oil!” The Prime Minister then introduced the subject of the financial claims negotiations which he said he understands have been an obstacle in improving relations with the U.S. He declared that this problem must be settled now, and that so far as Bulgaria is concerned this should not be difficult. No amount of money is too great to pay for the improvement of relations between the U.S. and Bulgaria, he said, whether it is $350,000 or $10 million! Even for Bulgaria, which is a poor country, no amount is too great for improving our relations. Mr. Zhivkov looked directly at Minister Angelov, laughed and said, “Perhaps I will get into trouble with the Foreign Office diplomats, but this is what I think! The next time you and I meet to discuss these questions, we should not have any Foreign Office official present, only our interpreters.” Later on he again said, “You can go to the Protocol Section for the routine things, but when you really want to discuss something serious and worthwhile and of some importance, then come directly to me. We can talk it over. If you want to talk to me as a friend on any kind of subject, then I will be only too happy to see you any time and we will be able to reach a decision.” Finally the Prime Minister mentioned that cultural relations should be improved too but that he does not view them as of the same importance as economic and political. He made a reference to Bulgaria’s inability to finance an American “ensemble” in exchange for the Kutev Ensemble’s forthcoming tour of the U.S., adding that the “principle of reciprocity” must be observed. (Apparently Mr. Zhivkov was not well informed on this question.) He clearly does not attach much importance to cultural relations. In my response to the Prime Minister’s various points I emphasized my belief that the development of relations between the U.S. and Bulgaria must proceed in all 3 areas—political, economic and cultural—which are interrelated. I referred to our country’s traditional and firm belief in the sovereignty and independence of small nations, whose rights we would continue to respect. I said that it was true that relations had not been good between Bulgaria and the U.S., but that this was due first of all to world political factors beyond his control or mine. I also pointed out that geographically Bulgaria is remote from the U.S. and that people in the U.S. simply have not known much about Bulgaria. Now the possibilities for communications are improving, I said, and we should take advantage of this period. As for the financial claims issue, I said I heartily agree with him that this problem should be settled forthwith, and that I was delighted to hear him say that it should not be difficult to conclude an agreement. I said that it had seemed most unfortunate that U.S.-Bulgarian relations had been static, simply because of a difference of a few hundred thousand dollars. I hoped that we could settle this issue at once and move on to more constructive relations. I stated my belief that cultural relations are important and have a bearing on political and economic development, since people must get to know each other better if trade and political understanding are to increase. Just before concluding our discussion, I asked the Prime Minister whether a new Bulgarian Minister to the U.S. has been chosen yet. He replied that due to the pressures of the Party Congress there had not been time to select a new candidate, but he assured me there will be a good man named soon. The Prime Minister asked me to convey his greetings to President Kennedy, for whom he expressed high regard and respect, and to inform President Kennedy of Bulgaria’s desire for better economic and political relations with the U.S. Mr. Zhivkov also asked me to visit him upon my return from the U.S. and added that he would always be at my disposal. He expressed the hope that we could settle many problems, and work together to improve relations between Bulgaria and the U.S. Personal Observations and Comments Mr. Zhivkov has an unassuming manner, at first impressing one as a quiet man. However, he is also talkative and laughs robustly and often. He may affect a Khrushchevian style in his deliberate attempt to be hearty, and at times play the buffoon. He wagged his finger at me to emphasize a point, a mannerism to which I believe Khrushchev is given. Mr. Zhivkov spoke proudly of his peasant origins and his native village, which is famous for slivova and slivova-drinking. His manners are a bit crude, although he was courteous and most cordial to me. I believe that a certain rapport was established between us. Mr. Zhivkov’s personality is quite different than Yugov’s, who impressed me as a hard, cruel, cold and ruthless man. Zhivkov, by contrast, is capable of acting in an affable, flexible manner. He does not convey an impression of great strength or intelligence. One would judge him to be a “follower” rather than a “leader”, which may be significant in view of his devotion to Khrushchev and the Soviet line. I was struck by Zhivkov’s frequent references to his own inexperience, “poor abilities” and “incapable qualities”. Either he must have deep feelings of inferiority, or else the opposite belief in his superiority which he tries to conceal by frequent self-denigrations. Whatever the case, his manner and bearings are those of a modest man. Whether Zhivkov’s emphatic assertions of his willingness to settle the claims issue now at whatever the cost represent a genuine determination on his part, I cannot be sure. He appeared to mean what he said, but only time will tell. I believe that we should soon test his intentions. I also believe that Zhivkov’s emphasis on Bulgaria’s sensitivity and desire to be treated “as an equal” and not to be ignored, offer some possibilities for the U.S. which I hope to exploit. Eugenie AndersonPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature.American Minister 17. Telegram From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.49/12–3162. Confidential; Priority. Prague, December 31, 1962, 2 p.m. 372. Made initial call of one hour on Foreign Minister David December 29, accompanied by Fleischer.President Kennedy nominated Outerbridge Horsey as Ambassador to Czechoslovakia on November 14. Ambassador Wailes left post on October 22. After brief small talk, David went into substance, describing state of relations in standard terms. He made no mention of Budway or other U.S. citizens detained in CSSR.Czech officials arrested Robert Roy Budway on charges of espionage on July 31 and held him incommunicado. The United States officially denied the spying charge and protested the denial to Budway of access to U.S. representatives. After Czechoslovakia failed to respond to a series of U.S. demarches, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs George C. McGhee called in Czech Ambassador Popov on November 26 and informed him that the United States would take a series of retaliatory measures, including suspension of economic talks, if the issue was not satisfactorily resolved within one month. (Memorandum from Davis to Bowles, December 3; Department of State, Central Files, 611.49/2–362) Budway was subsequently released. He seemed surprisingly well informed on detail and tone throughout was correct, with implications of cordiality no doubt customary on such occasions and not necessarily having real significance. He said there had been some improvement in relations during 1962, citing somewhat increased expansion cultural and scientific exchanges and, with specific respect to trade, cited approvingly U.S. participation for first time in Brno fair this past year, which could lead to constructive results. David dwelt at some length on negotiations to conclude property and financial agreement. Recalled these been underway since 1955; each of my predecessors had expressed hope upon arrival that they could be concluded and agreement signed. He referred specifically to signing of “principles” year ago; progress had been made subsequently but none recently. Stated only few matters unresolved and expressed belief that with goodwill they could be resolved. Indicated such resolution and conclusion of agreement highly desirable and “could be big help” in achieving improvement general relations. David went into considerable detail in discussing cultural exchanges past year which he said was marked by “certain improvements”. Cited specifically U.S. participation Karlovy Vary Film Festival and Czech participation San Francisco Film Festival. Without mentioning specific case, David said there had also been exchange of artists. (He indicated number of U.S. artists had performed Czechoslovakia although we know only of Loren Maazel during 1962.) David also said “agreement had been reached on post-graduate exchange.” (We will follow up to determine just what he referred to.) He also spoke of general scientific exchanges, including technical literature, and cited increased number invitations to U.S. to participate international scientific conferences in CSSR. David also stressed exchanges in field of sports, citing ice hockey and soccer, international figure skating competition, Czech parachutists to Boston and Dukla soccer team to U.S. In general, he said, there have been some positive steps but relations still are not satisfactory. He advocated efforts to “liquidate outstanding problems and then especially to expand trade”. On trade, he said that U.S. unfortunately placed hindrances in way of expansion, e.g. through tariffs. David concluded his presentation with general statement that CSSR desires good relations with all states, including USA. However, he said there must be certain prerequisites and declared that “if Ambassador wishes to contribute to achieve these, he will have our cooperation”. Only specific point he mentioned this connection was need for respect for normal precepts of intercourse between states, concept which I later reciprocated. Responding, I expressed appreciation David raised business matters immediately, instead of confining first call to mere courtesies. My government and I personally fully shared desire see improvement relations but unfortunately there was important and serious problem which we should solve in order make progress possible. Referred to large number American citizens visiting CSSR annually, stating that for most part visits proceeded normally. We welcomed them because they helped contribute to increased general understanding between our peoples. However, unfortunately there had been cases in past and some presently where American citizens had violated CSSR law, or were said have violated it, including cases where such violation most likely innocent through lack knowledge law. Cited as specific current example case of Robert Roy Budway but added several other citizens presently in prison or detained, including Raymond Hareld.A U.S. Army deserter who sought asylum in Czechoslovakia on August 2. In latter case we not informed of his exact situation because we not been able see him, but we wished to do so. I expressed appreciation for courteous and helpful assistance we received recently in Budway case from President of Pilsen Court and defense attorney. While we did not have all facts in case and had not formally been given statement of charges, from our understanding of facts it seemed that any violation of Czech law by Budway had not been serious, although he may been imprudent. He had been sentenced four years in prison and we understood he intended appeal sentence. We of course did not wish inject ourselves improperly on judicial side, but I hoped judicial processes would be completed quickly as possible and that they would result in reduction Budway’s sentence. I expressed hope it would be possible, if any sentence remained, that President Novotny—if he had power to do so, which I believed was case—would commute sentence to time already served. I hoped we could later discuss general question of difficulties encountered by Americans and find ways to minimize recurrences. I felt confident we could then make prog-ress in improvement general relations, although here I believed it would have to be in small steps in different fields, progressively leading to more significant changes. (I purposely made no comment on his initial reference to property and financial negotiations.) Commenting on my statements on difficulties encountered by U.S. citizens visiting Czechoslovakia, and on Budway case in particular, David said Budway was serving his sentence now. He said he did not know status of appeal but, if he appealed, outcome would depend on Supreme Court. He added outcome would also depend on his behavior. David then said, referring to my comment on problems of U.S. citizens having difficulty with law in CSSR, that “so far as it could influence U.S. citizens, it would be good if U.S. Government advised them to respect and observe laws of CSSR.” He clearly indicated desire have American (and other) tourists visit CSSR, stating CSSR wanted them inform themselves about country. If they came without hostility, they would have no difficulties. Speaking of American citizens in jail in CSSR, David twice said there had been number of instances in past of good will on Czech side in releasing Americans before sentence served out (this was presumably reference to Shaver and Zastera cases, but it was said with such emphasis that it may imply intention to commute Budway’s sentence when judicial processes completed). David added “it also is necessary that the other side show good will to improve relations.” (Note: This had been standard comment in similar circumstances in past, but he may have been implying that premature issuance of our threatened travel warning would complicate matters.) After I presented usual copies of letters and note asking date be fixed for credentials, he said this would be 9:00 a.m. January 3.Horsey presented his credentials on January 3. He reported on his meeting with President Novotny in telegram 379, January 3. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.49/1–363) Horsey 18. Airgram From the Legation in Bulgaria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Bul–US. Confidential. Drafted by Anderson. Repeated to Belgrade. Sofia, February 9, 1963. A–248. Subject: Memorandum of Conversation—Prime Minister Todor Zhivkov. Date: February 6, 1963 Place: Office of the Prime Minister PARTICIPANTS: Prime Minister Todor Zhivkov Mr. Ivan Peynirdzhiev, Foreign Office Interpreter Deputy Prime Minister Petur Voutov American Minister Eugenie Anderson Mr. Alex Bloomfield, Second Secretary of Legation The Prime Minister welcomed me and asked about my visit to the States. After my reply, Zhivkov remarked about the weather here, observing that, while the floods are serious at present, he believes there will be a better crop this year. He said there is an old Bulgarian saying, “The deeper the snow, the thicker the bread”. Zhivkov asked me about the weather in the United States. When I confirmed that we, too, have had very cold weather, adding, “It’s been terribly cold all around the world”, Zhivkov laughed and said, “Yes, the weather has been cold, but the international climate has been improving.” After exchanging these pleasantries, I said I was bringing the Prime Minister personal greetings from the President of the United States, John F. Kennedy. Before going on, I asked Zhivkov to tell me about his recent travels; that I was interested in hearing his reactions to developments in East Germany and Yugoslavia. The following points were made: East Germany Economic relations are more important than political. East Germany occupies second place in Bulgarian foreign trade, and accounts for 12–13 percent of the Bulgarian total. He declared that he was impressed with the “stable economy” of East Germany. He lavished such praise on “The Wall” that I took sharp issue with him, and he then agreed with me that we should work against walls between peoples and countries. Yugoslavia Zhivkov seemed a little embarrassed as he began to speak about Yugoslavia. He mentioned the difference between Party and Government cooperation, and clearly stated that there are, and will remain, ideological differences between Bulgaria and Yugoslavia as indicated in the Resolution at the Bulgarian Eighth Party Congress. However, he went on, “We are neighboring countries. We are both Socialist countries. We are all of Slavic origin and the same blood. For these reasons we are trying to improve relations.” The Prime Minister said there have been improvements in some fields, such as border questions, trade, cultural, and trade unions. But he was not specific. He added, rather defensively, that this improvement should not have a bearing on Yugoslav relations with other countries. No one should expect “miracles” to have been accomplished at his meeting with Tito. There remained the problem of disagreement with Yugoslav “revisionist” policies. Zhivkov added that the ideological differences should not prevent closer cooperation between Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. I responded that I was glad to hear of this attitude, which should mean that Bulgaria and the U.S. also could improve their relations. I said that my Government had had a chance to review its position and was anxious to settle the problems of the past so that we could move ahead to positive steps towards the improvement of the relations between Bulgaria and the U.S. I added that I hoped the Bulgarian Government had also reviewed its position. Financial Claims I then raised the question of the financial claims, stating that we wish to resume talks. I asked him if Bulgaria was ready to put forward a new proposal. In reply, the Prime Minister said that he was not informed on all the details but, as far as he knew, an agreement had almost been reached between the two governments. However, the United States Government almost doubled the amount shortly before the agreement was to be concluded. He asked whether, in the light of this, there was any guarantee that if we reached an agreement now, the U.S. Government would not again increase the amount of their claims. I replied that, as Minister of the United States, I could assure him that, if an agreement were reached here in Sofia which was approved by the State Department, this agreement would be implemented and carried out by the U.S. Government. Zhivkov then stated for his part he would instruct Deputy Foreign Minister Voutov, and that I could instruct any Legation officer, to carry on discussion on claims. He emphasized that the Bulgarian Government is willing to settle this question. I added that I hoped agreement on a lump sum cash payment could be reached easily, and that technical talks concluding the agreement then could be worked out in a few months. I reminded the Prime Minister of his remark before my departure for the United States to the effect that the normalization of relations with the United States would be worth a great deal to Bulgaria, whether it cost Bulgaria $350,000 or $10 million. Zhivkov laughingly confirmed this previously stated remark and repeated that it should not be difficult to reach an agreement. El Al ClaimsReference is to the shooting down of an El Al airliner by the Bulgarian Air Force on July 27, 1955. I then said that there is another outstanding question, the El Al claims. At this point, Deputy Foreign Minister Voutov intervened before Zhivkov could reply. Voutov said that this question was already settled; that the Bulgarian Government had deposited a check in an American bank which would satisfy the claims presented by the lawyers of the victims’ heirs; that Mr. Davis and Mr. Vedeler had approved the settlement; and that he (Voutov) had a written statement of acceptance by the lawyers. I asked for clarification, stating that I did not believe the question had been settled yet. The Prime Minister broke in to minimize the importance of the dispute. He said that this will be clarified, that there was no problem. He added that the Bulgarian Government views this accident not only from the financial, but also from the humanitarian point of view, and that Bulgaria is willing to meet fully all just claims. He suggested that Minister Voutov and I discuss the problem later.Anderson and Voutov discussed these issues in a February 18 meeting. A memorandum of their conversation is in Department of State, Central Files, POL Bul-US. Citizenship Cases I also mentioned that there is another question to be solved before we can fully normalize our relations. This is a citizenship question, but that, in view of the recent signs that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is making some progress in the Bonev and Dorset cases, I would not go into this matter today. The Prime Minister did not reply and appeared to be uninformed. Future Developments in U.S.-Bulgarian Relations The Prime Minister said that, in his view, all of these questions could be solved very easily, without problems; but that the real question is: What will follow the settlement of these problems? I replied that I had had several conversations in Washington with, among others, President Kennedy, the Secretary of State, and other officials in the Department of State and that we envisage several practical steps which could be taken after the settlement of the outstanding problems, such as: a. The establishment of a Bulgarian trade office in New York. b. Raising the status of our Missions to Embassies here and in Washington. c. A cultural exchange program. It was obvious that these answers did not fully satisfy Mr. Zhivkov and that he had something else on his mind. I went on to explain that, while there is objection on the part of certain Congressmen to repealing the bar to giving certain countries Most Favored Nation status, President Kennedy intends to request Congress to leave to his discretion the application of any repeal where he thinks it would be in the best interests of the United States. I added that, of course, it is not possible at the present time to predict what will develop in the future regarding Bulgaria. However, I said, President Kennedy had assured me of his interest in developing trade relations with Bulgaria and other Eastern European countries. Zhivkov’s Criticism of U.S. Policy The Prime Minister said that the Bulgarian people are realistic and they see that the Department of State’s policy towards Bulgaria was not “realistic” for the past four years. The Department’s attitude would not be realistic in the future, either, if it expects any changes in the Bulgarian political system. “Even if I,” he said, “would like to be instrumental in such changes, I would be deprived of power immediately.” Replying to my request for clarification of what he meant by “unrealistic”, Zhivkov stated that, although Bulgaria is a small country, it is in the center of the Balkan Peninsula and that the Balkan problems cannot be solved only with the help of Greece and Turkey, and without Bulgaria. For the past four years, he continued, there has been no improvement in relations between United States and Bulgaria. Smilingly, he said, he did not know whether Minister Voutov is to be blamed for this, or whether my predecessor was at fault; that my predecessor had done absolutely nothing here; that it was as if he were not present in Bulgaria. At this point, I said I did not think that he should criticize my predecessor who represented the United States, as I am doing, and that Minister Page is a countryman of mine. I said that I am not only the Minister of the United States, but also a personal representative and friend of the President of my country. I assured the Prime Minister that I was willing to cooperate with him and suggested that, rather than dwelling on the past, we should make a new start in relations between our two countries by the two of us working together. Zhivkov replied that he does not wish to dwell on the past, but to learn from it. Trade Proposal The Prime Minister then said that Bulgaria is very much interested in developing trade with the United States. If favorable terms can be arranged, he said, Bulgaria is desirous now of purchasing from the U.S. one or two chemical factories. Bulgaria has already received three offers from other countries, one being very favorable, he said, implying that Bulgaria is not dependent on the United States for purchasing chemical works, since it is able to obtain them from other countries, such as West Germany, France and even Japan. He said that, if there should be any difficulties in selling such chemical factories directly to Bulgaria, this could be overcome through an un-named third country. I did not reply to this extraordinary suggestion. Indeed, Zhivkov rushed on to the next subject, not appearing much interested in whether or not I responded. Press Attacks on President Kennedy Zhivkov then raised the subject of my informal discussion with Voutov on January 31 (Legtel 322)Dated February 1. (Ibid., Edu 7) in which I had expressed my displeasure over derogatory cartoons and press attacks on President Kennedy. I reiterated that the attacks against the United States Government, and even President Kennedy, which appear in the press, and caricatures of the President which are displayed certainly do not contribute to the improvement of relations between our two countries. I said that I, as personal representative of the President, consider such attacks and pictures as personally offensive. I added that President Kennedy is devoted to peace and wishes Bulgaria no harm, only good. The Prime Minister pointed out that our two countries live under different systems and that, also, the American press is critical of Communist regimes. I explained that the American press is not controlled by our Government and, furthermore, what I had in mind is not the criticism of ideologies, or systems, but concrete attacks against the U.S. Government, and even the head of our Government. “The American press,” I added, “has not been critical of you, Mr. Prime Minister. On the contrary, I have read in the American press some very complimentary remarks about you.” The Prime Minister then said that he agreed with me; that he is not now aware of concrete facts to which I have referred but he deplores them. He assured me that, today, he would issue appropriate instructions that such attacks should not be repeated. Then Zhivkov added that, shortly after his appointment as Prime Minister, personal derogatory remarks about him had appeared in some “Western press”, not naming the exact source. He said he had thought of asking the Foreign Office to call the Chief of Mission of that particular country here in Sofia and to draw his attention to these press remarks, but since these attacks had soon stopped he thought action would no longer be justified. Our meeting, which lasted for one hour and fifteen minutes, ended on a cordial note. Toasts were exchanged to the further development of better relations between our two countries, with the Prime Minister adding his hope that considerable progress will be achieved before our next meeting. As I was leaving the room, I admired the bouquet of roses on the table. Minister Voutov selected the nicest one and handed it to Zhivkov who presented it to me. Comments I had the impression that Zhivkov was less buoyant than at the time of our first meeting.See Document 16. Probably his first two months as Prime Minister have been a strain, in spite of his allegations that things have been going well here. Zhivkov also may have felt less confident in my presence when confronted with specific issues, than on the occasion of our first meeting when he could confine himself to generalities. I was struck again, as during our first visit, by Zhivkov’s reference to Bulgaria being a small country, and his repeated complaint that Bulgaria has felt ignored by the U.S. I was surprised that he stated so clearly that Bulgaria has no choice over its Soviet alignment. I noted that Minister Voutov took a harder position than Zhivkov whenever the former entered the conversation. I also observed that Voutov’s smile frequently turned into a smirk, and felt that he was trying to impress me and the Prime Minister that he will be a tough bargainer. However, I believe that Voutov has a great deal at stake in reaching agreement with the U.S. now and that Zhivkov has committed himself to do so. Eugenie Anderson 19. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 12–1 Bul-US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Davis and approved by the White House on June 4. The meeting was held at the White House. Washington, June 1, 1963, 11:15–11:35 a.m. SUBJECT Presentation of Credentials PARTICIPANTS U.S. The President Mr. Angier Biddle Duke, Chief of Protocol Mr. William J. Tonesk, Deputy Chief of Protocol Mr. Richard H. Davis, Deputy Assistant Secretary, EUR Bulgaria Mr. Lyubomir Dimitrov Popov, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Bulgaria to the United States The President began by asking the new Bulgarian Minister, Lyubomir Dimitrov Popov, what were the principal problems in US-Bulgarian relations. The Minister responded by saying “trade”, pointing out lack of MFN which made the difference on duties very high. For instance, Bulgarian tobacco had to pay a duty of 35 compared to a competitor with MFN who paid only 12. In response to the President’s question, the Minister said Bulgaria was interested in buying engineering products, particularly manufacturing plants. The Minister said they were encouraged by the recent agreement in principle to complete a financial claims settlement and hoped that with the establishment of a Trade Office in New York some progress could be made in developing US-Bulgarian trade. The President commented that the Minister was undoubtedly familiar with the Congressional action taken last year in denying MFN to Poland and Yugoslavia. The President expressed the opinion that it was unlikely that in the present state of international relations the Congress would consider restoring MFN to those countries who do not now enjoy it. In a brief discussion of economic relationships in the Bloc, the Minister said that Bulgaria’s foreign trade with the Western nations is about 20% of the total whereas with the USSR it is 50%; a great portion of Bulgaria’s exports consisted of agricultural products, especially tomatoes and grapes. The USSR represented a vast market for Bulgaria, although his country was still relatively under-developed. The President asked the Minister how long he had been a Communist. Mr. Popov replied that his father had been killed as a Communist in 1923 in an anti-Fascist revolt in Bulgaria and that he had been brought up as a Communist. Bulgaria had by tradition and history had close relations with Moscow. The Russians had liberated Bulgaria from five centuries’ rule under the Turks. Marxist Socialism had always had a strong appeal in Bulgaria and Dimitrov had been the Bulgarian hero of the workers movement. The President asked if the Chinese were active in Eastern Europe and why the present situation existed in Albania. The Minister replied that the Albanians had a young and immature leadership; their relations with Greece were bad and indeed a state of war still theoretically existed. Albania feels itself surrounded by enemies. These, in his opinion, were the principal reasons for the Albanian position. The President then asked about the Sino-Soviet dispute and whether its origins lay in ideology or in history. The Minister replied he really did not understand the present situation and did not know much about it. He expressed the personal opinion that the rift reflected “nationalism”, the isolation of China and the size of its population. The Minister then briefly sketched the history of the Bulgarian Communist Party under the leadership of Dimitrov, using this to conclude that Western political leaders erred in the view that the Communists were always monolithic; there had always been disputes and disagreements in the Communist movement. The discussion was terminated with the President wishing the Minister well in his mission in Washington. 20. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Rum–US. Confidential. Drafted by Crawford and approved in M on August 10. The meeting was held in Harriman’s office. Washington, August 8, 1963, 1 p.m. SUBJECT Rumanian-American Relations PARTICIPANTS W. Averell Harriman, Under Secretary for Political Affairs Mircea Malita, Rumanian Deputy Foreign Minister Petre Balaceanu, Rumanian Minister Nicolae Bucur, First Secretary, Rumanian Legation William A. Crawford, American Minister to Bucharest Harold C. Vedeler—EE Following the ceremony at which Mr. Malita signed on behalf of the Rumanian Government the Nuclear Test Ban TreatyFor text of the Test Ban Treaty, see Department of State Bulletin, August 12, 1963, pp. 239–240. the above group met in Governor Harriman’s office for luncheon. Deputy Foreign Minister Malita and Minister Crawford had arrived from Bucharest the previous evening. Apart from congratulations and general comments on the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty as a first step toward improved general relations, the following points emerged in the luncheon discussion: 1. Rumanian Position at Moscow Summit Meeting on June 26–28 on CEMA. In response to Governor Harriman’s question in this regard, Mr. Malita made a guarded presentation, noting that Rumania clearly intends to pursue its established course of building up its industry, and that the Summit meeting confirmed that no decisions can be taken by CEMA without unanimous approval of all members and that nothing can be done there contrary to the desires and interests of any individual member. 2. Signs of Independence from Moscow. Governor Harriman referred to newspaper reports here over recent months of evidence of a more independent Rumanian position and spirit vis-à-vis Moscow both with regard to CEMA and to Sino-Soviet differences, and noted that the Rumanians had returned their Ambassador to Albania, contrary to the action of other Bloc countries. He said that these signs of an independent spirit met with an approving reaction on the part of the American people and that in this atmosphere it might be possible to be more receptive to Rumanian requests for more trade and to Rumanian needs for industrial installations to which Mr. Gheorghiu-Dej had referred in his recent talk with Agriculture Secretary Freeman.Secretary of Agriculture Orville L. Freeman visited Romania August 3–5. The Legation reported on his activities in airgram A–41 from Bucharest, August 8. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 2–1 Rum) 3. Trade and Industrial Installations. Mr. Malita and Minister Balaceanu spoke at some length on this point, emphasizing the importance which the Rumanian Government attaches not only to increased trade with the United States but to “some signs” of response on our part to their requests to purchase industrial installations. They emphasized that Mr. Gheorghiu-Dej had made clear to Secretary Freeman that this was their basic concern and had several times requested Secretary Freeman to convey to President Kennedy the Rumanian desire for some positive action in this sense, and particularly with regard to two synthetic rubber plants, one a polybutadiene and the other an isoprene installation. Both of these had been included in the $100 million shopping list Minister Balaceanu had presented the United States Government in the spring of 1962, and it was still hoped that they could be provided. They would only be intended for wholly peaceful uses, and if licenses could be granted the Rumanian people would feel greatly encouraged. Mr. Malita observed that more than half of the 10 installations on their original shopping list for which licenses were not forthcoming last year were meanwhile contracted for by West European firms, and he cited as one example a tire factory supplied by the UK. Mr. Malita and Mr. Balaceanu also expressed the Rumanian desire to increase exports to the US through assistance of MFN if possible. If this were not possible, Mr. Balaceanu hoped that some favorable tariff arrangements might be made for a limited number of products they would particularly like to export to the US. Governor Harriman repeated that the Rumanian show of independence toward Moscow created a better atmosphere for considering improved economic relations and that Mr. Gheorghiu-Dej’s proposals would be carefully studied. He warned that action on such matters may take time but assured Mr. Malita that he would look further into the entire question. As for the desired industrial installations, there were really two aspects of the subject, those of licensing and financing. Minister Crawford explained some aspects of the Rumanian financing procedures in comparable deals with Western European firms which have sold Rumania some $350–$400 million worth of industrial installations over the past three years. Mr. Malita made the personal suggestion that a US-Rumanian joint study group on trade expansion might be usefully set up at this juncture. Governor Harriman expressed interest in the idea but was noncommittal. Mr. Malita said that he planned to extend his stay here by several days and Minister Balaceanu would like to have Minister Crawford and Mr. Vedeler for a stag dinner on August 12 to pursue matters further. 21. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FranceSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 W Eur-E Eur. Secret. Drafted by Vedeler, cleared by Davis and Thompson, and approved by Harriman. Repeated to London, Sofia, Bucharest, and Budapest. Washington, September 25, 1963, 3:22 p.m. 1495. Deptel 1378.Telegram 1378, September 18, reported the French desire to discuss the elevation of diplomatic representation in Hungary. (Ibid.) Following is position to take in consultation with UK and France on question of raising Western Legations in EE to Embassy status. Since Hungary special case for US we not in position at this time to consider raising status of our mission at Budapest. US has special problems in its relations with Hungary which will require some time to solve or to make definite progress towards solution before question of elevating mission of practical significance. In any event we anticipate that it would be necessary after solution of some of these problems and as reflection of progress in regularization of relations to send Minister to Budapest before elevating mission. Thus US may be obliged to hold back on this step in Hungary when other Western governments are preparing to go ahead. If they agree time is favorable for doing so, US cannot ask them to wait for US action. US prepared to elevate missions at Bucharest and Sofia at appropriate time. We think it advisable as means reinforce the importance and effect of action in Eastern Europe for US, UK and France to move about the same time in raising status of missions in Rumania and Bulgaria. Apart from factor of international atmosphere which now appears favorable for this step believe two principal considerations relevant in determining time of such action: (1) progress in solution of bilateral problems and in expansion of bilateral relations; and (2) extent to which EE country asserting more independent position toward Soviet Union. On these bases missions at Bucharest should be elevated before those at Sofia and US expects to take this step first at Bucharest. It is hoped UK and France might agree. Nevertheless we are not ready to move yet at Bucharest. Consider it necessary before this step taken at either Bucharest or Sofia to make further progress in solution of outstanding bilateral problems. These include problems of dual nationals, separated families, accommodations (chancery buildings at Bucharest and Sofia, residence site of CM and housing at Sofia) and consular convention. We expect to make progress in solution these problems at Bucharest as our economic relations with Rumania develop over the next months. We cannot forecast any definite schedule of progress but would hope to be in position possibly within a year to arrange with Rumanians mutual elevation of missions. The step with Sofia would come some time thereafter. We propose that the three governments consult in the future with a view to acting in concert concerning the rank of their missions at Bucharest and Sofia. The subject should also be raised in NATO at a time considered appropriate by the three governments so that the NATO countries generally might move together in elevating their Legations in Rumania and Bulgaria Ball 22. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Bul-US. Confidential. Drafted by Baker on October 1 and approved in S on October 4. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission. The source text is labeled “Part I of II.” Part II, a separate memorandum of conversation on Greek-Bulgarian relations, is not printed. New York, September 30, 1963, noon. SecDel/MC/79 SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE EIGHTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York, September 1963 SUBJECT U.S.-Bulgarian Relations—Trade, Citizenship PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary of State Ambassador Adlai E. Stevenson John A. Baker, Jr., USUN Bulgaria Mr. Ivan Khristov Bashev, Foreign Minister Amb. Milko Tarabanov, Bulgarian Permanent Representative to UN Mr. Lyubomir Popov, Bulgarian Minister to the United States Interpreter Following the opening amenities, the Secretary made reference to the recent steps made toward the improvement of U.S.-Bulgarian relations and expressed the U.S. desire to work for further improvements. In response to this, Foreign Minister Bashev expressed his agreement but noted that in regard to the recently concluded Claims AgreementFor text of the U.S.-Bulgarian agreement and accompanying declarations, see Department of State Bulletin, July 22, 1963, pp. 138–141. the Bulgarian Government had made quite a few concessions which they felt were justified by the desire to improve U.S.-Bulgarian relations in the future. Bashev made favorable reference to the joint declaration made at the time when the Claims Agreement was completed. He expressed regret, however, that he could not describe present U.S.-Bulgarian commercial relations as satisfactory. He noted Bulgarian readiness to buy a number of U.S. products, mentioning factories for cigarettes and artificial fibers, plus cotton, grain, fodder and paper. He said, however, that Bulgaria wants the same price conditions as other countries, needs more expeditious action on U.S. export licenses, needs better tariff treatment on its exports, and wants credit arrangements similar to those available from West Germany, France, Italy and Japan. The Secretary replied by enumerating the various problems which impede development of U.S.-Bulgarian trade relations noting U.S. legislation on strategic goods, extension of credit, and most-favored nation treatment, on which latter question favorable Congressional action towards Eastern European countries other than Yugoslavia and Poland is not likely this year. The Secretary expressed hope that some steps could be undertaken on the problems within the purview of the Executive Branch and mentioned a review of export licensing policy, a desire to examine more closely what Bulgarian products can be marketed in the United States, and the need to reach agreement on trade practices such as those involving patents and copyrights and dumping. He observed that in an improving international atmosphere involving U.S.-Bulgarian relations as well, American consumers would be more receptive to Bulgarian products and American businessmen more anxious to sell to Bulgaria. He also observed that greater travel would contribute to improving this atmosphere and observed that the United States is interested in having more Bulgarian tourists as well as seeing more Americans travel to Bulgaria. He said that the conclusion of an agreement on travel of dual nationals similar to that recently concluded between the United States and Czechoslovakia would encourage more Americans of Bulgarian origin to travel to Bulgaria. Bashev, commenting on the Secretary’s remarks, observed that there would be no problem of dumping from Bulgaria and that his country was a signatory of the international agreement on patents and copyrights. He welcomed the Secretary’s suggestion that some steps to improve trade could be pursued even prior to any changes in U.S. legislation and stated that he would like to be able to say to his government that a decision had been reached to start negotiations soon on this matter. The Secretary replied that for reasons of timing in relations with the committees of Congress, the United States would prefer to have a preliminary stage of discussions and examination of the trade problem before entering into a stage of actual negotiations. Bashev agreed to this approach and then commented on the question of tourism, noting that Bulgarian tourism to the United States was obstructed by the lack of a direct air route and the shortage of hard currency which the Bulgarian Government could afford to earmark for tourism. The Secretary replied that, although we were desirous of an increase of Bulgarian tourism to the United States, we recognized that there would be an imbalance in tourism but that this would perhaps help Bulgaria to acquire currency with which to cover its imports from the United States. Bashev replied that the question of dual citizenship could easily be resolved on the basis of a treaty and that Bulgaria had no problem in this connection. The Secretary concluded by mentioning he expected shortly there would be some important decision on the question of sale of U.S. grain to the Eastern European countries and that he hoped to be in touch with the Minister when this decision was reached. He noted that the sale of grain would be a good point to begin the exchange of U.S.-Bulgarian trade since the American public has a more receptive attitude toward trade in food commodities with the socialist countries than it does with trade in some other commodities. 23. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Carle and approved in S on October 27. The source text is labeled “Part 2 of 2 parts.” A memorandum of the part of the conversation on East-West relations is ibid. Washington, October 21, 1963. SUBJECT US-Rumanian Relations PARTICIPANTS U.S. The Secretary Richard H. Davis, EUR Harold C. Vedeler, EE Jack M. Carle, EE Rumanian Corneliu Manescu, Minister of Foreign Affairs Mircea Malita, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Petre Balaceanu, Minister to the U.S. Stefan Nastusescu, Private Secretary to Mr. Manescu (Interpreter) Following discussion of some of the broader problems in East-West relations, the conversation turned to US-Rumanian bilateral relations. The Secretary expressed the hope that we could find points at which our relations could develop. He said that we were exploring trade possibilities at present and had already taken certain administrative actions in this connection. Mr. Manescu replied that he did not wish to give the appearance of hurrying things but would like to express the views of his government as to specific ways in which our relations could be improved. 1. Removal of Travel Restrictions. Mr. Manescu said that “the game had been interrupted by the U.S., and the ball was now in your hands”. The Secretary said he accepted the fact that the ball was in our court and hoped we could furnish our answer soon to their recent note on this subject. He also hoped that the Rumanians would have a sophisticated understanding of the position we must take on travel, which is greatly influenced by the fact that the US constitutes the great heartland of NATO defensive strength. 2. Raising the Level of Diplomatic Missions. Mr. Manescu thought that it would contribute to the extension of our relations to raise the level of our respective missions. He understood it was necessary for us to “take into account other countries—your friends, as well as our friends”. The Secretary replied that we had no fixed views on this matter and did not exclude the possibility of raising the level of our missions. We were giving active consideration to the question. He also indicated that any action we might take would not be subject to the veto of our allies. 3. Economic Relations. Mr. Manescu pointed out that certain difficulties with regard to Rumania’s desire to broaden its trade relations with the US still existed. Referring specifically to the recent approval of an export license submitted by a US firm in connection with the Galati Metallurgical Combine, the Secretary said that there were some steps which we could take administratively. Other steps would require legislative action, however, and he could offer no encouragement in that regard in the near future. He agreed there was room for improvement of our trade relations and expressed the desire for progress in this field. Mr. Manescu indicated that he was informed of the Galati decision and commented that it was a very welcome step. 4. Rumanian Trade Delegation. Mr. Manescu reminded the Secretary that an approach had been made concerning a visit to the US of a Rumanian trade delegation. His government believed such a visit would be useful and was interested in knowing if the delegation could come. The Secretary said he assumed Mr. Manescu was referring to the proposal for a visit by a delegation headed by Mr. Gaston-Marin, which Mr. Manescu agreed was correct. The Secretary stated that we hoped to accept this proposal after necessary preparations for discussions with Mr. Gaston-Marin had been made. In conclusion, the Secretary and Mr. Manescu expressed mutual satisfaction with the exchange of views and improvement of communication between the two governments, which had resulted from this meeting, as well as their two previous conversations in New York. Note: Conversation was conducted through an interpreter furnished by the Rumanian side. 24. Telegram From the Legation in Bulgaria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Bul-US. Confidential. Repeated to Vienna, Ottawa, and Munich. Sofia, November 8, 1963, 7 p.m. 281. Vienna for SPO for information only; not for release. Munich for EAS for information only; not for release. Department pass USIA. I called on Prime Minister Todor Zhivkov November 8 at my request. I began by saying that, in view recent developments such as partial test ban treaty and President Kennedy’s decision re possible wheat sales to Soviet Union and East European countries,For text of President Kennedy’s statement on wheat sales to the Soviet Union, see Department of State Bulletin, October 28, 1963, pp. 660–661. I believe atmosphere is favorable for continuing to work at improving US-Bulgarian relations. I then presented four problems, three of which Legation has taken up repeatedly through Foreign Ministry and other agencies without success: (1) Citizenship problems. (2) Housing for Legation staff. (3) Free access to American Legation for visitors, without interference by militia. (4) Jamming of Voice of America. Zhivkov responded by agreeing we should continue to work at improving relations and expressed satisfaction over progress made during past year. He said he was unable give immediate answers today but assured me he would consider all problems. He mentioned especially questions involving American citizens and dual-nationals. Zhivkov also said he would look into diplomatic apartment [house] and possibly direct more workers be assigned in order expedite its completion. Re free access to American Legation, he said he was sorry if militia had prevented anyone from visiting Legation, adding that “this is not their function”. Re VOA, Zhivkov said if VOA broadcasts to Bulgaria are “objective,” Bulgaria will cease jamming; if broadcasts are not “objective,” Bulgaria will continue jamming regardless of what Soviet Union may do. Zhivkov admitted his latest information re content VOA was almost one year old. I then asked Zhivkov for his evaluation present Bulgarian political and economic situation. Contrary to reports of some American newsmen and radio, he said, there is no economic crisis. He denied there is any “system of bread rationing” in Bulgaria, adding bread problem has been solved for this year. Zhivkov added, however, there is a wheat shortage in Bulgaria due to bad crops this year and also to Bulgarian policy allocating major agricultural production resources to vegetables, fruits, and cotton. He said Bulgaria will need to import 500,000 tons of wheat and 300,000 tons of fodder annually for ten years (Leg. A–139).Airgram A–139, October 28, forwarded a memorandum of conversation between Anderson and Minister of Foreign Trade Budinov. (Department of State, Central Files, FT 1–1 Bul-US) Zhivkov evaded my indirect question as to whether he had been to Moscow recently (Legation’s A–154).Airgram A–154, November 6, reported on Bulgarian officials’ visits to the Soviet Union. (Ibid., POL 15–1 Bul) Our hour and a half conversation was on amicable basis. Pouching verbatim text conversation. Comment: I have impression that contrary to recent diplomatic rumors (Legation’s A–141)Airgram A–141, October 28, speculated on possible changes in the Bulgarian leadership and their implications. (Ibid., POL 15–1 Bul) Todor Zhivkov feels secure in position. While he clearly wants to minimize economic difficulties, he acted confident that they will be overcome. Further comment will follow.Anderson provided further detail on her meeting with Zhivkov in airgram A–175 from Sofia, November 16. (Ibid., POL Bul-US) Zhivkov said Bulgaria hopes to buy wheat from US but that it will not be able to do unless it gets longer credit terms than Soviet Union may receive. He stressed Bulgaria’s need for long-term credit and elimination of “discriminatory” tariff treatment. Anderson 25. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17–1 Czech-US. Confidential. Drafted by Dennis and approved by the White House on November 15. Washington, November 13, 1963, 10 a.m. SUBJECT The Czechoslovak Ambassador Presents His Credentials PARTICIPANTS The President Dr. Karel Duda, Czechoslovak Ambassador Mr. Angier Biddle Duke, Chief of Protocol Mr. John M. Dennis, Officer in Charge of Czechoslovak Affairs The President welcomed Ambassador Duda to Washington and thanked him for the cordiality shown Secretary Hodges during his visit to Czechoslovakia.Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges visited Czechoslovakia September 8–9. He asked the Ambassador what he thought were the major matters of interest between the United States and Czechoslovakia. Dr. Duda said his Government desires to maintain good relations with the US and he believes there are possibilities to further relations, especially in the fields of culture, science and trade. The principal difficulties in the Czechoslovak view concern: 1. The settlement of the economic-financial negotiations. 2. Increased trade, which Czechoslovakia foresees as being possible once prerequisites are established to enable it to export more to the United States and in turn to import more from this country. 3. The need for the United States to register positive moves toward Czechoslovakia to correspond with what it believes are positive steps it has taken toward improving bilateral relations. However, to be frank, the Ambassador had to point out that the travel restrictions imposed on November 12 were, in his Government’s view, a step backward and suggested a period in our relations which he had believed was a thing of the past.For texts of the November 12 statement outlining travel restrictions on East European diplomats, the U.S. notes to individual countries, and a list of U.S. counties closed to travel, see Department of State Bulletin, December 2, 1963, pp. 860–863. The President referred to the severe limitations on travel in the Soviet Union and said the United States is concerned that so much has been invested in its security that it was now necessary to establish travel controls. These are essential to our standard of security. They are not a harassment of Czechoslovak officials and are not directed against Czechoslovakia. They are not a political act but are simple security measures. He understood the Ambassador’s concern and said we do not wish to maintain these measures as a permanent thing. Dr. Duda replied that the problem here is that measures of this sort are followed by corresponding measures which tend to complicate relations. On the question of trade, the President agreed that it would be difficult to expect Czechoslovakia and other Eastern European countries to buy more in the United States unless they were at the same time able to sell more here. He then referred to the limitations regarding MFN and to the recent Senatorial discussions concerning this subject. The President said he would be glad to see this situation changed and trade be kept out of the political arena. However, he believes that if relations improve, and he hopes they will, this problem may be solved. He was aware, the President said, that Czechoslovakia has taken certain steps to improve relations. He believes it useful to all to maintain normal relations. He hoped, therefore, that our relations would improve further during the course of Dr. Duda’s assignment. Certainly, he said, the desire to improve relations is as strong as it has been for a long time. However, the President added, the recent Soviet arrest of Professor BarghoornOn November 12, the Soviet Union announced the arrest of Professor Frederick C. Barghoorn 2 weeks previously on charges of espionage. Following a personal intervention by President Kennedy, Barghoorn was released on November 16 and expelled from the Soviet Union. makes it difficult for the United States. Temperatures tend to rise over incidents of this nature, but, he continued, we must persist in our efforts to attain normal relations. With respect to his own country, Dr. Duda said problems existed but he believes the situation there is improving. He noted that Czechoslovakia has concluded a contract to purchase grain in Canada and a Czechoslovak official is currently in New York negotiating the purchase of corn, rice and 250,000 tons of wheat. The President said he hoped the grain purchases go along well and asked the Ambassador to come back anytime. 26. Telegram From the Department of State to the Legation in RomaniaSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 Rum. Confidential. Drafted by Carle, cleared in S/S, and approved by Harriman. Washington, November 27, 1963, 7:04 p.m. 288. Legtel 411.Telegram 411, November 26, suggested high-level treatment for Gaston-Marin. (Ibid.) Gaston-Marin paid fifty-minute call on Governor Harriman November 26 and discussed three specific problems RPR economic relations with US: 1. Rumanians desired import industrial installations from US in such fields as chemicals, rubber, power, metallurgy, electro-technology, cellulose, food products. Although now buying some of these products elsewhere in West, RPR wanted to achieve balanced commercial relations with other nations. Hoped obtain equally good or better equipment than that now being purchased in Western Europe. 2. In order pay for such imports directly or indirectly, RPR needed to export to US and hoped determine goods which would be of interest to US. RPR realizes this is difficult since US could not absorb all potential categories Rumanian exports and high US tariffs created problem. 3. Referred obliquely to problem of credit terms by remarking RPR presently obtaining good terms in WE and noted tendency toward further easing of terms. Gaston-Marin said RPR hopes in further talks to establish a framework of understanding on these points. Harriman replied in substance that we were planning invite Gaston-Marin for discussion these topics but that we not yet ready make definite policy commitments. US has recently issued certain export licenses as indication of a degree of liberalization of export control policy in response to RPR assertions self-interest. Referred specifically to Galati decision. Could not comment at this time on large number of US industrial installations RPR desires purchase from US. Since US does not engage in state trading, RPR would have to explore its export possibilities through private firms. Re credit terms, referred to pending Mundt bill which would pose difficulties if passed but which Administration hoped would be defeated as it since then has been. Harriman emphasized in general discussion that US objective was to encourage Rumanian development for benefit of Rumanian people. Although US did not desire RPR to have other than friendly relations with its neighbor USSR, past US-Rumanian difficulties in large measure attributable to feeling in US that Rumania subject to Moscow dictates. US also desired insure that equipment and technology exported to Rumania would not be made available to USSR. Gaston-Marin replied that Governor had not seen Rumania since 1946 and much had since been accomplished to the benefit of Rumanian people. In addition, state policy of Rumania is to honor strictly all commitments made re protection of patents and industrial information. At Harriman’s suggestion, arrangements now being made for further talks today without commitments with officials State and Commerce Departments concerned with economic and export control matters. Gaston-Marin scheduled depart morning November 28. Memcon follows.Not found. Rusk 27. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Hung-US. Limited Official Use. Budapest, December 13, 1963, 1 p.m. 370. We believe Hungarian success in parleying Western legations to embassies here calls for stocktaking on what we may now expect from Hungarians ourselves. This is what our diplomatic colleagues tell us here. Around time Greeks raised their legation this summer Hungarians approached Belgians. Brussels responded affirmatively and now announcement expected shortly. Hungarians reportedly maneuvered timing of Belgian announcement over several months in order encourage recent British action. At about time British action appeared likely, Hungarians approached French. French action now expected December 17. Meanwhile, Hungarians have approached Italians and suggested to Austrians that property negotiations might be facilitated by Austria raising its legation. Hungarians also indicated to American press representative that level official Hungarian response to Kennedy deathPresident Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22. here was pitched to level US-Hungarian relations. While this successful maneuvering of Hungarians does West little credit at least some Western missions here were ripe for such approaches. In contrast to ourselves, most of them did not have outstanding problems requiring solution before taking such action. Some did not want to be held back by our special problems and some felt that we have been unnecessarily slow in getting at our problems. We may be sure GOH has sensed this and may feel that action of other Western powers will tend to isolate us in our posture toward Hungary. They are likely to seek exploit this difference and use it to bring pressure on us to give Hungary the stamp of respectability that other Western powers now giving. GOH probably was much, if not more, interested in acquiring that stamp of respectability as solving problems. In such situation GOH should not be allowed to hang on us responsibility for not moving effectively toward solution our outstanding problems. Rightly or wrongly, as UN issue has receded, problem of Cardinal, about which everyone here speaks in hushed tones, has emerged within last year in minds Hungarians and diplomatic community as central US-Hungarian problem, solution of which could lead to progress in other areas. This unfortunately tends obscure constructive steps on which GOH gives us little credit, that we have taken in UN, on wheat, and elsewhere. We very much need avoid this and stress positive side what we are doing vis-à-vis Hungary. Information media can play key role in this. Indoctrination our allies and neutrals may also be called for. Jones 28. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Hung-US. Confidential. Drafted by Squire and approved in M on December 20. Washington, December 14, 1963. SUBJECT US-Hungarian Relations PARTICIPANTS United States Governor Harriman, Under Secretary for Political Affairs Mr. Harold C. Vedeler, Director, Office of EE Affairs Mr. Frederick M. Chapin, Office of the Under Secretary for Political Affairs Mr. Christopher A. Squire, OIC Hungarian Affairs Hungary Peter Mod, First Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Janos Radvanyi, Charge d’Affaires a.i., Hungarian Legation At his own request, Hungarian First Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Peter Mod, accompanied by Charge Janos Radvanyi, called on Under Secretary Harriman on December 14. Mr. Mod is returning to Hungary on December 17 at the close of the 18th UNGA session, where he has been head of the Hungarian Delegation to the GA. He stated that he wished to take advantage of a “courtesy call” before his departure to continue discussions that had begun with Governor Harriman at the time of President Kennedy’s funeral but which had been interrupted when Mod had to return to New York.No record of these discussions has been found. After initial amenities, Mr. Mod said that he would like to take the opportunity, now that he was in Washington, to talk further with Governor Harriman about relations between Hungary and the United States. Although he did not know in detail the daily matters of concern between the two countries, he knew the general feeling in the Foreign Ministry. Relations between Hungary and the US, he continued, had recently developed in a good way. The relation of the two countries’ UN delegations were more normal. During the recent visit to the US of the Hungarian First Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Janos Hont, Hungary saw with some satisfaction the good will towards that visit on the part of the US Administration and its helpful attitude. In the matter of the wheat and corn purchases, the US Government also gave evidence of helpfulness and good will. On Hungary’s part, continued Mr. Mod, there had also been signs of improvement. Travel restrictions had been abolished in Hungary. He had recently noted with pleasure that the US Charge had called on the Hungarian Foreign Minister in Budapest.On December 5, Jones delivered a message stating President Johnson’s intention to follow the policies of the Kennedy administration. Jones reported on the meeting in telegram 351 from Budapest, December 5. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 US-Kennedy) The atmosphere, Mr. Mod felt, in regard to US-Hungarian relations was better than at any time in the last few years, and it was his personal feeling that this atmosphere now made it appropriate to talk about the development of US-Hungarian relations. Governor Harriman noted that the US Charge in Budapest had been talking over, with the Hungarian Foreign Office, various matters which the US thought would assist in the improvement of US-Hungarian relations. Certain useful steps had already been taken, Governor Harriman continued, but other further steps remain to be taken. These steps, which the US Charge was authorized to discuss with the Hungarian Foreign Office, were the same ones outlined to Charge Radvanyi in Washington on October 20, 1962See Document 15. by Deputy Assistant Secretary Davis. The subjects include the problem of dual nationals, the separation of families, and the ability of American citizens to see their families in Hungary. While there had been a decided improvement in travel to and from Hungary recently, certain members of the families of American citizens still remain in Hungary separated from their relatives. There was also the question of the size of the US mission in Budapest and the restrictions on its personnel. Other problems were the claims relating to US Government property in Budapest, as well as the post-war claims of private American citizens which have already been settled in most Eastern European countries. Governor Harriman added that he had told Mr. Kadar in MoscowHarriman’s July 15–25 visit to the Soviet Union concluded with an agreement on the text of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. No record of this conversation has been found. that, although it was not directly a bilateral issue, the question of Cardinal Mindszenty would be an important one in the improvement of US-Hungarian relations. A problem that the Hungarian Government wanted settled, on the other hand, related to Hungary’s desire to sell meat to the US so that Hungary might expand its trade. This involved inspection procedures to satisfy US sanitary standards. The US had rather strict rules on the standards of meat production, which applied all over the world, not just to Hungary. The US had worked this problem out with Poland, and some progress, Governor Harriman understood, had been made in this matter with Hungary. The major point was that certain steps should be taken: the specific steps should be discussed in Budapest with the US charge. The subject of claims, said Governor Harriman, had not yet been under active discussion between the US and Hungary. The US had property in Hungary which it wanted to rehabilitate, but first the Hungarian squatters who presently occupied the premises must be moved out. To make these properties available to the US the cooperation of the Hungarian authorities was necessary. The US felt that these foregoing points were very important and action should be taken on them if relations between the two countries were to make progress. Mr. Mod agreed that certain points were very important. The US, continued Governor Harriman, had watched and was watching with interest various liberalization steps that Hungary had taken, including the general amnesty of March 1963. This was encouraging to the US. The US was of course interested in the development of US-Hungarian relations, and Mr. Mod could repeat to his Ministry in Budapest that the American charge in Budapest was fully authorized to discuss these matters. Governor Harriman concluded that the question of Cardinal Mindszenty had come up quite informally in Moscow in his discussions with Premier Kadar (during the negotiating and signing of the Partial Test Ban Agreement). Mr. Mod said that as in Governor Harriman’s discussions with Premier Kadar, the position of the Hungarian Government with regard to Cardinal Mindszenty was clear. The problem of Cardinal Mindszenty, as well as other Church-State matters, was the subject of negotiations between Hungary and the Vatican. These negotiations were proceeding in a good atmosphere, and he thought that some time in the near future the problem of the Cardinal, as well as the other Church-State problems, would be settled. As to the normalization of relations between the US and Hungary, Mr. Mod continued, the questions connected with the person of the Cardinal could be settled. All pending questions could be settled by direct negotiations, even the question of claims, if approached within the framework of the general problem of commercial and economic relations between the US and Hungary. Mr. Mod said he felt it necessary for the US and Hungary to sit down and talk over the claims problem. As to diplomatic relations, Mr. Mod noted that the US must surely be aware that all its allies in Western Europe were raising their missions in Budapest to the level of embassies. It seemed to him, said Mr. Mod, that the US was not in accord with the general diplomatic situation in Budapest, because the diplomatic establishment maintained by the US was of third rank, being headed not by an Ambassador or Minister but by a charge. In conclusion, Mr. Mod doubted that this situation was very satisfactory even for the US. Governor Harriman pointed out that the US had its own special problems with Hungary, some of which he had just mentioned. Additionally, in its relations with Hungary the US had historically been influenced by the especially friendly feelings of the American people for the Hungarian people. So many Hungarians had emigrated to the US, there was perhaps a more personal feeling for the welfare of the Hungarian people in the US than in other Western countries for historical and other reasons. The first problem that had to be solved, Governor Harriman said, was the normalization of US-Hungarian relations. The raising of the US Legation in Budapest to an Embassy must remain a matter for future developments. Governor Harriman pointed out that the US had legations in Bulgaria and Rumania, and embassies in Poland and Czechoslovakia. US relations with Poland had improved steadily, and the US has done a great deal for Poland, particularly with regard to supplying food. It was necessary only to refer to the case of Poland to understand how relations between the other Eastern European governments could be developed with the US, if those countries were of a mind to do so. To develop such a relationship required give, as well as take, on the part of the Hungarian Government. The US was glad to note the prog-ress that Hungary had made, continued Governor Harriman, but further steps still needed to be taken by that Government. The US was certainly interested in contributing to the improvement of US-Hungarian relations, and Governor Harriman added that he was very glad for the opportunity to talk over the matter of relations with Mr. Mod. Mr. Mod added that Hungary, too, was interested in better relations and was prepared to discuss the subject. Mr. Vedeler said that the basic points on which the US feels improvement of relations with Hungary depends were still those outlined to charge Radvanyi on October 20, 1962 by Deputy Assistant Secretary Davis. Both in Budapest and Washington, discussions between the two Governments on this subject had followed the outlines of the October 20 discussion. These points were embodied in a “talking paper”, a copy of which was informally provided Mr. Radvanyi at the time of that discussion. Governor Harriman asked Mr. Mod if there had been anything in the recent UNGA Session which had seemed of special importance to Mr. Mod at the time. Mr. Mod answered that the most important fact was the absence of the Hungarian question from the agenda of the 18th GA session. Governor Harriman said that Mr. Mod had undoubtedly noticed the US position on that question, and the fact that the US has decided to move ahead. He added that he thought Mr. Mod should tell the Foreign Ministry why the US asked more of Hungary. The American people had strong feelings for the Hungarian people. America was made up of people from all countries in East and West Europe. As Ambassador to Moscow during World War II, Governor Harriman said he had addressed himself more to the subject of the future status of Poland than to any other subject: Poland was a symbol to the American people. The US also had special feelings for the people of Hungary, which reflected the way the US people felt towards US relations with Eastern Europe. Mr. Mod said that the Hungarian Government knew the obstacles in the way of bettering relations, and he thought that these obstacles were now largely removed. Governor Harriman mentioned that US relations with Yugoslavia were of a special nature, a fact stemming basically from Yugoslavia’s independence of outside domination. Ever since the time of President Wilson, the US had been particularly strong for the self-determination and independence of peoples from outside domination. It appeared to be a policy on the part of the Kremlin to favor more self-determination in Eastern Europe. On this question Chairman Khrushchev had recently said that when the child grows, he becomes harder to control. President Kennedy in his speech at American University on June 10, 1963,For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 459–464. had very important things to say on this subject. Chairman Khrushchev has called it the best speech since the time of President Roosevelt. The speech had been very fundamental, and very frank, and Governor Harriman hoped that we would go down the road to which President Kennedy had pointed at that time. Mr. Mod said he was convinced that this speech had been understood correctly all over the world, and that what he was talking about, namely the improvement of US-Hungarian relations, was in line with that speech. The meeting then closed. Mr. Mod agreed to Governor Harriman’s proposal that the press be informed merely that Mr. Mod had paid a courtesy call, and discussions of mutual interest which had been broached at the time of President Kennedy’s funeral were continued during this second meeting. 29. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25–3 Bul. Limited Official Use. Drafted by White on December 31. Washington, December 27, 1963. SUBJECT Protest Against Mob Attack on US Legation in SofiaAt about 11 a.m. Sofia time on December 27, a crowd of about 3,000 persons protesting alleged U.S. involvement with an accused Bulgarian “spy” demonstrated at the U.S. Legation, breaking windows and overturning a number of automobiles. The Legation immediately protested the lack of police protection to the Bulgarian Foreign Ministry. PARTICIPANTS U.S. EUR—Mr. Richard H. Davis, Acting Assistant Secretary for European Affairs EE—Mr. Merrill A. White, Bulgarian Desk Officer Bulgarian Lyubomir Popov, Minister, Bulgarian Embassy Mr. Davis opened the conversation saying he imagined Minister Popov knew, either from his own sources or from the radio, what the subject was to be. Mr. Davis continued saying he was under instructions to protest strongly the mob attack on our Legation in Sofia and the failure to provide prompt and adequate police protection. We hold the Bulgarian Government fully responsible and will expect either restoration or compensation for the damaged property, both government and privately-owned. Mr. Davis mentioned he was also surprised at the delay in bringing up militia reinforcements, particularly since he understood that the militiaman at the entrance to the Legation had a telephone at his disposal. Continuing, Mr. Davis said that we expect the Bulgarian authorities will take immediate and effective action to assure the safety of the lives of official American personnel and the security of US property. We object also to the fact there was nearly a six-hour delay in the arrangement of an appointment for our charge to see an appropriate official of the Foreign Office.After meeting with lower level Foreign Office officials on December 27, charge Richard Johnson conveyed an oral protest over the incident to Foreign Minister Chernev on December 28. Johnson reported on their meeting in telegram 395 from Sofia, December 28. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 25–3 Bul) We expect that Minister Popov will communicate this protest to his Government as quickly as possible. Mr. Davis also reminded Minister Popov of the Memorandum of Understanding Regarding Resumption of Diplomatic Relations signed by Minister Popov’s predecessor, Dr. Voutov, and read a portion of this memorandum: “… members of the staffs of the diplomatic missions of each country who are nationals of the sending country shall enjoy in the territory of the other the privileges and immunities derived from generally recognized international law and practice.”Ellipsis in the source text. Mr. Davis concluded saying that such occurrences could only have damaging effects on US-Bulgarian relations. Minister Popov briefly replied saying he had been informed that the demonstration was spontaneous and had been brought under control as soon as the Bulgarian authorities were aware of it. He said the occurrence was unfortunate and that he had every wish to keep our relations moving forward. When he again described the demonstration as spontaneous, Mr. Davis reminded him that he had used no adjective to modify the word demonstration. Apparently very anxious to leave a rather embarrassing subject, Minister Popov concluded saying that he would relay our protest immediately to his Government. Before leaving, Minister Popov then asked a technical question concerning the MFN provision in the Foreign Assistance Act of 1963. Poland 30. Memorandum From President Eisenhower to Secretary of State HerterSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/1–2061. Confidential. Washington, January 20, 1961. Presidential Determination No. 61–18 SUBJECT Determination under Section 451(a) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended, permitting the furnishing of economic credit to Poland In accordance with the recommendation in your memorandum of January 20, 1961,In this memorandum, Herter recommended immediate action to establish a legal basis for further consideration of the issue with the Polish Government “with the understanding that the execution thereof be left to the new Administration” in the light of reports of a Polish trade agreement with Cuba. In a handwritten note at the bottom of the document, Eisenhower gave his approval subject to the understanding that such aid would not be offered to any country “obviously hostile to us.” (Ibid.) I hereby determine, pursuant to Section 451(a) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”), that it is important to the security of the United States that up to $5,000,000 of funds made available under Section 451(b) of the Act be used as described in your memorandum for a credit by the Export-Import Bank of Washington to the Polish Government without regard to the requirements of the Act, the Mutual Security and Related Agencies Appropriation Act, 1961, and the Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act of 1951, and, from such funds, I hereby direct that $5,000,000 be transferred to the Export-Import Bank of Washington for the foregoing purpose. You are requested on my behalf to give appropriate notice of this determination, pursuant to Section 513 of the Act, to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives. The Secretary of Defense, the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, and the Export-Import Bank of Washington are likewise to be notified by you of this determination. Dwight D. Eisenhower The foregoing approval is subject to the terms of the memorandum of Secretary Herter for General Goodpaster of January 20, 1961, which is hereby made a part of this document. 31. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/1–2361. Confidential. Drafted by Katz and initialed by Kohler. Washington, January 23, 1961. SUBJECT Approach to Polish Ambassador Concerning Reported Polish Credit to Cuba PARTICIPANTS Romuald Spasowski, Polish Ambassador Foy D. Kohler, EUR Julius L. Katz, EE Mr. Kohler informed the Ambassador that President Eisenhower had in principle approved the proposed $5 million credit to Poland, subject, however, to review by the new Administration. The reason for this, Mr. Kohler stated, was that subsequent to the Ambassador’s last call in the Department, we have received reliable reports that Poland is offering long term credits to Cuba at aid-type interest rates. Mr. Kohler called attention to the provision of the Mutual Security Appropriation Act of 1961 (Section 110)For text of this act, P.L. 86–794, approved September 2, 1960, see 74 Stat. 776. Section 110 forbade U.S. aid to a government that provided economic or military assistance to the “Castro regime” unless the President determined that the withholding of such aid would be contrary to U.S. national interest. which bars the use of funds appropriated under the Act to any country that provides economic and military aid to the Castro regime. A problem has therefore arisen with respect to the proposed US credit to Poland and we require all facts regarding the reported Polish credit offer to Cuba. Specifically, it is necessary for us to know a) whether the reported credit offer is correct; b) if correct, whether the offer has been accepted; and c) if accepted, the volume and intended utilization of the credit. Mr. Kohler pointed out that it was fair to say that the policy established under the law contemplated that we would not give help to other countries in order that they in turn might aid the Castro regime. The Ambassador stated that he had some information on the matter but preferred to seek full facts and instructions from Warsaw. He felt it necessary, however, to express regret that Polish relations with Cuba were being linked to a credit from the US to Poland. Mr. Kohler pointed to the requirement of the law which has been well-known to the Polish Embassy and, we assume, to the Polish Government. Speaking personally, Mr. Kohler stated that he could not understand how Polish involvement in Cuba could serve Polish interests. Poland had no real commercial interests in Cuba and its aid offers to Cuba would be regarded as obviously politically-motivated and as unfriendly acts towards the US. The Ambassador commented that the volume of Polish-Cuban trade was very small and should not stand in the way of US-Polish relations. At the same time, he realized that the Cuban issue was charged with emotion in the US and unwarranted conclusions could be drawn with respect to transactions which the Polish Government regards as normal from a commercial viewpoint. 32. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/2–761. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Warsaw, February 7, 1961, 4 p.m. 1119. Probably for reasons mentioned Embtel 1003Telegram 1003, January 16, reported a Polish approach concerning U.S. financing of a fertilizer plant. (Ibid., 748.5–MSP/1–1661) Minister and Vice Minister Trade and more recently Gottesman, journalist said to be close to Rapacki, have been pressing me reopening discussions on new PL480 Agreement.Formally titled the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act, enacted July 10, 1954; for text, see 68 Stat. 454. I have replied had no information on subject. Gottesman referred relative lack of impact our assistance to Poland with which we incline to agree while disagreeing his rationalization. According to Gottesman US should have made available in 1957–58 block credit of 300 million–350 million for Poland’s immediate use, either for agricultural products or capital equipment as regime saw fit. This of course was impractical and probably would not have brought us much more recognition in public eye since regime’s will to accord us such public credit has been notably lacking. Especially in past year there has been practically no mention in press of amounts or intrinsic value US assistance. If US disposed consider further PL480 Agreement point could be made by new administration we are disappointed with apparent unwillingness of Polish Government to accord due public recognition to scope and value of US economic assistance and cooperation. Since no political strings attached our assistance we are not asking for appreciation but merely actual recognition. Allusion might be made to pressing world food shortages, necessity PL480 priorities under expanding food for peace program and possibility that US agricultural resources might be utilized to better advantage elsewhere. Perhaps not as sticking point but as leverage in negotiations we would like to reiterate proposal to reduce grace repayment period on any new PL480 agreement to 3 or 5 years in order to stimulate Polish planning and interest in agreeing promptly to projects to be financed by local currency as and when Battle Act amended. In this regard we note Poles agreed to 5 year grace period previous agreements, that extention to 10 years granted 1960 was designed ease balance of payments in relation to nationalization claims agreement pending at that time, and that extension did not involve commitment future agreements. Also note that Polish balance of payments position at least with US probably has improved over past months. Poland might well be required during course any negotiations to document their balance of payments position. We believe Poland and bloc grain position through 1961 harvest probably sufficiently strained that Poland would accept 3 or 5 years. Also believe that 300,000 tons grain probably should be outside limit any PL480 Agreement prior completion 1961 harvest. Beam 33. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Official Use Only. Drafted by Tims and approved in S on March 3. Washington, February 10, 1961. SUBJECT Polish Ambassador’s Call Upon the Secretary PARTICIPANTS Romuald Spasowski, Ambassador of the Polish People’s Republic The Secretary EE—Richard W. Tims The Polish Ambassador called on the Secretary at his own request. He stated that his call was primarily one of courtesy, but that he was leaving for Warsaw in ten days and would like to be able to tell his government the United States’ views on certain subjects, particularly the President’s proposal to explore uses of funds that had accumulated in Poland from U.S. sales of commodities under PL 480. He asked whether there was anything he might say regarding the United States’ ideas of such uses as well as how soon the bilateral discussion of them might be expected to start. The Secretary replied that the negotiation of this matter naturally would depend on when Congress might amend the Battle Act.For text of the Mutual Defense Control Act of 1951, P.L. 213, approved October 26, 1951, see 65 Stat. 644. In any case, he thought formal negotiations might well be preceded by informal discussions at that time. The United States was thinking, he said, of projects in which the United States and Poland could cooperate for peaceful and friendly purposes, such as research for the solution of problems in medicine and agriculture, for example, as well as undertakings for broad benefit in economic and related fields. The Ambassador said that in another field, that of cultural exchanges, Polish-American relations had developed in gratifying fashion. He said that upon his return from Warsaw he would like to take up with the Department the question of working out an informal agreement to facilitate a further improvement of planning in this field. The Secretary said that there were two points he would like to emphasize to the Ambassador at this time, regarding the current status of United States-Polish relations. First, he said, he believed these relations were on a solid foundation of friendship and interest, and the United States sincerely wanted to see them continue and develop. Second, there was a critical area of which the Polish Government should take careful note in these relations, that of Cuba. The United States, he said, must take the gravest view of any move from outside this hemisphere to set up or assist an alien power within it. The Monroe Doctrine was very much alive, whatever changes may have occurred in ways of enforcing it. He said he believed Poland’s relations with Cuba were of marginal importance compared with its relations with the United States, and it was to be hoped that Poland would not jeopardize the latter by extending aid to the present Cuban government. The Ambassador replied that Poland’s relations with Cuba were only normal trade relations, and that Poland could not say it would refrain from such normal trade with any country. However, he said he understood the United States’ viewpoint which the Secretary was enunciating, and he would report it to his government. The Ambassador in closing said that he wished to make a statement about Polish-German relations. In general, he said, Poland’s views were well known. Regarding the most recent development, however, involving certain approaches to Poland by the German Federal Government ostensibly in the interest of improving their relations, he wished to say that the Polish Government was unable to take them seriously. They did not feel that there was any sincere intention behind the German moves, because these were counterbalanced by contrary German statements and actions which continued to go on at the same time. The Ambassador said he understood the Secretary would be seeing German Foreign Secretary von Brentano in Washington next week, and he was telling him these things in the hope that he would bear them in mind during his talks with von Brentano.Brentano visited Washington February 17. The Secretary replied that he of course could not speak for the motivation of the German Government in the matter alluded to, but that he was interested in having the Ambassador’s views on the subject and would bear them in mind. 34. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/4–1062. Official Use Only. Drafted by Tims and approved in S on April 17. Washington, April 10, 1961. SUBJECT Review of Polish-United States Relations by the Polish Ambassador PARTICIPANTS Romuald Spasowski, Ambassador of the Polish People’s Republic Dr. Marian Dobrosielski, Counselor of Embassy The Secretary of State EE—Richard W. Tims The Polish Ambassador called at his request following his return from a month’s consultation with his Government in Warsaw. The Ambassador said that while in Warsaw he had reviewed Polish-United States relations with Foreign Minister Rapacki, Politburo member Ochab, and other high officials, and that he would like to report to the Secretary on a number of points. His Government was pleased, he said, with the development of cultural exchange over the past year and would like to see it go still further, particularly the exchange of persons. They would also like to make an arrangement with the United States for technical assistance. In the field of consular relations the Ambassador said that his government was generally satisfied, but that the right to establish a consulate in New York City was one improvement which they would like to request. They would prefer to issue only diplomatic visas at Washington and to move their consulate from there to New York, where it would be much more useful to them, he said. In the field of economic relations Ambassador Spasowski said his Government hoped to see a number of developments. They wished there could be a broader licensing of exports of industrial equipment. They were interested in obtaining investment credits from the United States, in addition to the $5 million credit recently negotiated and still pending. As regards trade, they hoped that the question of dumping recently raised against certain Polish exports would be cleared up. The Ambassador wanted the Secretary to know that this question had aroused serious concern in high quarters in Warsaw, since it threw the planning of exports into a state of uncertainty and threatened to delay the expansion of Polish-United States trade which had been counted on after the granting of most-favored-nation treatment last fall. The Ambassador said his Government was actively looking into the question, raised by President Kennedy in his State of the Union message,For text of the State of the Union address, January 30, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 19–28. of finding appropriate uses for Polish currency owned by the United States, and would be ready to negotiate this matter formally when the Battle Act was amended. Meanwhile, he said, they did not look with favor on a direct discussion of this subject with Polish institutions by visiting representatives of private American organizations, and they also hoped that its discussion by the Congress would not involve airing of difficult political issues. The Secretary remarked at this point that we would favor starting informal discussions of ways to use the PL 480 proceeds, even before amendment of the Battle Act. Ambassador Spasowski next stated that he was instructed to say his Government would like to begin negotiation with the United States of a three-year agreement to obtain further grains, cotton, and oils under PL 480. The Secretary queried whether such a time span might not have drawbacks in view of the impossibility of foreseeing all the complexities that far ahead, particularly outside the economic field. The Ambassador replied that they counted on a continued detente in political relations and that a longer period than the previous annual loans would facilitate planning and stability. In concluding, the Ambassador remarked that his previous call on the Secretary had happened to take place on the eve of German Foreign Secretary von Brentano’s visit here, and that by a coincidence his call today just preceded the visit of Chancellor Adenauer.Adenauer visited Washington April 12–13. Apropos of this he wanted to repeat that his Government’s views about Germany had not changed. They felt more than ever that the Adenauer government was a menace because it supported groups demanding territorial revisions and because it was building up an aggressive military potential. Before leaving, Ambassador Spasowski informed the Secretary that he was being withdrawn from his Washington assignment and that in the next few days agreement would be requested for his successor, Mr. Edward Drozniak, the present Deputy Minister of Finance and President of the Bank of Poland. The Secretary complimented the Ambassador for his conduct of the mission to Washington during a period which had seen United States-Polish relations take a significant turn for the better, and expressed the hope that they might meet again in the future. 35. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/5–661. Official Use Only. Drafted and approved by Vedeler. Washington, May 6, 1961, 1:57 p.m. 1244. In separate luncheon conversations with Department officers May 5 Lychowski and Raczkowski raised questions re beginning of negotiations for new PL 480 agreement. They were informed that we preparing for negotiations and undertaking necessary paperwork at once. When pressed for exact date for initiation negotiations we said while we could not state with certainty we hoped begin discussions at least by last week in May. Pointed out we faced with difficulties such as recent speeches Jaroszewicz and other Polish leaders sharply attacking US which had held back beginning discussions. Also pointed out to Lychowski another problem this connection was exorbitant figure 2.50 million zlotys Warsaw city authorities asking for relocation tenants from Zawrat 6 which US desired for site Ambassador’s residence (your letter to Vedeler April 14)Not found.. Said this matter had come to attention of Congressman recently visiting Warsaw and this Congressional interest further reason for working out acceptable compromise; in effort reach reasonable settlement we willing pay half of 2–1/2 million figure. Lychowski’s assistance sought in disposing this problem and he indicated he would communicate with Warsaw. In response Raczkowski’s question re prospects for $5 million credit he informed matter under active consideration but events of recent weeks have not helped Polish case. Bowles 36. Memorandum of Conversation Between the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) and the Economic Minister of the Polish Embassy (Lychowski)Source: Department of State, Polish Desk Files: Lot 67 D 238, PL 480 Negotiations 1961. Confidential. Drafted by Rostow. Washington, June 5, 1961. Dr. Lychowski called on me today, Monday, June 5, 1961, to assure that the U.S. Government, at a sufficiently high and responsible level, understood fully the political implications, as he saw them, of the PL 480 negotiation in which he is now engaged. He believes that if we proceed with this long run agreement there will be two major political consequences. First, American industry will be brought into intimate contact, over a wide range, with Polish industry. I asked him what political basis there was in Poland for such an intensification of contact. He said that Gomulka had fought and won a major battle; namely, a battle to permit Polish industry to develop on lines of comparative advantage with respect to the international economy as a whole rather than merely on the basis of the requirements of the Communist bloc. He stated that there were, perhaps, five years in which Poland could make good on Gomulka’s policy which evidently went to the degree of long run political independence that Poland might be able to enjoy. And the proposals leading to more intimate association between American and Polish industry were, in his view, crucial to the success of Gomulka’s policy. Second, with respect to agriculture, the use of counterpart funds in the rehabilitation of Polish agriculture, combined with the tiding over of the Polish food deficit, would not only guarantee that the relatively free condition of Polish agricultural life would be maintained but that the U.S. would be associated in an intimate relationship with that 47% of the Polish population which is still in rural areas. In general, he expressed the hope that the decision on his proposals would not be taken on the American side without a full appreciation of the political implications as seen on the Polish side. To understand these implications required both political insight and professional economic knowledge of the proposals. It was for that reason, he stated, that he had approached me. WR 37. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Official Use Only. Drafted by Vedeler and approved by the White House on June 21. Washington, June 15, 1961. SUBJECT Farewell Call of the Polish Ambassador PARTICIPANTS The President Ambassador Romuald Spasowski, Embassy of the Polish People’s Republic Harold C. Vedeler—EE The President opened the conversation by commenting on the change in US-Polish relations that had taken place during the Ambassador’s stay here of the past six years. The President said that he understood the Ambassador had done much to help in this development and had been very cooperative. The President was sorry to see the Ambassador who had contributed so much to these relations leave from his pres-ent assignment. The Ambassador replied that he had tried to do all he could to assist in this improvement. The President said there had been some recent statements which were not helpful to these relations but he did not believe that they would do any fundamental harm to them. He continued that it was important to have harmonious relations between the United States and Poland since this contributed to reduce international tensions of a general nature. The Ambassador heartily agreed to this last statement and added that his Government wanted to see the further growth of these relations. The Ambassador then said that he would like to raise two points before leaving. The first of these was economic in character and related to the continuing interest of his Government in the further expansion of economic relations between Poland and the United States. In this connection he mentioned the economic negotiations now in progress and expressed the hope that there would be another agreement for a PL-480 transaction. He also referred to the matter of an industrial credit for Poland indicating that his Government hoped that attention would be paid to this interest of Poland. He would be extremely glad if such negotiations would not be too prolonged and, alluding to a statement of the President, he said the results of the negotiations should not be too little and too late. In introducing the second matter that he wished to raise he mentioned that he had discussed several times in the Department during his stay in Washington the German question and its significance for Poland. A focal point of the German question for Poland was the German-Polish border and he desired to recall that the Polish people could not understand the lack of a clearly defined American position on this subject. He said it would be much better for US-Polish relations if the United States Government could make a definitive statement on the boundary. The President replied that the question of the border was connected with the problem of Berlin. It was difficult for the United States to take a position on the boundary question opposed by the German Government and at the same time to obtain any settlement of the Berlin question. As the Ambassador was aware the United States has maintained the position that it was not possible to settle the boundary question until there was a German peace settlement. But if an understanding could be reached on Berlin then some of these other problems might be resolved. The President said that he knew of course how the Polish people feel about the border question. The Ambassador concluded his remarks on the subject of the German-Polish boundary by reiterating that a statement by the United States on this subject would substantially assist relations between the United States and Poland. The discussion then turned again to economic relations between the two countries. The President said that the amendment to the Battle Act had been passed by the Senate and was now in the House. It was indicated that discussions looking toward a new PL 480 agreement were in progress and that the agreement was expected to be concluded in several weeks. The Ambassador expressed his disappointment that it had not been possible for the United States to extend the credit of $5 million to Poland which had been under discussion from the previous administration. He then referred to the declining curve of industrial credits for Poland pointing out that credits of $30 million had been extended in 1957, $25 million in 1958, $6 million in 1959 and none in 1960. It was explained that while an industrial credit of $5 million had been under consideration for some months problems had been encountered by the US Government because of the extension by Poland of a credit of $13 million to Cuba. It had accordingly not been possible to complete action on this matter during the present fiscal year and the allocation had been lost. The question of further industrial credit to Poland would need to await consideration in the next fiscal year. (At this point the President said that he would like to have from the Department a background paper on the previous request of the Poles for a $5 million credit and on their current interest in industrial credits.) The President then asked who the Ambassador’s successor would be and the latter replied that Mr. Drozniak, an extremely able man, would be coming to Washington soon to take his place. The President asked what the Ambassador would do as his next assignment to which the Ambassador replied that he would be in charge of African and Asian affairs at Warsaw. The President inquired what the extent of the trade was between Poland and France. The Ambassador said he was not precisely informed about the extent of the current trade between the two countries. As for the trade between Poland and Britain it amounted to $50 million on one side and Polish exports to the United States during last year reached $37 million. The Ambassador commented that economic relations between Poland and the United States had increased substantially and said that his Government anticipated a further increase in exports. He said that ham which the Americans liked constituted the principal export to the United States. The President asked if the formation of the Common Market would present problems for Poland and the Ambassador stated that it would. As the Ambassador was about to leave the President said that he had been extremely cooperative and had apparently done much for the benefit of the relations between the two countries. The Ambassador noted the special interest in Polish affairs which the President had taken, expressed appreciation of this and the hope that this interest would continue. In saying goodbye the President indicated that he had a new reason for interest in Polish matters since his new godchild was on one side of Polish descent. 38. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/7–2461. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Katz; cleared by Blumenthal, Tyler, and the Department of Agriculture; and approved by Kohler. Washington, July 25, 1961, 8:43 p.m. 124. Embtel 140.Telegram 140, July 24, stated: “Cannot concur program outlined Deptel 101 and hope will not be presented Polish delegation pending our considered comments.” (Ibid.) Program outlined Deptel 101Dated July 21. (Ibid., 611.4841/7–2161) based on high level consideration relevant factors, including supply situation in Poland, requirements our policy toward Poland, question whether policy should be maintained, effect of Berlin crisis on policy and effect PL 480 program on Berlin contingency planning. Have given careful consideration recommendations contained recent Embassy communications and have had full discussion with Donnelly, who argued effectively for significant cut from last year’s program. While proposed program developed subsequent Donnelly’s departure and cannot claim it has his endorsement do not believe it inconsistent his argumentation. Decision proceed with program at this time based principally on judgment it essential if policy toward and present relations with Poland to be maintained. Failure proceed at this time would be interpreted as measure connected with Berlin crisis. This would be counter to posture we wish to assume at this stage crisis. While level of program could be open to differing views believe there is minimum essential level required to maintain present degree Polish dependence on US. Providing too little may be worse than nothing at all. Extreme short tether approach as suggested your G–555Airgram G–555, June 23, reported Embassy comments on Lychowski’s statement on the Polish position in economic contacts. (Ibid., 411.62041/6–2361) would in our judgment lead Poles reevaluate their relations with us.In telegram 152 from Warsaw, July 26, the Embassy reiterated its concerns and outlined its objections to the size of the proposed Polish economic assistance program. (Ibid., 611.4841/7–2661) Letter follows.Not found. Rusk 39. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Country Files, Poland. Confidential. Washington, July 27, 1961. SUBJECT Report on Status of Pending PL 480 Negotiations with Poland Pursuant to your request, made during the call of the Polish Ambassador on July 19,A memorandum of President Kennedy’s July 19 conversation with Ambassador Drozniak is in Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/7–1961. there follows a report on the status of current PL 480 negotiations with Poland. As I indicated in my memorandum of June 22,Not printed. (Ibid., 785.5–MSP/6–2261) reporting on the background of United States assistance programs to Poland since 1957, a new round of economic talks was initiated with Polish representatives at Washington on June 2. In its initial presentation, the Polish side expressed interest in (1) a large, four-year Title I agreement under PL 480 (sales for Polish currency); (2) a Title IV, PL 480 agreement (long-term dollar credit) for commodities ineligible under Title I; (3) purchase of $150 million worth of United States industrial equipment and technology over the next four years to be financed out of private and United States Government credits and Poland’s own funds; (4) a technical exchange agreement; and (5) utilization of PL 480 zloty proceeds on flood control and other land improvement projects. In response to the Polish presentation, the United States representative stated that due to legal obstacles, pending legislation and international political uncertainties, we were not prepared at this time to consider long-term arrangements under PL 480. Neither were we prepared to consider credits for purchase of industrial goods. We were prepared however to consider (1) a one-year PL 480 agreement under Title I; (2) increased Polish industrial purchases in the United States without reference to United States credits (i.e., out of Poland’s own dollar resources); (3) a possible technical exchange agreement; and (4) uses of United States zloty holdings for projects in Poland which might be possible in the event the Battle Act is amended. Our discussions with the Poles over the past month have concentrated primarily on the subject of a possible one-year PL 480 agreement. The Poles have requested a program amounting to $190–$200 million. We are now conducting third-country consultations on a program of $91–$125 million. It is our intention, however, to hold the program, if agreed upon, close to a level of $100 million. In view of heightening tensions arising out of the Berlin crisis there is a question whether we should now proceed with any further agreements with Poland. I note that in your conversation with the Polish Ambassador on July 19, you alluded to this question. I believe that a refusal on our part to conclude a PL 480 agreement with Poland in the next few weeks would have serious consequences in our relations with Poland and might well mean the end of the special relationship with that country which has developed since the advent of the Gomulka regime. The Polish Government would conclude that it could not rely upon the United States as a source of supply for important agricultural commodities and would move quickly to make other arrangements. It would seek imports from other sources, including the USSR, but would probably also introduce a series of restrictive measures at home upon consumers and upon the peasantry. I do not believe that the time has yet come when we should abandon our present policy toward Poland. Maintenance of Poland’s dependence upon the United States for agricultural commodities may in fact be useful since it may encourage Gomulka to exercise some restraint upon Khrushchev, although this hope should not be relied upon. The principal problem we face, however, is that of explaining publicly the conclusion of a $100 million program for Poland at a time when we are facing the Berlin threat and are taking military and economic measures to meet this threat. I think this explanation can be made. I would recommend that your address to the nation on July 25For text of the President’s address, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 533–540. establish the general posture that it would be undesirable to alter precipitately those established relations and policies we have developed toward the countries of Eastern Europe pending further developments and a more precise appraisal of Soviet intentions and actions regarding Berlin. If this is done, conclusion of an agreement with Poland in the coming weeks can be justified by reference to this general posture. If you agree with this reasoning, we would like to present our initial PL 480 proposal to the Poles early in the week of July 24.Minutes of the U.S.-Polish meetings are in Department of State, Polish Desk Files: Lot 67 D 19. Dean RuskPrinted from a copy that bears this stamped signature. 40. Memorandum of Conversation Between the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) and the Economic Minister of the Polish Embassy (Lychowski)Source: Department of State, Polish Desk Files: Lot 67 D 238, PL 480 General. Confidential. Drafted by Rostow. Washington, August 4, 1961, 11:45 a.m. Dr. Lychowski called on me today. He made the following points. 1. The Polish government will announce that its harvest this year is about 1.4 million tons greater than last year’s harvest. This figure will be false. The true increase will be of the order of magnitude of 5–600,000 tons. He said the reason for the lie was that Gomulka was under very heavy pressure from other Communist parties to go back to collectivization. He wants to be in the position of saying that his method works well. Further, Dr. Lychowski stated flatly that the Soviet grain harvest this year will be bad. The 400,000 tons of grain deliveries to Poland from the Soviet Union will come; but they will come late. In the light of the modest increase in the Polish harvest and the probable slowness in Soviet deliveries, he expressed the hope that we would find it possible to provide at least the same amount of grain under the PL 480 agreement as we did last year. That is, he said, 1.4 million tons. He advanced two political arguments for our continued support at this level. First, that we should help Gomulka continue to avoid collectivization (he described his mission in Washington as “helping the Old Man” maintain his agricultural policy); second, that Soviet tourists from the western provinces of Russia to Poland are increasing, and an ample Polish supply of bread and meat in Poland is good propaganda. He stated that in Russia, while the cities have enough bread, there is some trouble with the bread supply in the provinces. 2. He raised the question of whether, in line with a contingent agreement with the Eisenhower Administration, we might find it possible to allocate in FY 1962 $5 million from the contingency fund via the Export-Import Bank for the purchase of industrial equipment in the U.S. 3. He told me of the Western European complaint that U.S. PL 480 grain was permitting Poland to increase its exports of animal products to Western Europe. He stated that the Department of Agriculture has a long reply to this charge. If it were regarded as a serious matter by the U.S., Poland would be prepared to buy feed grains for dollars in the U.S. up to a limited amount, to be financed through the Export-Import Bank via the contingency fund; or, alternatively—as I understood his argument—Poland would be prepared to buy feed grains in dollars if the contingency fund were used to finance an equivalent amount of the transport costs of PL 480 grain shipments. I received these statements without comment. W. W. RostowPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 41. National Security Action Memorandum No. 75Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 75. Confidential. A copy was sent to the Director, USIA. Washington, August 20, 1961. TO The Secretary of State SUBJECT Polish Government Taxes on Relief Packages Is there anything we can properly do to persuade the Polish Government to lift their present restrictions in taxes which Polish recipients of a relief package must pay. I understand that shipment of used clothing makes up the bulk of the traffic.In a memorandum to the President, October 19, Secretary Rusk reported that Polish customs levies had been reduced and that discussions with approximately 150 recipients of these packages produced only three complaints, all related to duties on new clothing imports. “The Embassy expressed its continuing belief that the new tariff presents no difficulty to recipients of normal gift parcels.” (Ibid.) John F. KennedyPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 42. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Educational and Cultural Affairs (Coombs) to President KennedySource: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 74. No classification marking. Drafted by Coombs. Attached to a memorandum from Battle to Bundy, August 25. This memorandum replied to NSAM No. 74, August 20, which reads: “Is there any pressure that we should put on the Polish Government to permit exchange students to be selected by American foundations rather than the Polish Government?” (Ibid.) Washington, August 24, 1961. SUBJECT Polish Exchange Program The problem you raised about the selection of Polish recipients of private foundation grants has just been resolved—at least for the pres-ent. On August 22, under threat by the Ford Foundation to terminate the program, the Polish Ambassadors to the United States and United Nations gave satisfactory assurances to Mr. Stone of the Foundation that their government would withdraw its objection to most of the grantees in dispute. You may be interested in the attached details.Not found. During a courtesy call in my office on August 24, the new Polish Ambassador reaffirmed to me that the issue between his government and the Ford Foundation had been happily resolved. He personally is anxious to expand educational and cultural exchanges between Poland and the United States. At his urging, the Polish embassy here will soon have a cultural attache. I indicated that we are prepared to cooperate in an expanded exchange effort. We will meet again in a few weeks to discuss concrete plans. Philip H. CoombsPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 43. National Security Action Memorandum No. 79Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 79. Confidential. Washington, August 25, 1961. MEMORANDUM FOR The Secretary of State I have examined the question of the economic negotiations with Poland, and concluded that it would be desirable to come to an agreement incorporating the present State Department offer of 500,000 tons of grain and the Polish request for a promise of a review in the light of the actual size of the Polish harvest. I think the agreement to review should be used as a means of getting better performance from Poland in respect to: (a) information to the Polish people on American aid; (b) the selection of exchange students, which should be done by our Foundations, rather than the Polish Government; and (c) to the extent that the law permits, use of counterpart zloty on projects such as schools and hospitals, which demonstrate to the Polish people American concern for them. John F. Kennedy 44. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0048/10–161. Secret; Niact. Warsaw, October 10, 1961, 1 p.m. 653. US economic relations comprise mixture numerous activities inter-related with informational and cultural programs and broad political considerations. Re Deptel 538Telegram 538, October 7, reported that the United States would instigate a policy review of its relations with Poland. (Ibid., 448.119/10–761) important any review US trade and aid policy Poland differentiate specific economic activities and evaluate their relationship other fields. Basic economic activity is mutual commercial trade. Actual and potential benefits of increased dollar earnings from growing exports to US are a major Polish regime incentive to exercise some restraint in its relations with US. Conversely, significantly reduced export expectations especially if due US Government restrictions would weaken US influence potential and probably evoke bitter regime recriminations of bad faith in view mounting Ex-ImBank, PL–480, and nationalization claims re payment obligations over next years. On import side, Polish purchases US goods relatively unimportant to Poland except for high technology already limited by export licensing procedures. Complete discontinuation licensing US exports to Poland mentioned reference telegram will not seriously pinch Polish economy unless in concert other NATO countries. Unilateral refusal all licenses by US would, however, create ill-will Polish regime to no useful purposes but would result diversion Polish hard currency earnings to other Western suppliers who already have competitive advantage due geography, ability offer credit terms, and more expeditious licensing procedures. Furthermore, this would be contrary US effort maneuver Poles into increased purchasing and dependence US market, and would offer ready-made anti-US propaganda. Most important economic activity in terms actual and potential US influence is PL–480 grain deliveries for which Poland has real immediate and long term need. Expectation US may meet major portion this need is the major tangible and negotiable Western restraint on Polish regime. Its removal would stimulate retrogressive domestic forces and promote further deterioration US-Polish relations with adverse effect other US programs in Poland. PL–480 is the major component of the economic framework constructed by US over past five years to support a wide range of US informational and cultural programs and facilitate general US access here. However imperfectly this framework may be operating at present, it does serve to maintain US-Polish communication at a scope and depth unique to the Communist bloc. While further US Government and private credits primarily for industrial purchases are greatly desired by Poland, there is no reason believe regime prepared make any significant concessions obtain them. Also such credits not essential element maintenance reasonable level relations. Other important but not critical activities in US-Polish economic relations include US Government support private US charity programs, direct remittances, including PL–480 local currency projects, etc. While these carry economic benefits, they also serve enhance US presence in Poland. Pending and potential economic activities include ICA technical assistance, the President’s local currency “Projects for Peace”. Regime appears interested former but reluctant latter since they could and should involve major expansion US influence. In sum, continuing and prospective economic benefits provide tangible supporting framework of US-Polish relations as well as probably most effective—but by no means totally effective—points of leverage on the regime. Accordingly it essential this framework be maintained through current stresses in order that it may be exploited to preserve and as opportunity presents expand US influence. Embassy recommendations A. Trade. 1. That no attempt be make at this time to interfere with the commercial development of Polish exports to the US; 2. That licensing of US exports to Poland be continued according to previous criteria for the time being. B. PL–480. 3. That the broad policy concepts of PL–480 assistance to Poland be maintained for the present; 4. That the pending PL–480 agreement with Poland be concluded as promptly as domestic and international circumstances permit; 5. That more US desiderata be negotiated into or concurrently with PL–480 agreements with Poland. C. Aid—Other activities. 6. That industrial credits be denied Poland short of major improvement US-Polish relations; 7. That private US charities operating in Poland continue to receive US Government support as effective means expressing US concern for Polish population; 8. That other non-critical economic activities in Poland be continued at this time. D. Aid—New activities. 9. That planning for modest ICA technical assistance project be readied for implementation when circumstances permit, as vehicle for US influence in Poland; 10. That US planning and discussions with Poles for “Peace Proj-ects” continue and Polish agreement in principle, contingent Battle Act revision, be made condition any further PL–480 agreement. NB: Pertinent Embassy views US trade and aid policy were set forth at length in despatches 40, July 29, 1960, and 344, January 13, 1961, as well as draft “Guidelines US Policy and Operations Concerning Poland”, August 14, 1961.Despatch 40 transmitted the Embassy’s review of U.S. policy on Polish economic management. (Ibid., 411.4841/7–1960) Despatch 344 examined U.S. policy toward Poland since 1957. (Ibid., 611.48/1–1361) “Guidelines for Policy and Operations in Poland” is ibid., S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Poland. Magistretti 45. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting of October 13, 1961. Secret. Attached to a memorandum from Battle to Bundy, October 12. The paper was discussed at the 491st meeting of the National Security Council on October 13; see Document 46. For additional documentation on the subject of export licenses for Yugoslavia, see Documents 102 ff. Washington, October 11, 1961. REVIEW OF POLICY FACTORS CONCERNING LICENSING OF EXPORTS TO YUGOSLAVIA AND POLAND Problem: The President decided at the White House meeting on September 22No record of this meeting has been found. that export licenses for shipments to Yugoslavia and Poland should not be issued pending review of this question. Such licenses have been withheld since September 18. Prior to September 18 our treatment of exports to Yugoslavia and Poland was derived from our general policy toward those countries, based upon a careful and continuing analysis of our long range interests and objectives. To make a determination on the future licensing of exports to Yugoslavia and Poland, it therefore seems essential to re-examine the validity of our general policies toward those countries. A re-examination of our general policies is also desirable in order to provide future guidelines for other aspects of US relations with these two countries, including the daily conduct of diplomatic contacts, aid programs, trade policies, technical assistance activities, cultural exchange arrangements, etc. It is important at the outset to emphasize the profound differences between Poland and Yugoslavia. Their internal political and social structures are different; their general international postures are different; their relations with the US are different. Accordingly, the treatment they have received from the US has differed considerably. The principal point of similarity between the two countries is their mutual dedication to the general philosophy of Marxism, but even this philosophy has been interpreted and applied in different ways. In terms of US interests and objectives, there is no more validity in lumping Poland with Yugoslavia than there would be in lumping Tunisia with Ghana. Therefore, while the need for re-examining our policies is equally urgent for both countries, it is essential that each country be considered separately. I. Yugoslavia A. General Policies Up to the present time, US policy toward Yugoslavia has been based on the following premises: 1. Yugoslavia, while subject to a Communist dictatorship, is not a part of the Sino-Soviet bloc. In 1948 the Yugoslav Government, under Tito’s leadership, broke away from Soviet control and the international Communist movement. Since that time Yugoslavia has shown a vigorous determination to preserve its national identity and freedom from outside domination. 2. To a considerable extent, Yugoslavia has opened itself to Western ideas and institutions. It has also evolved an economic and political system which differs substantially from that of the Soviet Union. Yugo-slavia’s economy has undergone a process of decentralization with definite elements of competition and individual incentive. In this connection, it is important to note that Yugoslavia has achieved a rate of economic growth greater than is found anywhere in the Soviet bloc. 3. Yugoslavia’s independence of Soviet control has been emphasized by Yugoslavia’s participation as member or observer in certain international organizations in which the Soviet bloc does not participate and which, in some respects, are antithetical to Soviet ambitions. These include the GATT, the European Productivity Agency, the OEEC and the new OECD. Yugoslavia is also a member of the International Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, which protects US patent and trade mark rights in Yugoslavia. While the US has no formal copyright relations with Yugoslavia, few serious copyright problems have actually arisen. 4. Within the context of the “cold war”, Yugoslavia is a neutral country and usually behaves as such. It frequently takes positions on international issues that are opposed to US attitudes and interests, but this is equally true of other neutral nations. In the UN, for example, Yugo-slavia’s voting record corresponds more closely with that of India than with that of the Soviet bloc. 5. US trade with Yugoslavia, while moderate in volume, nevertheless serves US economic interests. Our overall balance of trade with Yugoslavia is decidedly favorable, and Yugoslavia is a significant market for US agricultural surpluses. 6. The US has a definite interest in maintaining Yugoslav freedom from Soviet control. In addition to our obvious desire to prevent the expansion of Soviet domination over Yugoslavia itself, the continued independence of Yugoslavia affords certain special advantages in our world-wide resistance to Sino-Soviet imperialism. It has profoundly disturbed the political and ideological unity of the international Communist movement. It has definitely encouraged nationalist, anti-Soviet tendencies among the populations of the Soviet-dominated states of Eastern Europe. The fierce Soviet and Chinese attacks on Yugoslav “revisionism” and “deviationism” have vividly reminded Marxist sympathizers in all parts of the world that the Sino-Soviet bloc is not satisfied with a mere triumph of ideological principles, but demands direct subservience to the bloc. On the basis of the foregoing considerations, the US has maintained a relationship with Yugoslavia generally similar to that maintained with other neutral nations. We have pursued friendly and frank diplomatic contacts, have conducted extensive information activities in Yugoslavia and have carried on a broad exchange program. Yugoslav requests for economic and technical assistance have been considered on their merits, and trade with Yugoslavia has been conducted as with other friendly and neutral countries. The US Government had reason for keen disappointment concerning Tito’s speech and the general role of Yugoslavia at the recent Belgrade Conference. We have already expressed to the Yugoslav Minister of Foreign Affairs and to the Yugoslav Ambassador here, as well as in writing to the Yugoslav Government in Belgrade, our disappointment and displeasure over the Yugoslav performance. However, as Ambassador Kennan has pointed out, we would be merely sowing misunderstanding if we took action which would imply that the Belgrade Conference has created a wholly new and unprecedented situation. It seems clear that our diplomatic pressures have already produced certain effects. Foreign Minister Popovic’s recent speech at the UN clearly indicates a Yugoslav desire to redress the balance and to reaffirm Yugoslavia’s status as a truly non-aligned country. Despite the frequent differences that will inevitably arise between the US and Yugoslavia, it is important that the US never lose sight of its own basic interests. It is important to the US that Yugoslavia remain independent, that it continue to present to the satellite states the magnetic picture of a successful alternative to bloc membership under Soviet domination and that it continue to be a disruptive element in the international Communist movement. The Department is well aware of the domestic implications of any US policy toward Yugoslavia. The fact that Yugoslavia has adopted the Communist ideology inevitably creates strong domestic pressures against amicable US-Yugoslav relations. These pressures tend to increase when the Yugoslav Government makes offensive pronouncements. Nevertheless, affirmative US policies toward Yugoslavia have, over the years, been supported consistently by informed public opinion and by the Congress in a long series of legislative actions. The Department believes that the fundamental interests of the US are served by continuing to recognize and support the independence of Yugoslavia from Sino-Soviet domination. Continuity is obviously a vital ingredient in the success of such a policy. We cannot succeed if we permit our basic premises and goals to fluctuate with the constantly shifting winds of international events. B. Special Problems In the practical application of our general policies toward Yugoslavia, it is necessary to give attention to such problems as (a) trade relationships, (b) economic grants and loans, (c) technical assistance, (d) travel, (e) cultural exchanges, etc. At the present time, however, the only issue which requires an urgent decision by the US is the recent suspension of export licensing. The US already has certain agreements with Yugoslavia on technical assistance. Any extension of these agreements will require review and possible revision. Yugoslavia has also filed a new application for one million tons of grain under the PL 480 Program, but this application is very recent and has not yet even been discussed with the Yugoslavs. It may also be desirable to review certain other specific aspects of our relations with Yugoslavia. However, with the single exception of export controls, all these matters can be considered with relative leisure. The Department believes that the recent suspension of export licenses to Yugoslavia is inconsistent with US interests for the following reasons: 1. The suspension of licenses implies that the US is lumping Yugoslavia with the remainder of the Soviet bloc, which is not only unsound on factual grounds, but which also has a political significance far out of proportion to its economic effects. 2. The economic significance of withholding individually validated licenses for exports to Yugoslavia is limited. About 92 per cent of the items controlled by the Department of Commerce can be exported to Yugoslavia without individually validated licenses, and over 80 per cent of US-Yugoslav trade is in this category. For the remaining 8 per cent of controlled items, licenses have generally been issued subject to Yugoslav assurances concerning transfer to third countries. We have no evidence that the Yugoslavs have ever failed to honor these assurances, with one exception in 1957, when the Yugoslavs admitted a mistake in permitting the diversion of a borax shipment. 3. Virtually all the items withheld from Yugoslavia by our recent suspension of licenses can be obtained without difficulty from Western Europe, Japan or elsewhere in the Free World. Thus, even if it were assumed that the export of certain items to Yugoslavia might somehow threaten our security interests (a highly dubious assumption) the suspension of licenses would accomplish little or nothing in protecting our security. 4. The only substantial effect of withholding licenses for exports to Yugoslavia would be political. A continued suspension would be interpreted to mean that the US has altered its basic concept of Yugoslavia as an independent nation, or else would be interpreted as an indication that the US is reacting toward Yugoslav behavior at the Belgrade conference in an abrupt and vindicative manner. In either case, the basic interests of the US would suffer, both in terms of our relations with the Yugoslavs themselves, and in terms of the attitudes of other nations toward the US. In the words of Ambassador Kennan, “It is one thing to speak of modifying previous levels and nature of aid programs; it is another thing to deprive the Yugoslavs of normal opportunities for trade with the US … Drastic and punitive measures affecting trade as well as aid would only silence our friends, vindicate anti-Western extremists … and cut off more hopeful possibilities. So final would this be in its effect on possibilities for my own usefulness here that I would hope the Department would give me an opportunity for personal consultation before taking steps of such gravity.”Ellipses in the source text. C. Recommendations: 1. That the US reaffirm the basic principles of its policy toward Yugoslavia. 2. That the current suspension of export licenses for shipments to Yugoslavia be removed, and that the US revert to the policies and practices previously in effect, under which Yugoslavia received treatment comparable to that accorded other neutral nations. 3. That our policies toward Yugoslavia with respect to aid, technical assistance, development credits, etc., be carefully reexamined, with attention both to our long-range objectives in Yugoslavia and to our immediate tactical relations. Ambassador Kennan, for example, has recommended that we fulfill existing technical assistance contracts but negotiate no new ones; that we continue to make developmental loans on a project-by-project basis; that the work of voluntary relief agencies be re-examined; and that we grant only about 40 to 50 per cent of outstanding Yugoslav requests for wheat, and considerably less in other commodities. All these recommendations should be carefully reviewed here in Washington, but there is no great urgency involved. II. Poland A. General Policies Poland, unlike Yugoslavia, is clearly a member of the Soviet bloc. It is bound to the USSR not only through such formal instrumentalities as the Warsaw Pact, but also because of its exposed geographic position, its heavy economic dependence upon the Soviet Union, its desire for support against fears of a resurgent Germany, etc. Even more important is the fact that Soviet troops are still present in Poland. The Polish Government, in any “show-down” situation, would have no genuine alternative but to submit to the Soviet will. The Polish position on international issues is rarely distinguishable from that of the Soviet Union itself. In brief, Poland is under heavy Soviet influence and US policies must fully take account of this fact. On the other hand, it is equally important to recognize that Poland is by all odds the softest spot in the Soviet system. It differs from the other bloc members in a number of significant respects. First, since the establishment of the Gomulka regime in 1956, the Polish Government has enjoyed a measure of independence which, while limited, is nevertheless unique within the bloc. The people of Poland have a long-standing antagonism toward Russia and basic orientation toward Western civilization. Only a small part of Polish agricultural land has been collectivized. Essential freedom of worship exists in Poland, including the teaching of religion to children by the clergy and the operation of a university and seminaries by the Catholic Church. The Polish Government permits a diversity of expression in the arts which is unmatched elsewhere in the Soviet bloc, and intellectual activity is fairly vigorous. The Polish Government has also been more restrained in the exercise of police power, as evidenced by the relative absence of political arrests and greater freedom of movement within the country. Finally, the Polish regime permits more extensive and active contacts with the West than are permitted by other satellite states. This is true in terms of scientific and cultural contacts, tourist travel and the emigration of large numbers of Poles to various Western countries. Under the Gomulka regime, there has also developed a considerable expansion of relations with the US. US officials in Poland are able to maintain and develop broader contacts, both with officials and with private citizens. US consular officers are able to carry on their activities with considerable freedom and on a much larger scale than is possible in other bloc countries, including services on behalf of American citizens. US volunteer agencies (CARE, Church World Service, etc.) are able to administer food distribution programs which include full identification of the source of the distributed goods. The US has been able to maintain a USIA-type program in Poland, including the establishment of a reading room open to the public, the distribution of the Information Bulletin, the publication of a monthly magazine and the circulation of a considerable volume of American books, films, etc. The US has formal treaty relations with Poland covering patents, trademarks and copyrights, and there has been no evidence of Polish “piracy” with respect to any of these rights. VOA broadcasts are not jammed in Poland. Finally, the US has been able to develop a far more extensive exchange program with Poland than with any satellite country. Total US exports to Poland are similar in dollar volume to US exports to Yugoslavia. The balance of trade is distinctly favorable to the US, and the US retains the right to demand gold or hard currency for its exports to Poland. Surplus agricultural commodities represent a sizable proportion of Polish imports from the US. Thus, the US itself derives a significant economic advantage from its trade relations with Poland. In developing future US policies toward Poland, it would be erroneous and dangerous to base such policies on the illusion that Poland is likely to be detached from the bloc in the immediate future. On the other hand, in view of the circumstances described above, it is apparent that Poland enjoys a significant measure of autonomy, particularly in the pursuit of internal policies, which the rest of the bloc does not possess in any comparable degree. In essence, two courses of action are open to the US. The first is simply to write off Poland, along with all other countries within the Soviet bloc, as a “lost cause” and to concentrate our energies solely on maintaining a defensive posture against the further expansion of Sino-Soviet influence. The second alternative is to take such steps as are available and practical to “carry the war to the enemy”—specifically, to seize all reasonable opportunities to increase Western influence and weaken Soviet influence in Poland over an extended period of years, with the ultimate objective of helping Poland to become a completely independent nation. The second alternative necessarily implies the application of special policies to Poland in such fields as trade, commercial credits, economic and technical assistance, exchanges of persons, etc. The application of these special policies inevitably involves uncertainties, since our ultimate goals can be achieved, at best, only over a long period of years. In brief, the second alternative is a calculated gamble. However, the first alternative is wholly defeatist. The first alternative would imply US acceptance of the thesis that a Communist triumph in practically any country must be regarded as permanent, and that the continuing struggle between the Sino-Soviet empire and the Free World must therefore be waged exclusively upon the territory of the latter. For the reasons indicated, the Department has accorded Poland a considerable measure of special treatment since 1956. This policy was never expected to produce any sudden or dramatic results. On the other hand, this policy has unquestionably brought some visible gains. It has helped to preserve the changes distinguishing Poland from the other bloc states, to keep the door open to wider American access to the Polish people and to maintain the intrinsic Western orientation of the great mass of the Poles. This policy also continues to provide a lever by which the US can hope to influence the future destiny of Poland and to moderate the actions of the entire Soviet bloc. Because of these benefits, our policy has received widespread support among interested domestic groups, such as the Polish American Congress. B. Special Problems The application of our general policies toward Poland to the specific areas of trade, aid, exchanges of persons, etc., obviously requires greater tactical flexibility than is the case with Yugoslavia. This is true because our immediate objectives are more limited, because our contacts with the Poles are more restricted, because the risks of liberal treatment are greater and because Poland, as a member of the bloc is necessarily involved in US decisions affecting the bloc as a whole, such as the Berlin crisis. At the present time, there are two issues in our relations with Poland that require urgent decision. The first involves the willingness of the US to conclude an agreement already tentatively reached with Poland for the shipment of 86 million dollars worth of grain under the PL 480 program. The terms of this tentative agreement provide that Poland will pay for this grain in local currency, which the US will have the option of either using within Poland or, at the end of a 10-year period, converting into dollars or gold. (These terms are similar to those which have been applied to past PL 480 transactions with Poland.) While naturally Poland is anxious to conclude this agreement, the US has thus far hesitated to do so because of the Berlin crisis. The second problem requiring urgent decision involves the field of export controls, and specifically the recent suspension of licenses for shipments to Poland. In past years, the policy of giving special treatment to Poland has been applied to the field of export controls, as well as to other activities and relationships. The preferential treatment given Poland has been limited, but it is perhaps the basic explanation of the fact that Poland, as compared with other bloc countries, accords the US special treatment in overall relations. Our preferential treatment of Poland can best be illustrated by comparing the export licensing policy applicable to Poland with the licensing policy which has been applied to the remainder of the Soviet bloc. In the past, about 10 per cent of the items controlled by the Department of Commerce could be exported to the Soviet bloc under general license. Another 80 per cent required individually validated licenses, which were usually granted upon application. The remaining 10 per cent, consisting of items on the Positive List and the GRO Exception List, likewise required individually validated licenses, but applications for these were usually denied to other bloc countries. In the case of Poland, about 90 per cent of the items controlled by the Department of Commerce could be exported under general license. The remaining 10 per cent, consisting of items on the Positive List and the Polish GRO Exception List, required individually validated licenses. Licenses for these items were sometimes granted to Poland if they were determined to be “reasonable and necessary to the Polish civilian economy”. The recent decision to suspend export licenses for shipments to Poland and Yugoslavia still leaves Poland in a better position than the remainder of the Soviet bloc with respect to general licenses, but actually gives the other bloc countries somewhat better treatment than is given to Poland in the issuance of individual licenses, since action is at least permissible on applications from the former. This is wholly incongruous with the general US policy toward Poland. Since August 25, 1961, there has been a more rigorous application of criteria in our controls over exports to Eastern Europe as a whole. The Department concurs in this tightening of export controls, which apply to Poland along with the remainder of the Soviet bloc. Nevertheless, the Department strongly believes that the general freeze on individual licenses for exports to Poland should be lifted, and that we should revert to the previous policy of according preferential treatment to Poland, for the following reasons: 1. The maintenance of preferential treatment for Poland in granting US export licenses is an extremely important element of our overall policy toward Poland. The termination of this preferential consideration would be interpreted by the Poles, and by various allied and neutral nations, as an indication of a basic change in the US policy of distinguishing between Poland and the remainder of the bloc, and might well be interpreted by the Polish people as evidence of a US decision to “write off” Poland as a lost cause. This would inevitably strengthen the hard-line, pro-Soviet Communists in the Gomulka regime, would have a profoundly discouraging impact upon Western-minded Poles, and would tend to nullify the gains that we have made in our relations with Poland since 1957. 2. The current suspension of individually validated licenses for exports to Poland has a relatively minor effect upon the total volume of US exports to Poland. Nor is it likely to have any significant effect upon US strategic interests. As Embassy Warsaw points out, refusal of licenses will have no economic result except to divert Polish hard currency earnings to other Western suppliers. Here again, as is true in the case of Yugoslavia, the principal impact is political and psychological. 3. In one sense, the present freeze tends to discriminate against Poland in relation to the remainder of the bloc. We have no basis whatever for justifying such discrimination, either to the American people, to the Poles or to other nations of the world. 4. Within the framework of our general policy toward Poland, it is recognized that tactical situations may arise which will make it desirable for the US Government to exert pressures upon Poland. It is also recognized that the general field of export controls affords an opportunity for the exertion of such pressures. However, it seems obvious that the US must give the most careful consideration to any measures of this kind before putting them into effect. We must have a clear understanding of our objectives in exerting pressure, we must choose the particular measures most likely to be effective, we must choose the proper time and circumstances and, finally, we must always try to maintain a balance between our short-term and long-term objectives. Leaving aside all other considerations, it seems obvious that the present moment is the worst possible time to exert special pressures against Poland in the field of export controls. In the near future, we may be required to take stern measures against the Soviet bloc as a whole, including Poland, because of the Berlin crisis. Western contingency planning for economic countermeasures against the Soviet bloc is already underway. However, there are three vital elements to be considered in planning these countermeasures. The first is that the economic countermeasures should not be applied unilaterally by the US but should be applied by the NATO countries as a whole. Second is that such economic countermeasures should be applied to the entire Soviet bloc, without distinction among individual members of the bloc. The third is that these economic countermeasures should be applied at a time when they are likely to produce a maximum impact upon the Soviet bloc in relation to the Berlin crisis. The withholding of licenses for exports to Poland represents a unilateral move by the US, prematurely timed and directed against a particular country. The continued withholding of these licenses would thus diminish the force of properly-timed, concerted Western countermeas-ures, and would also severely complicate the difficult problem of obtaining an agreement among the NATO countries on the application of such countermeasures. In brief, we seem to be bringing pressure against the wrong country at the wrong time in the wrong way. C. Recommendations 1. That the general US policy of seeking to maintain a “special relationship” with Poland be reaffirmed. This implies a measure of preferential treatment for Poland as compared with other bloc countries. 2. That the current suspension of export licenses for shipments to Poland be removed. The US should follow the course agreed to on August 25, 1961, of applying more rigorously the criteria for granting individual licenses, in accordance with the general tightening of controls over exports to the Soviet bloc as a whole. However, Poland should continue to receive the same degree of preferential treatment over other bloc members that it has been accorded in past years, unless and until the Berlin crisis warrants a general economic blockade against the entire Soviet bloc. 3. That no decision be made on the conclusion of the pending PL 480 agreement with Poland until the Department has had an opportunity to examine more carefully the possible consequences of this agreement, both in terms of the fluid Berlin situation and in terms of selecting the most effective tactics in the application of our general policies toward Poland. 4. That other aspects of our relations with Poland, especially those involving preferential treatment, be carefully reviewed during the next few months, taking full account of the recent recommendations by Embassy Warsaw. 46. National Security Council Record of Action No. 2439Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Yugoslavia. Secret. The decisions were taken during the 491st meeting of the NSC on October 13. Washington, undated. POLICY TOWARD YUGOSLAVIA AND POLAND (“Review of Policy Factors Concerning Licensing of Exports to Yugoslavia and Poland”)Document 45. a. After discussing the paper entitled, “Review of Policy Factors Concerning Licensing of Exports to Yugoslavia and Poland”, agreed: (1) To remove the current suspension of export licenses for shipments to Yugoslavia and Poland, and (2) To revert to previous practices, including the careful screening of all export licenses issued. b. Noted the President’s request that the Secretary of State review all types of economic assistance being extended to Yugoslavia and Poland and to present to the Council recommendations with respect to future assistance. These recommendations should rest on a review and restatement of U.S. policy toward each country. 47. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Country Files, Poland. Confidential. Washington, November 15, 1961. SUBJECT Pending PL 480 Agreement with Poland Problem At the NSC Meeting on October 13 you requested that I review assistance programs to Poland and make recommendations to the Council on the basis of a review and restatement of US policy toward that country.See Document 46. The only assistance program under consideration at this time is a pending PL 480 agreement. In view of the limited scope of the assistance problem, the pending status of the agreement after negotiations with the Poles since last June and the need to reach a decision at an early date the Department believes that this matter might well be settled without bringing it before an NSC meeting. Discussion Background of PL 480 Negotiations. PL 480 agreements with Poland have been concluded annually between 1957 and 1960 for a total of $365 million. In negotiations this summer most of the details were worked out for an agreement totalling $86.3 million and including the sale of 500,000 tons of wheat, 100,000 tons of barley and lesser amounts of other surplus commodities. These negotiations were suspended and the Polish Ambassador informed on September 1 that, in view of the current international situation, we were not prepared to sign the agreement at that time. We told him that we would review the situation during the following month to see if it would develop in a way which would make conclusion of the agreement possible. In the following weeks the Poles, while informally indicating that they understood our having to delay signature of the agreement, pointed out the serious difficulty which an extended delay would cause them in seeking to satisfy their grain requirements for the coming year. They have emphasized that, even with increased deliveries from the USSR and about 500,000 tons of grain purchased for hard currencies from Canada, Finland, Switzerland and West Germany, they will have a substantial short-fall. They also point out that, in connection with their economic planning for 1962, the effects of failure to work out a solution to their grain requirements in the near future would be serious, and might include political consequences which could adversely affect the independent status of the Polish farmer as well as US-Polish relations. Because of the Berlin crisis and domestic discussion of economic relations with the Soviet bloc it was decided to delay action on the PL 480 agreement and to review economic relations with Communist countries. In informing the Poles of the delay in conclusion of the PL 480 agreement, we had in mind the possibility that our action might encourage them to seek to exercise a beneficial influence with Moscow in connection with the Berlin crisis. There is no evidence available to indicate what effect it has actually had. We are satisfied, however, that whatever effect may have been achieved in this direction cannot be sustained by further delay. Also, we have already substantially exceeded the period of delay indicated to the Poles. Significance of the Polish Situation. The Gomulka regime came to power in 1956 in the face of dramatic pressure by the Polish people for liberalization and an end to the unhappy period through which Poland had passed during the previous decade. While Gomulka was able to restore order and preserve the system of Communist rule, his regime has been characterized by major divergencies from the pattern of the rest of the Soviet bloc which affect not only the situation within Poland but its role in the bloc and in the world. The measure of independence which Gomulka won in 1956 has been reflected in domestic policies which are unique in three important respects: (1) Agricultural land was returned to the peasants. Except for 13% of arable land held in state farms (most of which is in formerly German areas), only 1% of Polish agricultural land is collectivized. The remaining 86% is farmed by private farmers to whom Gomulka has stated that they will never again be forced into collectives. (2) An understanding was reached with the Catholic Church under which essential freedom of worship has been permitted, including the teaching of religion to children by the clergy and the operation of a university and seminaries by the church. While there have been stresses in the relationship between the regime and the church, these freedoms continue to exist. (3) The area of civil freedom has been expanded. The power of the police has been significantly restrained, resulting in a marked relaxation of the atmosphere of fear and suspicion which characterizes life in the Soviet bloc. Diversity in the arts and intellectual life is permitted to a degree unmatched in the bloc. The Polish theatre, the graphic arts and literature all reflect the existence of an area of self-expression which, while not extending to open criticism of the regime, is not fettered by the requirements of “socialist realism”. Travel within Poland and beyond its borders is freer than in any other Eastern European country. Since 1956, Poland has also played a special role in the international sphere. Within the Soviet bloc, the very existence of a Communist country in which unorthodox domestic policies are pursued inevitably exerts an influence in other bloc countries which complicates regime efforts at maintaining orthodoxy as well as the general effort to foster homogeneity in the bloc. Beyond the bloc, Poland has developed a pattern of relationships with the West which is unique. This has made possible contact with the West and influence from the West to such an extent as inevitably to affect the situation within Poland. United States Activities in Poland. The development of bilateral relations with Poland since 1956 has made possible a considerable expansion of US activities there. Officers of the Embassy in Warsaw as well as visiting US officials have been able to maintain broad contact with Polish officials and other citizens as well as to move freely about the country in performance of their functions. Embassy officers are able to represent the interests of American citizens to a degree and through means which are not possible elsewhere in the Soviet bloc. US voluntary agencies are able to administer food distribution programs which include full identification of the source of the distributed goods and delivery directly to the recipient. VOA programs are not jammed in Poland. We have been able to maintain a modest USIA-type program, including circulation of an official US magazine and an International Media Guarantee program, of $1.2 million per year. Finally, we have been able to develop an exchange program involving both the US Government and a number of American foundations and other private sponsors which is considerably larger and less fettered by government controls than any other in the orbit states of Eastern Europe. We have been able to contract for various types of agricultural, medical and vocational rehabilitation research programs, financed out of zloty proceeds from PL 480 sales. The Role of US Assistance to Poland. The deliveries of foodstuffs have contributed significantly to the total supply of these essential commodities. Deliveries of cotton have had a noticeable impact upon the important Polish textile industry and upon the supply of textiles and clothing in Poland. The Polish people are aware of the nature and importance of US aid which, therefore, serves our purpose of demonstrating our interest in their welfare. More important, the development of the US activities and programs in Poland described above has gone hand in hand with the program of US economic assistance which began in 1957. There can be little doubt that PL 480 deliveries including the prospects for their continuity have had an important influence on the receptivity of the Polish Government to other US Government activities in Poland. Since 1957 the US has satisfied a significant portion of Polish grain requirements, having provided a total of almost 4 million tons of wheat and other grains. It is not in our view an exaggeration to state that our deliveries of these commodities have constituted an underpinning for the continuation of Poland’s essentially private agricultural system. Effect of Further Delay in Concluding PL 480 Agreement. We believe that a further delay in concluding a PL 480 agreement will produce a reaction to the detriment of US programs and thus of our influence in Poland. Our policy toward Poland since 1957 has been delicately adjusted to a complex situation. If it is to be successful in the long run there must be continuity in our actions so that those in the Polish regime who take the risk of advocating more extensive relations with the US will have ground for doing so. There is considerable indication that the Polish leadership includes, besides those individuals who support the policy of active relations with the US and other Western countries, others who oppose these and who urge more orthodox domestic policies and closer ties with the Soviets. The latter would very likely exploit a break in the continuity of the PL 480 program in an effort to restrict the scope of US-Polish relations and to bring about a retrogression in domestic policies, particularly as regards the status of the peasantry. There are some signs that the delay in concluding a PL 480 agreement has already had effects on our relations with Poland. The Polish Government has, for example, postponed dedication of the American Children’s Hospital in Krakow. We have also learned that the Polish Embassy in Washington has received instructions to begin the liquidation of the Polish commercial mission in the US. The latter action is said to result from the fact that the mission’s presence is not justified by its present workload. We have been informed by a number of Polish officials in Warsaw and Washington that some solution to the problem of their grain requirements must be found urgently. They have pointed out in this connection that economic planning for 1962 must be completed by the end of November. It is probable that in the absence of an indication of continued grain deliveries under PL 480 that the Polish Government will resort to the reintroduction of certain coercive measures to obtain grain which is being withheld by the peasants. The implications of such action for the continuation of Polish agricultural policy are apparent. Conclusion It is in the light of the situation described above that we must now consider whether to continue to withhold the PL 480 agreement or to take some action to conclude an agreement. The decision should, we believe, take into account factors affecting both the international situation and our relations with and policy toward Poland. We do not believe that developments since September with regard to the international situation are such as to justify conclusion at this time of the full agreement negotiated last summer. We do believe, however, that our purposes would best be met by the conclusion as soon as possible of an agreement of approximately half the value of the $86 million agreement negotiated last summer. Signature of this partial agreement could be coupled with a statement that we would be prepared, if conditions permit, to consider other Polish needs under PL 480 at a later time. Such action, while helping to meet Poland’s urgent need for foodstuffs, would, we believe, satisfy our purposes in avoiding the deterioration of our relations with Poland. It would, at the same time, clearly indicate that we continue to regard the international situation, as it affects our relations, as not in a condition which would justify conclusion of the full agreement originally negotiated. The most urgent Polish need at present is for grains. This then should constitute the basic component of the partial agreement. The Department of Agriculture, however, for domestic marketing considerations which it feels are highly important, desires to program also the vegetable oils included in the draft agreement previously negotiated. It is satisfied, moreover, that the vegetable oils can be justified as a necessary foodstuff. Although we do not believe inclusion of the vegetable oils is necessary for foreign policy reasons, we concur, for the reasons stated by the Department of Agriculture, that they be included in the partial agreement. Recommendation 1. That you authorize conclusion of a PL 480 agreement with Poland as soon as possible in the amount of about $45 million. 2. That the Polish government be informed that consideration will be given at a later time to additional Polish requirements for PL 480 commodities in the light of the situation as it exists at the time. Dean Rusk 48. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/11–2161. Confidential. Drafted by Wortzel; cleared by EE, ALD, EUR/EX, FN and the Treasury Department for paragraph 1, and CU for paragraph 2; and approved by Vedeler. Washington, November 21, 1961, 7:26 p.m. 770. Deptel 763.Telegram 763, November 20, informed the Embassy that the Department would indicate willingness to resume P.L. 480 negotiations to the Polish Ambassador. (Ibid., 611.4841/11–2061) Understand Embassy already aware provisions Agriculture Act 1961 which prohibit PL 480 sales at exchange rate less favorable than US Treasury disbursing rate. Poles here have stated categorically that for political reasons including implications re sovereignty Polish Government cannot accept situation in which another govt requires it to establish new official exchange rate. Argue also that after years of inflation and confusion Poland established present rate which it chose not to alter even in face Soviet pressure connection recent revaluation ruble and which determined to maintain. Dept believes this position firm and therefore likely that termination accommodation rate unavoidable if PL 480 agreement to be concluded. Dept aware impact termination accommodation rate and now considering steps including necessary adjustment allowances and establishment post allowance effective from date of rate change. Re Embtel 833Telegram 833, November 10, reported Embassy discussions of a Polish proposal for community schools. (Ibid., 611.4841/11–1061) Dept plans seek include necessary authority zloty use in agreement. Will also seek obtain conversion for per diem and expense connection FAS program. Dept has obtained Polish Ambassador’s assurance Poles will not disclose PL 480 negotiations prior conclusion agreement.In telegram 901 from Warsaw, November 24, the Embassy reported its concern about Polish “sensitivity” on the exchange rate issue and suggested that the Polish position was subject to modification. (Ibid., 611.4841/11–2461) Rusk 49. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/11–2461. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Wortzel; cleared by EE, FN, Blumenthal, AID, and the Department of Agriculture; and approved by Vedeler. Washington, November 29, 1961, 12:15 p.m. 796. Embtel 901.See footnote 3, Document 48. Dept has given thorough consideration intent and implications Section 201 Agriculture ActFor text of Section 201 of P.L. 480, see 68 Stat. 457. as affecting official activities and personnel in context pending PL 480 agreement. In negotiations we have repeatedly stressed importance Polish concession and used arguments including points mentioned Reftel. Issue at impasse upon suspension negotiations August. In numerous conversations since then Poles including Ambassador who authoritative this subject have expressed concern that this issue appeared to prevent agreement but repeated that this matter of principle and that Warsaw inflexible for reasons stated Deptel 770.Document 48. At meeting November 22 Dept insisted Poles ask Warsaw reconsider position with view finding solution. At meeting November 27 Poles said that reply received to effect that 24–1 rate absolutely not negotiable. Would appreciate Embassy’s elaboration basis doubt that Polish position final. Re request Reftel that signature agreement be delayed, Dept sees no purpose delay if as stated reftel rate change unavoidable. Dept understands Embassy concern effect rate change on personal and official expenditures. As pointed out Deptel 770 and Vedeler letter actions under consideration designed deal with problem. Details to follow.In telegram 934 from Warsaw, November 30, the Embassy responded that it believed the Poles would give ground on the exchange rate issue because of the extreme importance of U.S. imports to the Polish economy and urged delay in the signature of the agreement until Ambassador Beam had arrived in Washington to present his views. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/11–3061) Rusk 50. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Polish Desk Files: Lot 67 D 238, PL 480 General. Confidential. Ambassador Beam dictated the memorandum of conversation in Washington on December 2. Warsaw, November 29, 1961. SUBJECT General US-Polish Relations PARTICIPANTS Jozef Cyrankiewicz, Polish Prime Minister Jacob D. Beam, United States Ambassador to Poland Interpreter from the Council of Ministers (On November 24 I mentioned to the Foreign Office Chief of Protocol that I would like to hold myself at the disposal of the Prime Minister to make a farewell call and asked that he be informed accordingly. Hearing nothing further, I mentioned to Foreign Trade Minister Trampczynski in my call on him the day before my departure (November 29) that I regretted I had not been able to see the Prime Minister and asked him to transmit my farewell greetings and regards to Mr. Cyrankiewicz. I said I was especially sorry to have missed the Prime Minister since our President had received Polish Ambassador Spasowski on his departure. At the Foreign Office luncheon given for me the same day, the Protocol Chief and the Head of the American Desk were called away for a long telephone conversation. On their return they asked me whether I would be free to call on the Prime Minister at 4:30 that afternoon. I replied I would be honored to do so. My ensuing talk with Cyrankiewicz reported below lasted just over an hour.) After an opening exchange of amenities, I commented US-Polish relations were good but required further improvement, especially after the events of the current year. It was our feeling Poland was perhaps apt to take its relations with the US too much for granted and was not fully aware of our problems. We had been trying to help Poland and the Polish people but this had recently proved difficult. Certain statements and press articles had been published which affronted the dignity of the US and had provoked a vivid reaction in Congress and among the American people. Furthermore our economic programs did not seem to be appreciated and it had been noted in Washington that no publicity whatsoever had been given to the extent of US economic assistance to Poland. A goodwill visit of some of our Congressmen to take part in the cornerstone-laying ceremonies for the Krakow Hospital had been cancelled from the Polish side and this step was resented in influential Congressional circles. I said I was hopeful that some relaxation of international tensions might soon occur and that we would be able to go ahead with some of our plans for Poland. I sincerely trusted the Polish Government would take advantage of these possibly favorable opportunities and would devote closer attention to US-Polish relations and to meeting our needs for their maintenance and improvement. The Prime Minister replied he would be happy to comment on some of the difficulties which arose on the Polish side. President Eisenhower had stated US assistance was being given to break Poland away from its Soviet ally. This objective was unacceptable. As to the Krakow visit, the Polish Government understood that some Congressmen were to be included who were unfriendly to Poland and who hoped to exploit their trip to make hostile propaganda at a time when international relations were already tense. An economic program for this year had earlier been discussed with the US but had been abruptly cancelled because of Poland’s supposed misdeeds over Berlin. Such political pressure was unacceptable. As to publicity, the Government had sent its Deputy Prime Minister to Krakow with me to inaugurate the new galvanizing line at Nova Huts. The Prime Minister was happy to learn that discussions had been reopened in Washington on a curtailed economic program for this year but two principal obstacles had to be overcome. Because of the break-off of the previous talks, Poland had been forced to assign large quantities of foreign exchange to the purchase of wheat abroad. Now it was being required by the US to buy 200,000 tons with its own dollar resources. The money could not be provided in the established plan. Furthermore Poland was being asked to alter its exchange rate in accounting for the local currency deposits. This simply could not be done. I replied as follows. Secretary Dulles in October 1957 had made it clear the US did not wish Poland as a military ally and Poland was free to make such arrangements for its security as it found necessary, although of course we hoped it would be able to act of its own free will. Any other idea would be unrealistic. With respect to the Krakow visit by our Congressmen, this had been proposed as a goodwill gesture which might ease relations by concentrating attention on a common humanitarian objective. It had been my experience that unfriendly persons usually left Poland with a better feeling after witnessing Polish achievements and experiencing its hospitality. It was still regrettable this opportunity had not been seized by the Polish Government but I would do my best to alleviate the misunderstanding on my return. With further regard to the Nova Huts ceremony, I reiterated my appreciation for the Deputy Prime Minister’s participation but observed that, as had already been mentioned in Washington, no mention had been made of those portions of my speech reporting that the total of our credits to Poland now amounted almost to half a billion dollars—a very sizable figure and a substantial benefit to Poland’s economy. As regards the history of this year’s economic negotiations, the Prime Minister ought to realize this. We did not attach political conditions to our assistance. Poland was free to come to its own decisions regarding the German question but must realize we meant business over Berlin and that if our rights were infringed a most dangerous crisis would ensue. Perhaps Poland in its own interest should consider the problem further and suggest moderation from the Eastern side. The point I wished to stress with the Prime Minister was that while we did not make political conditions we were forced, because of the pressure of public and Congressional opinion, to take account of political conditions as they are. My country’s good faith had been directly attacked in statements from which I had to disassociate myself on occasion by leaving diplomatic receptions where I was a guest. Although I respected, while disapproving, Polish feelings over Cuba, our Consulate at Poznan had been smashed up in a manner strongly resented by the American people.The Consulate was attacked by a mob directed by Polish Communist officials on April 19. The incident was reported in telegram 1519 from Warsaw, April 19. (Ibid., Central Files, 748.00/4–1961) The United States formally protested on April 20. (Telegram 1526 from Warsaw, April 20; ibid., 122.732P/4–2061) As to our economic programs, we were not asking for thanks but simply for the type of recognition which it was in Poland’s interest to provide if such programs were to continue. I knew that Congressional feeling was especially strong on this point. Again I hoped that tensions would soon ease and I asked the Prime Minister to help those of us like myself and our Government authorities, who were favorably inclined, to go on helping Poland. In speaking frankly I sincerely believed this aspect of our relations had been neglected on the Polish side. The Prime Minister said he had also spoken frankly but thought our discussion had been useful. He had some kind words to say about my contribution to the furtherance of better US-Polish relations. We reverted briefly to the current Washington economic negotiations which I said I would look into on my return home. I referred to the very favorable Polish trade balance with the US and said it was not unreasonable to ask that Poland supplement credits with free currency purchases. The Prime Minister said the Polish Government would be happy to do so next year and in future years, but the request, coming after so much delay this year and Polish purchases of grain for hard currency was unfair. He referred to the Polish textile industry’s preference for, and to a certain extent dependence on American cotton and thought we should do more to encourage this stable market. As to the exchange rate, I suggested it should be possible for the financial experts to find a solution but the Prime Minister was skeptical. 51. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/12–461. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Wortzel; cleared by EE, FN, by AID and EUR/EX for the last paragraph, and by Blumenthal and the Department of Agriculture; and approved by Vedeler. Washington, December 8, 1961, 4:05 p.m. 829. Embtels 934 and 941, Embdesp 239.Regarding telegram 934, see footnote 4, Document 49. Telegram 941, December 4, analyzed Polish approaches to the question of the zloty exchange rate. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/12–461) In despatch 239 from Warsaw, November 29, the Embassy reported on negotiations over the zloty exchange rate. (Ibid., 611.4841/11–2961) Dept aware considerations discussed reftels and Embdesp re Polish use exchange rates. However issue not in these terms but whether possible conclude agreement which will avoid discontinuance Treasury rate. In this connection Dept has persistently sought negotiate such agreement. No indication given Poles to date that agreement possible at official rate. Various alternatives tried including Embassy suggestions and others despite increasing indications including Trampczynski and Cyrankiewicz statements to Ambassador that Polish position firm. Possibility finding solution limited by dollar repurchase provision which represents important U.S. interest we not prepared sacrifice. In PL 480 negotiating session Dec. fifth Lychowski made clear that Polish position absolutely inflexible and that much as commodities needed agreement could not be signed at rate other than 24–1. Dept considers important recognize realistic alternatives. Now fully clear that Polish position can only be tested by explicit refusal conclude agreement which does not permit preservation Treasury rate or other rate above 24–1. If Polish position actually as claimed this can only result in failure conclude agreement with inevitable major consequences to U.S. policy. After repeated and vigorous efforts which Dept has made since August to alter Polish position, and in view possible consequences, we satisfied that risk not justifiable. Dept therefore plans conclude agreement o/a fifteenth even if no concession exchange rate obtained.For text of the agreement, signed on December 15, see 12 UST 3065. As stated Deptels 770 and 796Documents 48 and 49. Dept has been fully aware consequences termination Treasury rate and preparing do everything possible cope with effects official expenditures and personnel. Every effort being made avoid injury Embassy operation and programs. Allowance structure to be altered promptly upon rate change with establishment post allowance. Detailed instructions follow. Rusk 52. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Kohler)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/2–162. Confidential. Washington, February 1, 1962. At the request of Dr. Marian Dobrosielski I had lunch today with him and Dr. Iwaszkiewicz of the Polish Embassy. The subject of the discussion, after a certain amount of preliminary talk, proved to be PL480 cotton for Poland. Dr. Iwaszkiewicz, who is the Commercial Counselor, detailed at some length the hardships that are being imposed on Poland by the withdrawal of our September offer to supply 40,000 tons of cotton. He indicated that they had with difficulty persuaded Warsaw to allocate $2 to $3 million for cash purchases of cotton. He said that the Embassy had discussed the matter with Secretary Freeman and Under Secretary Murphy of the Department of Agriculture and Assistant Secretary Martin of the Department of State. I explained that they were indeed the proper channels for the discussion and that I really could add nothing to what they had already learned. The essence of their position was that even if they could not get the 40,000 tons they had originally counted on they would need at least 20,000 in addition to what they could purchase with cash or otherwise they would be faced with a desperate situation and a short week in the cotton industry. Part of the introductory discussion concerned Marxism, Keynesianism, economists and planning in Poland and the U.S. A more substantial part of it consisted of a recital by Dr. Iwaszkiewicz of the benefits that PL 480 had already conferred on Poland. These were: to permit a more rapid development of meat production than would otherwise have been possible; to sustain the Polish policy of a relatively free agriculture; and to stimulate the substitution of margarine for butter which, in turn, permitted an increase in butter exports and the development of the domestic margarine and vegetable oil industry. By contrast, Dr. Iwaszkiewicz lamented the lack of credit available for industrial purchases and stated the Polish Government’s desire to expand its machinery purchases in the United States. The absence of suitable credit arrangements, however, drove them to a continued reliance on Western Germany and Britain, even though they would prefer to have the U.S. as a supply. CK 53. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/3–362. Confidential. Drafted by Wortzel; cleared by Vedeler, Katz, and Blumenthal; and approved by Davis. Washington, March 9, 1962, 5:21 p.m. 1199. Re: Embtel 1344.Telegram 1344, March 3, suggested that the United States take a firmer line in negotiations for a new P.L. 480 agreement, including an insistence that adequate publicity be given to U.S. aid. (Ibid.) In order to evaluate suggestions Reftel Dept requires elaboration several points. (1) Re publicity reftel speaks of full and fair public recognition of past aid. Embassy has earlier reported factual coverage last agreement front pages major papers as well as items covering first and second deliveries. As Embassy aware Dept. has insisted Polish press carry news of PL 480 agreements in pursuance US objective that Polish people be informed of US origin needed commodities. Embassy has reported that Polish people aware PL 480 assistance. Request Embassy indicate specific deficiencies press coverage, keeping in mind US objectives this regard as well as inherent limitations such coverage. (2) Reftel mention of US desiderata implies specific conditions or concessions against which level agreement should be balanced. Dept has recently informed Poles continued failure deal with dollar bonds can affect economic relations. In pursuit aim of increasing normal procurement agricultural commodities by Poles, we required Poles purchase 200,000 MT feed grains and now considering package purchase cotton under which portion would be cash or short-term credit with remainder PL 480. Leverage these or other elements bilateral relations limited by fact that current Polish request understood as supplementary December agreement and new conditions or terms raise questions including that of good faith. Request indication specific desiderata Embassy believes Dept should seek associate current Polish request in light above comments. US policy since 1957 and most recently stated in draft Polish guidelines paper“Guidelines for Policy and Operations in Poland,” August 14, 1961. (Ibid., S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Poland) and Embtel 653Document 44. holds that PL 480 agreements are a key element in pursuit overall objectives. These include objectives affected directly by agreements themselves (preservation non-socialized agriculture, welfare Polish population), as well as others which less directly affected (ability maintain various programs and contacts). Re former, size agreements obvious factor in effective pursuit objectives, although, of course, actual determination of size various agreements based upon complex of factors. Re latter, evaluation in terms of balance against size PL 480 agreements extremely difficult if possible at all. Policy further recognizes leverage derived from agreements while acknowledging limitations ability cause shifts Polish policy. Dept fully shares Embassy belief that leverage should be used where possible meet US objectives or influence Polish actions but considers essential this be considered in light total objectives. Embdesp 331“Comments on Recent Polish PL–480 Requests,” March 1. (Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/3–162) which just received contains valuable comments in light of which interested agencies will consider Polish request.In telegram 1429 from Warsaw, March 15, Ambassador Cabot reiterated the need for “full and fair” Polish recognition of U.S. aid, adding “my opinion is that we should seek to balance accounts more evenly beginning with the pending negotiations.” (Ibid., 411.4841/3–1562) Rusk 54. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2074. Secret. Drafted by Garthoff, cleared by Kohler, and approved in S on March 19. The meeting was held at the Polish Mission. Rusk and Rapacki were attending the Geneva disarmament talks. Geneva, March 16, 1962, 4:30 p.m. SecDel MC/27 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Mr. William C. Foster Mr. Foy D. Kohler Mr. Raymond L. Garthoff Poland Mr. Adam Rapacki, Foreign Minister Mr. Marian Naszkowski Dr. Manfred Lachs Mr. Henryk Sokalski SUBJECT International Problems and Disarmament 1. On March 16, at his request, the Secretary met with Foreign Minister Rapacki at the Polish Mission in Geneva for one hour and thirty minutes. Arrival and departure noted by the press; upon departure the Secretary noted that he had exchanged views with Foreign Minister Rapacki on disarmament and other matters. 2. The Secretary asked Rapacki his views on the prospects and problems of disarmament. Rapacki replied in general terms echoing the Soviet position. Both agreed it was unwise to have respective positions frozen too early in talks. The Secretary noted the importance of a good atmosphere for the negotiations, and commented that while both speeches on the previous day (Gromyko’s and his own)For text of Rusk’s speech, see Documents on Disarmament, 1962, vol. I, pp. 142–149. Text of Gromyko’s speech is ibid., pp. 94–103. had served this purpose, today’s speech (by Czechoslovakia) had not done so.Not found. Rapacki did not reply, but seemed to agree with the point. 3. The Secretary noted the special initiative of Mr. Rapacki on a nuclear-free zone in Europe,For text of the original Rapacki proposal submitted to the U.N. General Assembly on October 2, 1958, see Documents on Disarmament, 1945–1959, vol. II, pp. 889–892. Rapacki submitted an amended proposal on November 4, 1958; see ibid., pp. 1217–1219. On March 28 in Geneva, he submitted to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee another revised plan for a nuclear-free zone in Europe; see ibid., 1962, vol. I, pp. 201–205. and asked whether he had modified his proposals. Rapacki replied that he had made several proposals, originally for a nuclear-free zone and later for a staged plan in which initially the obligation would be not to arm with nuclear weapons states in the area not now possessing them, and later to provide for removal of all nuclear armaments. However, there had been no concrete reactions to his proposals, so he did not now have concrete modifications. The Secretary inquired specifically on the geographic areas of coverage of such zones, and Rapacki noted proposals on Scandinavia, the Balkans, Africa, as well as Central Europe. 4. The Secretary noted that the problem of disarmament could not be separated from its political context. Rapacki said that the key was peaceful coexistence. The Secretary recalled—as a soldier in 1945–1946—that the US had demobilized at that time, but had since had to rearm and quadruple its military expenditures due to actions which could scarcely be called peaceful coexistence: Greece, the first Berlin Blockade, Korea and others. Current prospects for disarmament were not separable from political issues, particularly Berlin. 5. The Secretary noted that the other side seemed to have disposed of East Berlin, why then could we not dispose of West Berlin, and there would be no problem. Rapacki treated the suggestion as not a serious one. He countered that in reality the FRG, and the GDR with its capital in Berlin, both existed. The Secretary commented that, candidly, in this off-the-record conversation, he felt that if the East Germans had been more successful internally—like the Poles—the question of Berlin would not have arisen. Rapacki agreed, commenting that he would not, candidly, attempt to argue that all of the East German population favored the regime. Many had “escaped”. But, he contended, the GDR had renounced all previous German expansionist designs, and had accepted a just frontier with Poland. These were not entirely popular moves in Germany (East or West), but they were good and necessary. 6. The Secretary inquired whether, frankly, Minister Rapacki as a Pole, Socialist, “imperialist,” or whatever, did not consider the past history of dangers and difficulties from neighbors both to the East and West, and whether from this standpoint he really wanted to see US troops withdrawn from Europe. Rapacki replied that they did not propose such withdrawal, but the Secretary noted that others did. Rapacki stated that they favored disarmament with withdrawal of all troops to their own countries, and early abolition of all nuclear delivery means. The Secretary commented that if nuclear weapons were withdrawn and political issues remained unsettled, there might have to be a very large increase in conventional arms. 7. The Secretary noted that, in a broad sense, all the disarmament matters with which we were concerned were “regional” problems of the northern hemisphere. He said that if we were unable to solve the political problems which we faced, he would hate to predict the future of the northern hemisphere—this was by no means a threat, nor was he necessarily pessimistic, but it was recognition of a real danger. The Secretary declared that he considered the greatest danger to be that of both sides sitting down to the conference table believing that the other side would not go to nuclear war. Rapacki and his colleagues were initially stunned. The translation was rechecked at Rapacki’s insistence, but he remained non-plussed. The Secretary expatiated on this theme, stating with quiet emphasis that the United States would not be pushed out of West Berlin. He noted West Berlin and South Vietnam as cases of non-“peaceful coexistence” aggression. Rapacki noted that the Poles had only representation on the Commission in South Vietnam. Vice Minister Naszkowski, in an aside interjection, muttered “who was the aggressor in Vietnam,” but Rapacki quickly changed the subject to say that Berlin was the key problem and danger. The Secretary stated that the presence of the US in West Berlin was a stabilizing influence, to which Rapacki did not reply. 8. The Secretary commented that over the past century the causes of war had declined—no longer were wars waged over dynastic questions, protection of nationals, for trade rights, or the like. The remaining causes are dangerous enough, but fortunately are fewer. Rapacki demurred from this, noting wars of recent decades. Rapacki stated that there had been an important change in that now no class would be served by war, but that the class aspect of policy remained. Rapacki stated that so far as they were informed, their side would not do anything to stir up risk of war. 9. The question of Germany arose in many contexts. Rapacki did reiterate long-standing themes of West German revanchism and irreconcilability to the Polish frontiers. He admitted frankly that the Poles do not want German unification under contemporary circumstances, do not want an all-German election which they know the Communists would lose, and do fear West German designs. Rapacki said he thought the Poles, and the other Socialist countries, were not alone in not desiring German reunification. The Secretary took cognizance of the German problem and suggested reunification as the best long-term guarantee against future recrudescence of expansionist nationalism in West and East Germany. The Poles seemed to be unmoved on this point. The Secretary stressed importance of the integration of West Germany into the European community as a safeguard, and Rapacki nodded agreement. 10. The meeting, which was the first which the Secretary held in Geneva with any Bloc Minister other than the Soviet one, was in a cordial and relaxed atmosphere. Rapacki was, of course, under some compulsion not to stray from the established Bloc line on disarmament and the Berlin and German questions (particularly with Naszkowski present), but he managed nonetheless to convey the impression of at least limited independence of judgment and even of policy. 55. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Garthoff and approved in S on March 22. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission. Geneva, March 21, 1962, 5 p.m. SecDel MC/41 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary of State Mr. Foy Kohler Mr. Raymond Garthoff Poland Mr. Adam Rapacki, Foreign Minister Mr. Marian Naszkowski, Vice Foreign Minister Mr. Henryk Sokalski SUBJECT General Exchange of Views 1. In a return visit to that paid by the Secretary, Mr. Rapacki came to the US Mission on March 21 for a meeting of approximately one and one-quarter hours. Underlying general differences and problems in East-West and Polish-US relations formed the chief subject of discussion. 2. The Secretary noted that disarmament involves many problems. For example, our own constitutional practices require us to proceed in a certain way. We have used the term “treaty or treaties” for general disarmament because there are limits on what long-range commitments our Senate can ratify. Our trade agreements are only made for two or three years. We are for general and complete disarmament, but once Stage One has been agreed and put into practice it will be much easier to see the detailed form for the later stages. Rapacki indicated that he understood, but he seemed to interpret the reason for a cautious approach on our part in political rather than juridical terms, and said that he understood that while our general interest was disarmament, special interests in the US were opposed and had to be convinced and overcome. He made no comment on the specific form a disarmament agreement should take (though in his speech earlier at the plenary session he had spoken out for the Soviet draft treaty as the only approach).For text of the Soviet draft treaty, see Documents on Disarmament, 1962, vol. I, pp. 103–127. 3. The problem of the economic problems and consequences of disarmament was briefly discussed. Rapacki stated that Poland had for her part disarmed to a degree in 1956–1957, without serious economic difficulties. The Secretary noted that with due time economic adjustments occasioned by disarmament were no problem for the US. And the US would like nothing better. In individual cases, such as the locality around a large aircraft plant, there were of course some short-run problems. Rapacki raised the question of economic aid to other countries. The Secretary noted that this depended in part on the readiness of the recipient countries to absorb aid. Rapacki pressed on the question, mentioning India as an example, and discussion followed on the economic, social and health context of effective aid. 4. The Secretary remarked that he would like to note in this private discussion that a sophisticated understanding was needed on both sides of the peculiar problems impinging on US-Polish mutual relations. On the one side, we recognize that Warsaw has only limited influence on relationship between Warsaw and Moscow. On the other side, we hope they will realize that internal US political situation and the imperatives of internal political debates compel us to take public account of Poland’s membership in the Communist Bloc. We base our relations with Poland, however, on the basis of bilateral interests rather than simply with Poland as a member of the Communist Bloc. When Rapacki had clarified that the Secretary was not seeking an agreement on reciprocity of these considerations, but rather noting them as illustrations on each side of matter requiring delicate understanding, he agreed. 5. The Secretary asked Mr. Kohler to speak of any problems in bilateral relations between our countries. Kohler noted the improvement and satisfactory state of such relations, and Rapacki agreed. Rapacki noted hopes for increased trade, including Polish interest in capital investment goods as well as in consumer goods. The Secretary reiterated that the US understood that Warsaw was not able to ignore broader US-USSR differences, but that we did not hold Warsaw responsible for them. 6. The Secretary asked Rapacki what he considered to be the biggest change in Soviet policy since the death of Stalin. Rapacki replied that peaceful coexistence, the “reconstruction” of the general line of Soviet foreign policy under Khrushchev, was clearly the major change. As specific points, he mentioned meetings with Western leaders, travel and opening up of contacts between peoples. The Secretary stated that we were concerned over such indications of non-peaceful interests as the declaration of the communist parties in November 1960,For text of the statement, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, December 28, 1960, pp. 3–9, and January 4, 1961, pp. 3–8. and Khrushchev’s speech of January 6, 1961,Extracts of Khrushchev’s speech are printed in Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pp. 1–15. on spreading communism. If these were declarations of faith and expectation, that was one thing; if a program of action, that was another. It often appeared to us that it was the latter. Rapacki replied that it was a matter of belief, and of action in striving to win economic competition, which they saw as the main arena. The Secretary pressed for clarification of such declarations, and Rapacki responded with the same explanation, adding that Khrushchev had never said that they would force communism on anyone, that forceful imposition of socialism was not possible. Naszkowski added that Khrushchev had in fact asserted that force would not be used. 7. Rapacki said that Khrushchev had said not only in public but in closed session (apparently in November, 1960) that peaceful economic competition was the only means to victory for communism. He also said that in closed session Khrushchev had declared that communism would not come until they had more sausages than the West. (Later in the discussion, in an apparent allusion to this figure of speech, Rapacki said the Chinese Communists had been rushing too fast—and their table was bare.) 8. The Secretary remarked that he hoped relations between the US and the USSR could be on the basis of state interests rather than ideologically motivated political action. The Secretary added that he thought the Soviets were beginning to see this too, and that one of the issues of dispute between the Soviets and the Chinese was on this basis. Rapacki replied that the Soviets, and Chinese too, did act on the basis of national interests. They shared the same general aims. The US, declared Rapacki, has been placed in the unsought position of potential arbiter between the USSR and Communist China. The Secretary expressed surprise. Rapacki commented that the US, by demonstrating the possibility and success of the peaceful coexistence policy, can bring the Chinese and Russians together on the basis of such a policy. The Secretary remarked that having us as a common foe was one of the chief elements holding the USSR and China together. The Secretary asked about Communist pursuits of world revolution, as perhaps against their national interests. Rapacki dismissed “world revolution” as a discredited Trotskyite slogan, and reaffirmed the belief of the Communists in victory through demonstration of a superior economic system. 9. The Secretary noted that there were those who saw some possibility of a gradual evolutionary merging of our widely disparate systems. Thesis and antithesis (of present systems) might lead to a new synthesis. In the US, large corporations paid 75 percent of their profits in local state and federal taxes. There was some planning involved in import-export arrangements. The Secretary said that Ambassador Galbraith had once written that in “Socialist” India there was more free enterprise than in the US. Rapacki noted that there were different kinds of “socialism”. India and Cuba don’t have socialism in the sense they understand it. There are differences between Polish, Soviet, Chinese socialism. When India does have socialism, it will be its own form. 56. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/4–1362. Confidential. Drafted by Katz and approved by Blumenthal. Washington, April 13, 1962, 5:01 p.m. 1368. We informed Drozniak and Lychowski April 12 our readiness conclude immediately amendment Dec 15 agreement providing Title I sale 92,000 bales cotton and 10,000 MT rice. Sale conditioned on Polish agreement purchase in US with own resources 46,000 bales cotton and 10,000 MT rice. Also informed them we unprepared consider at this time grain and other commodities requested Feb 20 but expect be able begin discussions about June 1. Stated that in meantime Embassy Warsaw would be instructed raise with Polish Government certain matters of concern such as questions publicity and dollar bonds. Noted that PL 480 negotiations must be viewed in totality our relations. Extent to which problems cited above affect our relations cannot fail be weighed in consideration PL 480 matters. Drozniak appreciative cotton decision although noting hope for larger amount. He expressed concern delay re grain pointing out last year’s crop overestimated. Late spring and insufficient deliveries from peasants aggravating grain problem. Indicated his intention seek acceleration negotiations on grain. Dept representatives were not encouraging on this score. Re publicity Ambassador stated no problem since he discussed matter during Warsaw consultations and was assured adequate publicity would be forthcoming. We noted statement and observed this would ease our Embassy’s task. Re bonds he questioned usefulness Embassy raising matter since Polish attitude not negative. Problem was one of finding resources to pay obligations. This would be facilitated by credits for purchase export generative equipment. Dept representatives emphasized importance attached resolution bond problem, indicating in response Drozniak question that our desire for satisfaction publicity and bond matters one of several factors leading decision defer consideration grain and other commodities until June 1. Instructions being pouched April 16 will deal matters to be raised by Embassy.Not found. Rusk 57. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/4–1762. Confidential; Priority. Warsaw, April 17, 1962, 5 p.m. 1632. Re Deptel 1368.Document 56. I am gratified with Department’s insistence on Polish cash purchases cotton and rice as condition Title I sales those commodities under amendment December 15 agreement. Nonetheless, Department’s proposal remains clearly very attractive financial proposition for Poles which they should not be permitted to realize without at least some concrete concessions to our reasonable requirements. Therefore and as a minimum I must reiterate and strongly urge that a communique fully describing and explaining the background of total US economic aid to Poland since 1957, be negotiated and accepted for wide distribution by the Polish side as an integral part of the proposed amendment (Embdes 352).Despatch 352, March 16, discussed Polish publicity for P.L. 480 agreements. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.484/3–1662) I consider this to be a matter of right and prudence for the reasons cited in A–519Airgram A–159, March 15, discussed ways to utilize P.L. 480 aid to increase U.S. influence in Poland. (Ibid., 611.48/3–1562) and not a new or unreasonable condition. (Perhaps as Drozniak suggested, publicity will pose no problem, however when we discussed it with him in Warsaw he dismissed our complaint as unjustified and no consequence.) I believe we must show the Poles now that we really mean business on publicity. To do so will provide an immediate practical test of Polish intentions, possibly settle the problem, and facilitate moving on to other matters in the forthcoming negotiations. To fail to do so now only postpones the matter unnecessarily and prejudices its later presentation in Warsaw. Parenthetically, Gomulka’s April 13 statement (Embtel 1610)Telegram 1610, April 16, reported on Gomulka’s speech on export policy. (Ibid., 411.4841/4–1662) about economic competition with capitalism and textile raw material imports for which Poland “must pay” is further evidence of the need for and significance of adequate publicity for US aid. I am also gratified that Department’s postponement of consideration of Polish grain requests will give us an opportunity to begin to balance accounts more evenly. In this connection I look forward to receiving the instruction pouched April 16. I trust any further negotiations will enable us to obtain some of the advantages mentioned in previous Embassy communications.In telegram 1392 to Warsaw, April 10, the Department of State reiterated its disinterest in a joint U.S.-Polish statement and the reasons for this position and informed the Embassy that it believed that the two sides were on the verge of an agreement on a cotton and rice amendment that it hoped to sign on April 19. (Ibid., 611.4841/4–1762) For text of the agreement as signed on that date, see TIAS 4998. Cabot 58. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/4–2762. Confidential. Warsaw, April 27, 1962, 5 p.m. 1721. Department’s A–70 and Department telegram 1392.Airgram A–70, April 14, instructed the Embassy to inform the Polish Government of continuing U.S. dissatisfaction with inadequate media treatment of P.L. 480 assistance. (Ibid., 611.48/3–1562) Regarding telegram 1392, see footnote 5, Document 57. Saw Under Secretary Winiewicz today and raised with him two matters mentioned in airgram. Re publicity Winiewicz indicated considerable had been given, that publicity re help from other members Communist bloc had also declined in recent years, and that because of the existence in Polish Communist Party of a hard core which opposed all PL 480 agreements with US it was difficult to publish strongly favorable articles. With regard to matter of foreign indebtedness Winiewicz reminded me that Poland had scrupulously met all obligations to US even at height of cold war and indicated that Poland was hesitant assume further obligations which it might not be able to service. He suggested that both matters be discussed with Trampczynski Minister Foreign Trade, when he makes his visit to US. I doubt that anything will be done regarding either matter despite my representations but I shall endeavor to follow them up at an appropriate time.In telegram 1457 to Warsaw, April 30, the Department of State reported that it would raise the questions of publicity and bonds with Trampczynski during his visit to Washington. It instructed the Embassy to continue to press both matters with the Polish Government. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/4–2762) Cabot 59. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Battle) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/5–362. Confidential. Drafted by Barnsdale and Wortzel and cleared by Weiss, Tyler, and Vedeler. Washington, May 3, 1962. SUBJECT Legislation to Deny Most-Favored-Nation (MFN) Treatment to Poland and Yugoslavia If successful, current efforts to deny Most-Favored-Nation (MFN) treatment to Poland and Yugoslavia, by specific legislation, would jeopardize much of our policy toward those countries. The denial of MFN treatment to Poland and Yugoslavia would run directly counter to our policy, which has been to draw those countries closer to the West and to provide an alternative to their dependence on Soviet Bloc countries in trade and other fields. Such legislation would also be undesirable in that it would limit Presidential flexibility in dealing with our bilateral relations with Poland and Yugoslavia. The material effect of the denial of MFN treatment to Poland and Yugoslavia would not be substantial in terms of our own import trade, and might not be great in terms of present levels of Polish and Yugoslav export trade to this country. However, it could seriously impede the growth of their trade relations with this country in particular, and, by limiting their earnings, with the West in general. We could also expect our action in withdrawing MFN treatment to serve in a real sense as an indication to our allies of a hardening attitude and policy toward both Poland and Yugoslavia. We could expect such an interpretation to encourage in Western Europe the taking of harder lines toward Poland and Yugoslavia not only in the field of trade but in other broader areas of policy. Our action might indeed be welcomed by nations whose products compete with those of Poland and Yugoslavia, e.g. Greece, and any subsequent action on our part to restore MFN treatment to these countries could be made difficult by such attitudes on the part of our allies. The ultimate consequences for Polish and Yugoslav policies would be out of proportion to the effects of our action in the field of trade. The Polish and Yugoslav reactions would probably be extreme. The full consequences of our action would be certain to slow the existing favorable developments in extending our influence in those countries. Additionally, we would have to reckon with the possibility that past favorable developments might even be reversed. Taken in conjunction with other factors in today’s international situation, such as Soviet pressures on Poland to support fully Soviet policies in Germany, and Polish and Yugoslav fears of the possible effects of the Common Market on their European trade, we could expect a realistic if not pessimistic reassessment on their part of the desirability of relying upon the West. This is particularly true of pro-Western individuals who may have staked their personal positions upon the prospects of the increasing association of their country with the West and who would suffer disillusionment at this negative and backward-turning action of the United States. With specific reference to Poland, it will be recalled that on April 16, 1958, in the wake of the changes which had taken place in Poland since 1956 and consistent with developments in United States policy toward Poland, President Eisenhower approved a recommendation that Most-Favored-Nation status be restored to Poland at an appropriate time.For text of NSC 5808/1, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. X, Part 2, pp. 110–120. It was subsequently decided that this action should be taken as soon as a nationalization claims agreement was concluded with Poland. During negotiations leading toward a claims settlement, United States representatives informed the Poles of this. A claims agreement was concluded with Poland July 16, 1960 and, on November 16, 1960, the President ordered the restoration of MFN status to Poland.For text of the agreement on the settlement of claims against Poland, see 11 UST 1953. For text of the letter from President Eisenhower to the Secretary of the Treasury restoring MFN status to Poland, see Department of State Bulletin, December 5, 1960, pp. 863–864. The implicit finding that Poland was eligible for MFN status within the meaning of Section 5 of the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1951For text of P.L. 50, the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1951, approved June 16, 1951, see 65 Stat. 72. was analogous to the earlier explicit finding by the Secretary of State that Poland was a “friendly nation” within the meaning of PL 480, the criteria for such determination being identical for the two acts. In restoring MFN status to Poland, we had in mind the connection between Poland’s ability to earn dollars in the United States market and its ability to meet its substantial dollar obligations to the United States. These include contingency fund credits totalling $61 million, dollar repayment obligations under PL 480 agreements which, by now, exceed $400 million, obligations to American national holders of Polish dollar bonds, and $40 million in settlement of nationalization claims. In the case of Yugoslavia, there is no reason consistent with the established legislative criteria dealing with MFN treatment which would justify taking what amounts to punitive action against Yugoslav trade with the United States. There is no question of Yugoslav domination by the world Communist movement, and Section 5 of the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1951 has never been applicable, therefore, to Yugoslavia. We are convinced that the withdrawal of MFN treatment would be interpreted as an indication that the United States considers Yugoslavia has returned or is in the process of returning to the Bloc. There can be no doubt that the taking of legislative action to deny MFN treatment to Poland and Yugoslavia would constitute a reversal in a real sense of our long-standing policies toward these countries. Moreover, in the case of Poland the withdrawal of MFN treatment would clearly violate our assurances given to that country at the time of the negotiation of the United States-Polish claims agreement. In neither case can we see any justification nor any gain but only loss. We urge every effort to forestall this action. Lucius D. BattlePrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. E.S. Little signed for Battle. 60. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Katz and approved in U on May 9. Washington, May 4, 1962, 3:30 p.m. SUBJECT Call of the Polish Ambassador PARTICIPANTS The Polish Ambassador, Edward Drozniak Dr. Marian Dobrosielski, Counselor The Under Secretary Mr. Griffith Johnson, E Mr. W. Michael Blumenthal, E Mr. George Springsteen, U Mr. Julius L. Katz, EE After describing the satisfaction of his Government at the general course of US-Polish relations, the Ambassador expressed his serious concern over the US intention to delay until about June 1 the sale to Poland of grain and other commodities under PL 480. If discussions commenced on June 1, it was likely, on the basis of previous experience, that deliveries would not begin until late September. This would coincide with deliveries from Poland’s own harvest and would not alleviate Poland’s immediate need for grain. The Ambassador explained that the present shortage arises from the over-estimation of production last year, as well as the fact that peasant deliveries have lagged because of international tensions and the late Winter in Poland. The Polish Government would not like to resort to forced deliveries and therefore hopes to meet the situation by means of imports from the US. The Ambassador therefore requested that Poland’s request of last February, for 600,000 tons of wheat, be considered immediately. He hoped that a decision could be reached during the visit to the US of Poland’s Foreign Trade Minister, Mr. Trampczynski. Mr. Ball asked Mr. Katz what were the possibilities for accelerating discussions on grain. Mr. Katz noted that June 1 was not far off. Moreover, he pointed out that the Ambassador’s assumptions about the interval between initiation of discussions and the beginning of deliveries was not necessarily correct. While on some occasions our negotiations were long drawn out because of extraneous factors, we have on other occasions concluded negotiations very quickly, witness the recent amendment on cotton which was concluded in less than five days. Mr. Katz pointed out that we also wished to evaluate the results of discussions in Warsaw on certain matters of concern to the US. Mr. Ball emphasized that we were most concerned about Poland’s failure to take steps to settle the problem of defaulted dollar bonds. He requested the Ambassador to impress upon his Government our difficulty in accepting new financial obligations from Poland while old obligations were in default. Ambassador Drozniak stated that during his recent consultations in Warsaw he raised the question of bonds and this question is being considered seriously there. He regretted that he had no instructions as yet. He was informed about Ambassador Cabot’s conversation with Deputy Foreign Minister WiniewiczSee Document 58. and was hopeful Minister Trampczysnki would bring with him some word on the bond problem. At the conclusion of his visit the Ambassador stated that the bulk of Polish-American relations was pleasant but there had recently been an unpleasantry—our rejection of the Rapacki Plan.For text of the April 3 U.S. statement, see Department of State Bulletin, April 23, 1962, pp. 664–665. Our rejection was so swift and so out of hand as to have caused astonishment, not only by the Polish Government but by the population at large. The Polish Government continues to believe the idea of the Rapacki Plan to be sound and hopes one day it will be seriously considered. Mr. Ball commented that it was not as though the Plan had not been given consideration. It had in fact been considered over some period of time. We could not afford, however, to permit any confusion or misunderstanding as to our position. We just do not feel that the assurances which exist in present East-West relations are adequate for an arrangement such as is envisaged in the Rapacki Plan. 61. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/6–1562. Confidential. Repeated to Belgrade. Warsaw, June 15, 1962, 4 p.m. 2082. Department pass Commerce. Behrman called June 14 Trampczynski, Jedrychowski and Winiewicz. Approximately one hour conversation each. At Behrman request Trampczynski outlined future Polish trade West, expressed concern common external tariff Common Market, particularly affecting Polish agricultural exports. However, said 1962–1963 expected no appreciable problem this sector. In discussion possibilities Polish relationship GATT, freely admitted problems posed by trade relations two differing economic systems but offered no solutions. Trampczynski stressed importance foreign trade to development Polish economy, asserting that expectations were for growth of industrial goods exports. In reply to question of how Poles would work to reduce common external tariff Common Market, Trampczynski offered no effective reply. Did show considerable interest in working towards method of accommodating state trading procedures to demands of free world traders, but again nothing specific. Trampczynski, Jedrychowski and Winiewicz took same position on problems which prevent trade from developing between Poland and United States. First, lack technical knowledge goods available US (2) lack commercial credits (3) tightness export controls. Argument was that without knowledge of technical capabilities of American products, purchases often led to inefficiencies and inadequate tooling up of plant. Also that relatively greater knowledge Western European and UK capabilities led to greater imports from these countries. On second point asserted Johnson Act detrimental since did not affect grade other countries, and on third, that application embargo delayed trade and made planning difficult since could not know what could be obtained and whether future plans might be interrupted or inconvenienced. Behrman replied each of these to effect that first would be resolved if trade opportunities in Poland became greater so that private business felt it worthwhile spend time sales effort, that present was no time to attempt change Johnson act but that in fact Poles could take care of situation by joining IMF. Trampczynski and Jedrychowski indicated IMF membership low priority, mentioning specifically that consideration had been given to this 1958 but support not forthcoming when Poles took initiative. General impression from discussion was that political realities in bloc prevent any strong move by Poles towards IMF. Seemed to be full understanding that US could not [omission in the source text] on Johnson Act.Reference is to the Johnson Debt Default Act, signed on April 13, 1934, which prohibited financial transactions with any foreign government in default in its obligations to the United States. (48 Stat. 574) The act was amended on July 31, 1945, to exempt foreign governments that were members of both the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development from some of its provisions. (49 Stat. 516) Jedrychowski stressed Poles intended pay every cent of debts, including World War I and interim, not indicating any precise period in which this expected to be done. On third point of embargo and trade policy, Behrman stressed attitude Congress as presented by possible position on MFN in trade bill and amendments to Export Control Act. Brunt of argument here was that Congress saw no real return to US from deferential treatment to Poles compared with rest of Soviet bloc, and that recent political and economic moves by Poles showed closer identity with bloc, which Congress tended to feel would remove justification for continuing deferential treatment. Jedrychowski stressed MFN treatment negotiated by Poles as part property claims settlement 1960 and removal would be contrary such agreement. Trampczynski indicated MFN worth half million dollars in trade 1961 (our estimate and that of his subordinates considerably larger and would be worth much more in 1962). Conversation Winiewicz stressed long-run friendship US despite ups downs current problems. Although stressed Poland politically and economically tied Soviet bloc, point also made that reliance by Poland on socialist trade actually much less than assumed outside and probably less than figures showed. Said Polish policy to increase amount trade with West. Behrman replied Common Market economically integrating with intention trade externally but moving toward political integration as well and that CEMA integration would weaken basis for continuation of Polish deferential treatment. On export control point Wieniewicz argued that no control policy could in fact prevent economic growth and policy had in fact caused creation of shipbuilding industry in Poland—obviously at great cost but now pride of their economy. Jedrychowski and Winiewicz both made special point at length that no political conditions could be imposed on Poles for continued deferential treatment, that no specific action would be taken to make congressional continuation of deferential treatment easier, and that political and economic unity with socialist group was overriding consideration of all policies vis-à-vis West. Within these limitations Winiewicz stressed desirability long-run friendship and hopefulness that ups and downs could be weathered. Behrman replied long-run friendship certainly sought and philosophical approach taken by Winiewicz hopeful in view fact Congress might at some time restrict flexibility executive. While Winiewicz particularly raised specific points such as [garble] indebtness and publicity in Poland on US/Polish economic agreements, saying everyone in Poland knew of US-Polish trade relations, no attempt made settle any particular issue nor were any raised from our side. Behrman explained on each occasion that objective was fuller understanding broad situation in which each country had to operate. Although all three made no indication Poland considering any changes external position which could contribute to improvement relations, value of talks lies in opportunity make abundantly clear that Congress unhappy current position these relations and that Poles must consider importance every move which weakens hand of administration in effort continue deferential treatment Poland as member Soviet bloc. Behrman checked with me approach to be taken in discussion. I concurred in a firm line on above points and feel it important that opportunity was taken by Washington official to present this to high officials in Polish Government. Further, every opportunity in future should be taken to stress necessity of Poles to demonstrate mutual profit to US as result of deferential treatment. Behrman concurs in record discussion above. Cabot 62. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/7–662. Confidential. Warsaw, July 6, 1962, 5 p.m. 48. Under Secretary Winiewicz today called me in and handed me aide-memoire MFN matter. This aide-memoire refers to discussions in both houses of US Congress which “have already adopted certain provisions which clearly aim at a return to cold war practices in trade and financial relations.” “As is well known MFN clause was restored by USG in November 1960 in conjunction with undertaking by Polish Government to start compensation payments in amount of 40 million dollars. This undertaking by PPR was in fact made conditional—on basis gentlemen’s agreement—upon granting by US of said clause to Polish exports. Government of PPR has been strictly discharging its obligations.” Aide-memoire then goes on to argue at some length that present obligations already impose strain on Polish balance of payments and that rescinding of MFN “could prevent Poland from discharging her undertakings.” In course of discussions Winiewicz pointed out that effect of drastic economic measures against Poland would be to cause a sharp worsening in Polish-American relations. He said MFN more important for Poland than PL-480. Such worsening of bilateral relations at moment when world outlook seemed to be perceptibly brightening would be very unfortunate. I said that though impression prevailed in US that Poland getting bulk of benefits from our economic relations and though some illusions regarding Poland had been shattered, I would consider it deplorable if there were to be sudden worsening of relations. As Department aware (Embtel 2118 June 20),In telegram 2118, Cabot stressed his belief that withdrawal of MFN status from Poland violated a U.S. moral commitment. (Ibid., 611.4841/6–2062) I feel strongly that we would be defaulting on moral obligation if cancellation of MFN for Poland should become law. Also considering fact that Poland, if MFN cancelled, probably would not and could not meet obligations, it would seem to me counter-productive from viewpoint our immediate interests to cancel clause. Even for those who believe that Poland should not have benefit of any favorable economic ties with the US, it would seem to me that this is wrong way to go about achieving desired result. I earnestly hope therefore that Congress can be persuaded to reverse itself in this matter. Cabot 63. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/9–1362. Confidential. Warsaw, September 13, 1962, 1 p.m. 500. Department telegram 320.Telegram 320, August 30, reported that the Department of State had informed the Poles that it expected to begin P.L. 480 discussions in September and instructed the Embassy to press the Polish Government on publicity and bonds. (Ibid., 411.4841/8–2462) Called on Deputy Foreign Minister Winiewicz September 12 at my request for further discussion publicity and bonds. In response my question whether he could provide any further information these questions in light his discussions with government leaders (Embassy telegram 377)Telegram 377, August 25, reported Polish interest in information about P.L. 480 payments. (Ibid., 411.4841/8–2562) he stated following. Re bonds could go no further than basic statement on intent contained annex to 1960 claims agreement pending further developments affecting balance of payments. MFN cited as one unknown quantity imbalance [in balance?] of payments formula. Re publicity, he stated that in opinion many Polish Government leaders past publicity had been adequate and that all economists and others concerned were fully aware magnitude and generous terms American economic assistance. For internal political reasons could not officially give any assurances that publicity following conclusion any further PL-480 agreements would be more complete than in previous years. He said he could add, unofficially however, that he had seen the drafts of several articles on this subject which were more complete and might be published depending upon outcome next round of negotiations. I told Winiewicz that in my opinion these limited assurances were not satisfactory but would report them for Department’s consideration. He departs for UN September 15 or 17. Sherer 64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/9–1362. Confidential. Drafted by Wortzel and approved by Vedeler. Washington, September 15, 1962, 12:15 p.m. 391. Re Embtel 500.Document 63. Dept agrees Winiewicz statements unsatisfactory re both bonds and publicity. Re former not clear whether Embassy made point contained in last paragraph Deptel 320 in rebuttal Winiewicz comment on MFN.See footnote 1, Document 63. The last paragraph reads: “Believe question bonds should be pursued at this time. In this connection if question MFN raised as affecting ability deal with bonds you may suggest they assume no change on basis discussion tentative pending completion legislative action on Trade Expansion bill.” Polish reference to 1960 statement of intent seeks to ignore point that our present initiative caused by their failure effectuate this statement for over two years. Re balance of payments difficulties we can point out that benefit Poles gain this regard from PL 480 agreements contributes to ability deal with bond indebtedness and that we cannot ignore this. Re publicity useful point out that we as well as Poles have internal political considerations and that ours dictate our receiving more than unofficial hints of future action. We cannot accept situation in which Poles ask us make commitment in form of agreement while saying that they “might” then provide some publicity. Not clear from last paragraph Reftel whether Embassy plans continue discussions at FonOff during absence Winiewicz. While we intend indicate our dissatisfaction to Poles here and may express our views to Winiewicz in New York, we believe that discussions must continue in Warsaw. Poles may be informed that if discussions suspended until return Winiewicz, they must anticipate effect on timing negotiations.In telegram 524 from Warsaw, September 17, the Embassy reported that during the discussion Winiewicz showed a complete understanding of the status of the trade bill and also indicated that even in favorable circumstances he could give no assurances on meaningful actions on the bond issue. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/9–1762) Rusk 65. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/9–2762. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Belgrade. Warsaw, September 27, 1962, 4 p.m. 606. Reference: Deptel 448.Telegram 448, September 26, reported that congressional action on removing MFN status from Poland and Yugoslavia had been taken in spite of President Kennedy’s intervention. (Ibid., 711.48/9–2662) I realize that it is probably now impossible to do anything about MFN in view of Conference Committee’s action.Regarding the congressional action on MFN, see Document 130. Nevertheless, it seems to me important to point out that this action is not only breach of a commitment which was certainly implied but also stupid from viewpoint our most immediate interests. I think it probable that Poles will immediately default on nationalization agreement alleging that we have broken agreement and perhaps adding that congressional action makes it impossible to secure means to continue service on agreement (Embassy A–27).Airgram A–27, July 13, forwarded the text of a Polish aide-memoire on P.L. 480. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/7–1362) I am also somewhat apprehensive of effect congressional action will have on outstanding PL480 Agreements. Embassy has evidence from various sources that Poles are effecting number of economies in their foreign exchange budget. This is probably a reflection of the relative shortage of grain throughout bloc this year and consequent necessity of further hard currency purchases in West coupled with strain of Canadian grain purchases already undertaken. It also probably reflects uncertainty regarding new PL 480 Agreement. Moreover difficulties in fulfilling plan for industrial exports West are apparently causing concern. It is our impression that Poles are genuinely short of foreign exchange to cover what they consider minimum necessary import program. Question of Polish dollar commitments under present PL480 Agreements will of course not arise for nearly 5 years. Nevertheless, I consider it increasingly doubtful whether Poles will or indeed could meet these commitments since most Polish trade with other Western countries is tied to bilateral arrangements and hard currency surplus to repay PL480 commitments was scheduled to come largely from increased access to US market. This in turn should presumably be taken into account in any negotiations we undertake regarding new agreement. Poles can be expected to apply increasing pressure for elimination of hard currency repayment provision as date for first payment approaches using line that we have disposed of useless agricultural surpluses and are now demanding dollar repayment while refusing Poles opportunity to earn dollars in US market on equitable basis. On the other hand we must realize that to refuse to enter into a new agreement because of the difficulties which Poland would undoubtedly have in meeting service on such an agreement under present circumstances would result in sacrificing all gains in our relations for past five years and would probably lead to as chilly a period as chilliest of cold war. In any event, I consider it a waste of time to discuss further any possibility of a bond settlement. Cabot 66. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at New YorkSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2150. Secret; Niact; No Other Distribution Even On Limited Basis. The Secretary was attending the 17th session of the U.N. General Assembly. See also Document 132. Washington, September 28, 1962, 9 p.m. Tosec 59. Eyes only for Secretary. (Attention: Mr. Swank) From Dutton. Per our conversation: “Memorandum for the President, subject: denial of most favored nation treatment to Yugoslavia and Poland. It is my judgment and that of all of the senior officers of the Department concerned with this matter, that the denial of most favored nation treatment to Yugoslavia and PolandOn October 4, the Congress passed the Trade Reform Act of 1962 that included a provision denying most-favored-nation rights to any state under Communist control. For text of P.L. 87–974, approved October 11, see 76 Stat. 872. See also Document 130. will have the most serious consequences for our relations with these countries and toward our entire position in Eastern Europe. It would run directly counter to our policy of holding out an alternative to those countries which are striving to be independent of international Communism and free from Soviet domination. It would cause the loss of effective gains we have made in projecting United States influences into Eastern Europe. It would destroy many important and identifiable pro-Western elements in those countries who, according to our best information, are in the ascendancy. The denial of most favored nation benefits will have most serious effects on Yugoslav and Polish trade with the United States. Analysis of trade statistics with Yugoslavia indicates that virtually all of its exports to the United States would be subject to significantly higher duties. Poland has enjoyed MFN benefits only since later in 1960 and has thus only begun its efforts to develop a market here. These efforts, which have had our encouragement, would be nullified. The loss of trade with the United States, taken in conjunction with other international developments, such as the effects of the Common Market on their trade with Western Europe, may be expected to lead Polish and Yugoslav regimes to undertake a realistic, if not pessimistic, reassessment of the wisdom of their reliance on the West. We will have given them but one alternative, that of complete dependence on the Soviet bloc. We will thus have contributed much to an objective neither Stalin nor Khrushchev has been able to achieve, the unity of the Communist world. At a time when international Communism is seeking to advance its position everywhere in the world I fail to see why we should now abandon our efforts to carry the war to the enemy. We have every reason to be greatly encouraged by events in Eastern Europe which are unquestionably running in our favor. There are innumerable evidences that in each of the countries in the Eastern European Soviet bloc there are mounting pressures for liberalization and for better relations with the West. In Yugoslavia we have a clear demonstration of the benefits of our policy. We should not be swayed from our course by public statements of old-line Communists such as Tito. We are now witnessing in Yugoslavia the gradual transference of power to younger and less doctrinaire men who are determined to hold Yugoslavia from communism itself. This is not the time for us to write off our extensive investment in this area and to ignore our vital security interest in the future of these countries. The only profit of such action would be for international Communism and Nikita Khrushchev. Dean Rusk” Ball 67. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2152. Secret. Drafted by Glenn and approved in S on October 4. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission. New York, October 1, 1962, 3 p.m. SecDel/MC/79 SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE SEVENTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York, September, 1962 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Amb. Stevenson Mr. Richard Davis, EUR Mr. Edmund S. Glenn, LS Mr. Philip Valdes, SOV Poland Foreign Minister A. Rapacki Mr. Z. Janczewski, Ministry of Foreign Affairs SUBJECT Polish-American Relations in the light of the world situation After an exchange of amenities the Secretary suggested that one of the topics of conversation might be that of bilateral relations. As the Foreign Minister certainly knows the President has had some difficulties with Congress in regard to legislation pertaining both to trade relations and to aid. It is quite clear that the attitude of Congress is to a large extent influenced by the general political atmosphere. The President bases his own policy on the belief that an improvement and a normalization of Polish-American relations should be possible in spite of existing difficulties upon which, as we all understand, neither Poland nor the United States exercises full control. The task of the President would be much easier if Poland did not publicly take a position in support of policies which create a danger to peace. At the present moment the President has made his own stand clear in spite of the political difficulties which might result from this at election time. He is trying to persuade Congress to keep the door open to the development of normal relations between the United States and Poland. Unfortunately, at the very moment when the President was doing that, Mr. Gomulka made a speech in which he supported the Soviet views about Berlin and also there were Polish expressions of solidarity with Soviet policy at a time when Soviet provocations in Cuba have reached a maximum. The difficult task of working for better mutual relations should be one for both governments and these Polish actions have not helped the United States Administration in its endeavors. The Secretary made it clear that both the traditional friendship of the American people toward the Polish people and the personal regard of the Secretary to Mr. Rapacki, as Foreign Minister of Poland, were not at stake. The problem was that of obtaining cooperation from both sides toward the solution of current problems. He invited the Polish Foreign Minister to speak freely. Mr. Rapacki said that this was not the first time that he and the Secretary had exchanged frank and free remarks and this mutual frankness undoubtedly has contributed to such improvement in relations as has taken place so far. It has been recognized ever since the first conversations of the Foreign Minister with representatives of the United States, back in 1956 or 1957, that a normalization of relations should be sought in full realization of there being points of disagreement between the two nations. In spite of such points of disagreement in regard to the overall world situation, the two nations could work together to maintain their traditions of friendship and develop their economic and cultural relations. The experience of the last few years has shown that such policies could lead to success and Poland intends to keep on seeking possibilities of closer relations in spite of areas of disagreement. The Foreign Minister understands that there are certain difficulties in the United States at the present moment. He, of course, does not wish to mix in American internal affairs. However, he is somewhat surprised that the United States Government should depend to such an extent on a certain part of American public opinion, even if that part of the opinion finds its expression in Congress. There should be no necessity to depend to such an extent on a part of public opinion. The Secretary remarked that it is equally necessary for the United States Administration to take into account American public opinion as it may be for the Polish Government to take into account the Warsaw Pact. The Foreign Minister said that there is a great difference between public opinion and an international agreement. He may agree that there is an inter-dependence between public opinion and the actions of the government and he recognizes that the United States Government has made great efforts to improve economic relations between Poland and the United States. However, public opinion is something on which the government itself may have an influence. Thus, public opinion is influenced by a situation such as that of Berlin or Cuba, but not only by that—and in regard to the expression of American opinion through recent legislation in regard to Poland, the Foreign Minister feels that in a way it is the actions of the United States Government which have influenced public opinion, only in turn to be influenced by it. The Secretary spoke about certain policies which endanger peace. The Foreign Minister said that this is not anything which is of Poland’s doing. The Secretary remarked that sometimes people have to bear the consequences of their partners’ actions, and this even when they themselves are not fully willing members of the partnership. Mr. Rapacki said that he felt that none of Poland’s partners were endangering peace. He is certain that the President of the United States does not wish either to endanger peace. In regard to Berlin, Mr. Rapacki said that there is one point which is particularly serious and that is the question of the presence of Western troops in that city. He was not authorized to express any opinions except his own, nor did he wish to imply that what he has to say on the subject represents anybody else’s opinion. His own opinion is that the question of Western troops in Berlin is not an “absolute question”. If the situation were different in the world, the presence of the Western troops in Berlin would not appear as such a difficult problem. It is necessary to understand other people’s point of view and in particular it is useful for the United States to understand how these things look from Warsaw. The situation in Berlin, and in particular the situation as it derives from the presence of Western troops there, had taken a turn for the worse after incidents such as that of the U–2 plane and after the aggravations of the situation in regard to Cuba last April. If the relations between Cuba and the United States were based on peaceful co-existence it would certainly be easier to negotiate a solution to the question of Allied troops in Berlin. The Secretary had spoken of Soviet provocations in Cuba. Mr. Rapacki does not see any such provocations. He knows the facts of the situation and he feels that he has learned a lot from a recent visit to Cuba. This visit leads him to believe that relations between Poland and Cuba will be quite a bit easier than expected. In this respect, he was somewhat surprised at the intervention of the United States Ambassador in Warsaw in regard to Cuba before his departure for his Cuban visit.Rapacki visited Cuba June 10–17. According to despatch 482, June 14, Ambassador Cabot had warned the Polish Government that the Cuban visit would have a damaging effect on U.S.–Polish relations. (Ibid., 748.00(W)/6–1462) Cabot reported on a verbal exchange with Rapacki over the Cuban visit in telegram 2155, June 26. (Ibid., 748.13/6–2662) Mr. Rapacki mentioned that, although this has nothing to do with the subject of Cuba, the new Ambassador is making an excellent impression in Warsaw. In any case, it cannot even be suspected that the purpose of Mr. Rapacki’s visit in Cuba was to aggravate the tension between that country and the United States. It was, nevertheless, a very instructive visit and Mr. Rapacki would advise the Secretary to perhaps visit Cuba himself. The Secretary said that he doubted whether he would receive an invitation. Mr. Rapacki said that he might in the future. At the present moment this is not a very concrete subject of conversation. Obviously, the Foreign Minister is not extending any invitations, and the Cubans themselves might be afraid that an invitation on their part might be interpreted as a sign of weakness. Mr. Rapacki’s personal opinion about the Cubans is that they are non-conformist people—something which the United States should well know and which others are discovering now. The Cubans seek their own way and will not follow anybody’s example. They certainly do not intend to copy measures which have failed elsewhere. Mr. Rapacki had found more points of agreement between the thinking of Cubans and Poles than he had expected. Reverting to the question of bilateral relations, Mr. Rapacki said that he was afraid that the recent decision of the United States Senate might be a step backward in the development of these relations. He has read with great care both the language of the legislation and the interpretations given to it. He feels that there exist possibilities for continuing economic relations in the direction in which they are developing at pres-ent, since these relations are based on a certain number of economic principles. For example, the most-favored-nation clause is tied to certain obligations on the part of Poland; it is thus a matter of reciprocal legal obligations. This point should be made clear since a lack of clarity in this respect influences the marketplace and makes it difficult not only to develop but even to maintain trade at the present level. It should be made clear that the question of the most-favored-nation clause is not one which can be made unilaterally but is a matter of international agreement. As for the question of repayment by Poland of pre-war bonds, it is better perhaps to leave it in abeyance until such a clarification is obtained. The Secretary said that the President is trying to leave the door open so as to make normal relations between the two countries possible. At the end of this week it will become known what exactly is the legislative situation. The question of trade is more important than that of aid and in that respect the Executive branch of the United States Government will do whatever is possible, within existing legislation, to maintain good relations and to improve them. It is highly important in this respect to avoid tying together things which do not need to be so tied. If the Polish Government were to retaliate for any one action on the part of the United States by tying to it some other action on the part of the Polish Government—without absolute necessity—this would produce a downward spiral where from retaliation to retaliation relations would worsen. The Foreign Minister asked whether the Secretary had in mind Congressional action. The Secretary said that Congressional action imposes certain limitations on the possible actions of the Executive branch. It is the policy of the Administration to act towards better relations within such limitations; if, however, the Polish Government, because of some such limitations, were to take retaliatory action on its part, this might lead to a further narrowing of the freedom of action of the Administration and thus precipitate a series of retaliations and counter-retaliations. Mr. Rapacki said that the most-favored-nation clause is tied to the payment by Poland of indemnifications for nationalized American property. The Secretary said that he urges the Poles not to tie together any items which it is not absolutely necessary to tie together. Mr. Rapacki said that he understood that anything which constituted a deterioration in mutual relations might lead to further deteriorations; likewise, improvements may lead to further improvements. In any case, the most-favored-nation clause should not depend on the general political situation. The Secretary said that he wanted to speak of his personal experience of the last six months. Very much of his time was spent before Congress, including Committee meetings in Executive Session which are not reported in the press, defending the possibility of maintaining normal economic relations with Poland. Had he been a lawyer, such as his good friend Governor Stevenson, he would have said that he received very little help from his client in these endeavors. Governor Stevenson said that the client in question certainly was absent at the time of the debate. The Secretary said that, for example, the Polish position in regard to Berlin did not make his own position before Congress very easy. In regard to the substance of the question of Berlin, the Secretary did wish to say that he wants to make it absolutely clear that the Allied powers are in Berlin to stay. There were opinions expressed recently to the contrary; these opinions are not only unrealistic but also dangerous. Mr. Khrushchev had repeatedly said that Mr. Macmillan, President De Gaulle, Mr. Spaak, Mr. Fanfani, and even President Kennedy, are ready to agree with him on Berlin; only Chancellor Adenauer does not want to agree. Nothing could be farther from the truth, and it is essential that everyone should be aware of that. Passing to the question of Cuba, the Secretary would like to make it clear that there are two points which are not negotiable. One of these is the question of a political and military alliance between the Soviet Union and Cuba. The other is that of Cuban infiltration into other Latin American countries. This is something which the President stated categorically already a year ago. We are not interested in Cuban internal affairs. We are not even particularly concerned with the Cuban nationalization of American property (which, parenthetically speaking, wasn’t profitable anyhow). We cannot accept, however, the establishment of a Soviet military base in this hemisphere. Finally, in regard to bilateral relations, there are obvious difficulties, but the Administration is still prepared to do whatever it can within the context of the present situation to work for the normalization of these relations. By the way, the Secretary prefers the expression “normal relations” to that of “peaceful co-existence” as the latter has become a slogan which means many things we cannot accept. Thus, the Secretary, when speaking of relations between states, governments or peoples, prefers the good, old-fashioned expression “normal relations” which does not contain the reservations implied by the expression “peaceful co-existence”. This latter expression has been used to describe situations in which there is very little peace—there certainly is no peace in Vietnam and the Secretary is not certain whether there will be peace in Laos. Mr. Rapacki said he agreed that peaceful co-existence was not being implemented in many parts of the world, although he might differ with the Secretary as to who is responsible. This expression has, nevertheless, great value as it means absence of war. The Secretary said that it was described by Mr. Khrushchev himself as covering the struggle on the part of the Soviets for the imposition of their system. This is why he prefers the pre-Khrushchev and pre-Stalin expression “normal relations”. Mr. Rapacki said that the victory of ideology should be pursued only by peaceful competition. The Secretary remarked that Mr. Khrushchev certainly went beyond peaceful competition when he gave his blessing to so-called “wars of national liberation”. Mr. Rapacki said that ideology is not very important if major wars are avoided. If there is no war the world will evolve in such a way—both within each of the three blocs and as to the relations between them—that none of those alive today will recognize. The Secretary said he hopes that it will be given a chance to evolve. Poland certainly has no interest in any solution which would result in the incineration of the entire northern hemisphere. Returning to the present situation the Secretary said that tensions would certainly decrease if there were to be a de-Stalinization of East Germany—for example (and he had said this to Gromyko), if the East German regime were to de-Stalinize and if East Germany had a regime similar to the Polish regime of today, current tensions would be greatly reduced. Mr. Rapacki said that he would certainly hesitate to give advice to the Government of the German Democratic Republic. As a matter of fact—and what he is going to say is an example of his frankness in this conversation—one of the greatest fears the Poles had at the time of their October revolution was that the East Germans might follow their example. The Secretary asked whether this was because of the 20 Soviet divisions in East Germany. Mr. Rapacki replied no, that their greatest worry was how far the FRG might go. The Secretary said he would not ask Mr. Rapacki to comment on the following but in the light of Poland’s knowledge of the situation in Central Europe and the fact the German problem will not impinge directly on Polish interests, Poland should know that the presence of American troops in West Berlin is a factor of stability. The Foreign Minister said that it would be so if U.S. policy itself were “stabilized”. Only in such a case would the presence of American troops in Berlin have a stabilizing effect. Where, however, American policy oscillates under the influence of a public opinion which gives in easily to irritation, the presence of American troops cannot have a stabilizing effect. The effect of the presence of American troops in West Berlin is tied to the entire world situation and would be stabilizing only if American policy were constant and the same in all parts of the world. The Secretary said that the American is a strange animal: when attacked, it defends itself. Given the pressures on Berlin and on Vietnam, and the penetration of this hemisphere through Cuba, we cannot accept a stability which would be like that of a hypnotized rabbit waiting for the snake to strike. Mr. Rapacki said that it might be good to think of what happened in Cuba. It is not “we”—and by we the Minister does not mean Poland, but the Socialist “camp”—who started the revolution in Cuba. It is not “we” who isolated Cuba. If the Cubans act as they do it is first of all because they have been isolated. The Secretary certainly is aware of the fact that the Cubans requested permission to buy arms in Britain and only upon the rejection of their request did they turn toward the Soviet bloc. The Secretary said that this was hardly the whole story. The United States certainly could not tolerate the sending of Soviet agents to other countries of the Western Hemisphere and the provision by Cuba of funds to subversive movements in Latin American. Mr. Rapacki said that he did not wish to enter into a controversy in regard to agents, since after all it is difficult to determine whose sources of information are reliable. He repeated, however, that the Cubans acted as they did because they felt isolated and wanted to break out of their isolation. The tempo of the Cuban revolution was set not by the Chinese Communists or the USSR but by the United States. The Secretary concluded by saying that the legislative action of Congress would become known shortly, even though the precise scope of such action is not known today. When Congress finally acts and when we know the situation, time will be needed to see what it means and what are the actual possibilities. Quiet consultations are preferred to hasty reactions. Therefore, the Secretary urged the Polish Government to avoid any hasty reaction to such legislation, whatever might be its precise terms. The Secretary expressed the hope that one day they might talk about Polish-U.S. relations in a sunny climate. The Foreign Minister expressed the hope that it will be possible for the two countries to continue developing their friendly relations. 68. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/10–1662. Confidential. Repeated to Belgrade. Warsaw, October 16, 1962, 6 p.m. 736. Director General Michalowski invited me today to Foreign Office to present note regarding Congressional action directing abrogation of MFN for Poland.The text of the note was transmitted to the Department of State in airgram A–300 from Warsaw, October 17. (Ibid., 411.4841/10–1762) Note refers to talks in Warsaw on this subject and states “Introduction and application of restrictions in Polish-American relations would be, on part of American side, non-fulfillment of pledges, which were undertaken at time of negotiations of agreement to settle United States claims arising out of nationalization of property of American citizens in Poland … charge d’Affaires … Siscoe … confirmed that MFN clause would be granted after conclusion of agreement.” Note continues that in point four of Raczkowski–Kohler protocol United States representative confirmed statement that granting of MFN would take place after signing agreement. “Implementation by Poland of agreement and … MFN clause to Poland are inseparably tied up with each other.”Ellipses in the source text. Note then argues that further carrying out of Polish commitments is connected to volume of Polish exports to United States. Withdrawal would not only check mutually beneficial economic relations but also unfavorably weigh on spirit of entire relationship of two countries. In course of conversation Michalowski pointed out that already Polish exporters are receiving numerous cancellations of orders due to uncertainty regarding date of application of MFN cancellation. He reflected obvious unhappiness of Polish Government at turn of events and desire to save what could be saved from wreckage. Polish note confirms our thought that Poles are not likely to continue paying on claims agreement once MFN is cancelled. When I gently urged restraint Michalowski pointed out that news regarding MFN cancellation had not yet been published (he was evidently unaware of General Spychalski’s speech Embtel 723)Telegram 723, October 15, reported that the Polish Minister of Defense had used the denial of MFN as an example of “imperialist” efforts to undermine socialism in Poland. (Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/10–1562) but would obviously have to be. I said that I was referring to statements and acts which were of no real importance to Poland but very offensive to United States public and Congressional opinion. I said that I would say no more since I was aware that Foreign Minister Rapacki had been incensed by statement I had made to him under specific instructions. While conversation was unhappy one it was personally cordial and there was no need to convince Michalowski that President and Department were strongly opposed to Congressional action. I intimated efforts were being considered to find some satisfactory course of action but I could give him no assurances as to what would happen. Cabot 69. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/12–662. Confidential. Drafted by Katz and approved in U on January 3, 1963. Washington, December 6, 1962. SUBJECT Call of the Polish Ambassador Regarding US-Polish Economic Relations PARTICIPANTS The Polish Ambassador, Edward Drozniak Dr. Marian Dobrosielski, Counselor, Polish Embassy The Under Secretary Mr. Julius L. Katz, EE The Ambassador expressed satisfaction that after so many months of delay the PL 480 negotiations had finally begun. He wished to raise some general problems connected with our bilateral relations, rather than the negotiations per se, but he hoped his point of view would be taken into account before the negotiations were finalized. The past months, he said, were full of expectation, promises and disappointments. (He noted parenthetically that “some officials” of the State Department said they had a right to be disappointed.) He realized, of course, that US-Polish relations were affected by the international situation, and that the Administration was not always able to do what it wished. Nevertheless, facts were facts and the Polish Government could not depend upon intentions and attitudes. The Ambassador said that he wished to call attention to these facts: 1. Despite a promise last December that there would be a further agreement in the early Spring, and a further promise to begin negotiations in June, nothing had happened until now. The promises of last December and June had figured in Polish planning for animal husbandry. When the U.S. did not provide grain Poland had to buy grain at great cost in order to maintain the hog population. The result was a grave deterioration in the Polish balance of payments. 2. Despite the Administration’s attitude, the Congress had voted to withdraw MFN from Poland. This, together with the boycott campaign against goods of Polish origin, was producing a serious effect on Polish exports to the U.S. 3. Poland had expected to see a further development in bilateral relations with the U.S., i.e., it expected a change in the Battle Act. Today one hears nothing about this. The Ambassador noted in this connection that he came here 18 months ago to work for improved relations; now he has to work hard to maintain the status quo. 4. To the problems with the U.S. must be added problems with Western Europe, particularly the Common Market. Some 40% of Poland’s trade was with the West, but because of trade difficulties and discrimination, Gomulka had recently pointed out that Poland’s dependence on trade with the West would have to be reconsidered. In the past five years, Poland had lost $450 million through a working of the terms of trade. This produced a terrible strain on Poland’s balance of payments. 5. Poland’s agricultural situation this year was very bad. Grain production was 2 million tons less than last year, potatoes were lower by 7.5 million tons, and the vegetable and fruit crops were very bad. Poland had to import between 2.7 and 2.9 million tons of grain this year. 6. In these circumstances, Poland expected to receive a proposal from the U.S. which would recognize Poland’s present situation and reflect the traditional generosity of the U.S. The U.S. offer, however, was only $37 million. Without wishing to enter into details, the Ambassador wished to point out that Poland had requested 1.5 million tons of grain. The U.S. offered 400,000 tons of wheat. Yugoslavia, he noted, had recently received 1.2 million tons of wheat. Similarly with respect to cotton, Poland had requested 40,000 tons to cover its deficit. The U.S. offered 4,000 tons. Summing up, the Ambassador said that in one of Poland’s most difficult years the U.S. made its smallest proposal and had proposed conditions (cash purchase commitments) which were beyond Poland’s capacity at the present time. On the assumption that the U.S. shared Poland’s desire to advance our relations, he requested: 1) A public statement by the U.S. Government indicating the intention to maintain the status quo regarding most-favored-nation treatment. This would assure American firms who were uncertain about the future of trade with Poland. 2) A public statement, preferably by the President, opposing the boycott campaign. The efforts of the Department in the form of letters and interviews were appreciated but this was not enough. 3) Efforts in the new Congress to amend the Battle Act. 4) Review by the Under Secretary of the U.S. position in the PL 480 negotiations. The Ambassador hoped that the U.S. could examine the situation not merely from a statistical point of view but from the viewpoint of the Ambassador’s presentation. The Under Secretary thanked the Ambassador for his clear and frank presentation and assured him that we wished to have good relations with Poland. There were, however, forces beyond control which limited the full possibilities. With regard to the points made by the Ambassador, Mr. Ball commented: 1) The President had indicated in a speech in Buffalo his intention to seek a change in the MFN provision of the Trade Expansion Act.For text of the October 14 statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pp. 782–783. Mr. Ball noted that he personally had done everything in his power to prevent the passage of this provision. 2) With regard to the boycott campaign, it was difficult to control the attitudes of individuals. He was not sure that an official statement would provide the answer to this problem, but said he would consider this matter further. 3) Regarding the PL 480 negotiations, Mr. Ball recalled the difficult period in the Congress on the Foreign Assistance Act which made it uncertain whether PL 480 could continue. In the circumstances we could not move faster. He indicated that he was aware of the general considerations in the negotiation but was not familiar with the details. He stated that he would review our position with Mr. Katz in the light of the Ambassador’s remarks. 4) With regard to the Battle Act problem Mr. Ball noted that we tried to get an amendment, had succeeded in the Senate, but not in the House. It was pointed out that the worsening of the international situation, notably in Berlin and Cuba, was largely responsible for the failure to obtain passage of the amendment. Invited by Mr. Ball to add any further comments, Mr. Katz observed that the Ambassador’s first fact was based upon a misapprehension, i.e., that we had “promised” that there would be a further agreement for grain in the early Spring. In fact we had agreed to consider further sales of wheat. We had considered this and concluded that we were not in a position to offer additional wheat and so informed the Ambassador at the time we signed a supplemental agreement for cotton and rice. The current negotiations were a new round, unrelated to last year’s negotiations. Mr. Ball concluded the conversation reiterating that he would review our position in the negotiations. 70. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/12–1862. Confidential. Warsaw, December 18, 1962, 5 p.m. 989. Deptel 718 December 17.In telegram 718, the Department of State reported that Lychowski had stated under instructions that Poland could not make any cash commitments as part of a P.L. 480 arrangement. (Ibid., 611.4841/12–1762) Please see Embtel 988.Telegram 988, December 18, outlined ways in which Poland was profiting from its manipulation of the exchange rate. (Ibid., 611.4841/12–1862) Embassy sees no reason doubt urgent requirement additional grain imports by Poland this crop year. Even if figures inflated, Poles must purchase additionally at least as much wheat as we offer them. Presumably Poles would be unable purchase in Western market at terms more favorable than those normally obtained from Canadians, i.e. 10 percent down and balance in 3 years with interest rates running over 6 percent. Hence over 3-year period PL–480 offer much more favorable to Poles even when tie-in sales included. However, Lychowski’s instructions not to accept cash purchase commitments may well be based on seriousness present policy cash position. Embassy has no way of estimating current status hard currency reserves but believes they must be precariously low in view such desperate measures as cut in number of foreign correspondents and in foreign service salaries. If longer period were allowed for tie-in cash purchases it would perhaps show whether Polish position political or based on lack of exchange. I prefer, however, approach suggested in my Embtel 988. Cabot 71. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/12–2162. Confidential. Drafted by Katz and approved in S on January 6, 1963. Washington, December 21, 1962. SUBJECT Call of the Polish Ambassador Concerning PL 480 Negotiations PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Mr. Edward Drozniak, Polish Ambassador Dr. Marian Dobrosielski, Counselor, Polish Embassy Mr. Julius L. Katz, EE The Ambassador called this morning at the invitation of the Secretary, to discuss the impasse in the current PL 480 negotiations. The Secretary said that in reviewing the background in the negotiations he found it difficult to understand why the Poles should have been surprised or shocked at our proposal for cash purchase requirements. This proposal seemed to be a reasonable one. The Ambassador replied that there were two aspects of the US proposal which were disturbing. First, the PL 480 offer was too small and did not take into account Poland’s real needs. Secondly, the cash purchase requirement was burdensome, especially at this time when Poland’s balance of payments was so seriously strained. The Ambassador elaborated on this point as he did in his meeting on December 6 with Under Secretary Ball,See Document 69. and presented to the Secretary the attached MemorandumNot printed. explaining the Polish position. He added that as a former banker he could not advise his Government to take on the cash purchase obligations since he saw no possibility of meeting these obligations. In commenting, the Secretary said that he wished to put aside any thought whether this problem was being considered from a sympathetic or hard point of view. As a former banker, the Ambassador should appreciate our situation. We were in effect offering some $60 million of commodities on terms of about one-third in cash and the balance over forty years. These terms, the Secretary thought, were considerably more favorable than what the Poles obtained elsewhere. Pointing out that the US also faced a serious balance of payments problem, the Secretary said that we found it most difficult to be in the position of subsidizing Polish purchase of commodities elsewhere. Moreover, we had to be careful that we were not subsidizing Polish exports of animal products in competition with our own. The Secretary emphasized that the unwillingness of the Polish Government to assume any cash purchase obligations made it very difficult for us to conclude an agreement. He therefore urged the Ambassador to seek new instructions. The Ambassador said that the US view had been reported not only by cable, but Deputy Foreign Minister Winiewicz had personally carried back to Warsaw information on the negotiations. In view of the absence of any significant change in the US position he did not believe Warsaw would provide new instructions. The Secretary suggested to the Ambassador that if he felt he could not seek new instructions, he send a letter to Foreign Minister Rapacki stating that the Secretary wished the Foreign Minister to review the problem in the negotiations. The Secretary emphasized that he was not soliciting a counterproposal, since he could not hold out any prospect that such a proposal would be accepted. But there was no reason why we could not continue to exchange views in order to find a solution to our problem. There might be other ways to solve our problems. Why, for example, couldn’t the Poles seek some relief from other creditors, pointing out the contribution the US was making in its very liberal credit terms. The Ambassador hastened to say that to do so would destroy Poland’s credit. But the Secretary pointed out, the Ambassador had impaired Polish credit here by saying that they are unable to accept cash purchase obligations. The Ambassador coughed nervously and muttered something about the difficult situation in which Poland presently found itself. In concluding the meeting, the Secretary reiterated his request that the Ambassador ask Mr. Rapacki to review the problem from the viewpoint of the trade problems of both sides. 72. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/12–2662. Confidential. Drafted by Katz and approved in S on January 7, 1963. Washington, December 26, 1962. SUBJECT Call of the Polish Ambassador Concerning Polish PL480 Negotiations PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Mr. Edward Drozniak, Polish Ambassador Dr. Marian Dobrosielski, Counselor, Polish Embassy Mr. Julius L. Katz, EE The Ambassador stated that he had conveyed the Secretary’s remarks to Foreign Trade Minister Trampczynski and to Foreign Minister Rapacki.See Document 71. Mr. Rapacki had requested the Ambassador to express his gratitude that the Secretary had taken the time personally to interest himself in the negotiations. He also asked the Ambassador to convey to the Secretary his best wishes for a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year. Both Ministers, the Ambassador continued, had reviewed the negotiations and after careful study had concluded that it would be possible to rearrange certain plans so as to assure the availability of some hard currency for agricultural purchases in the US. The Polish delegation had received instructions which go quite far in this respect. The Ambassador expressed the hope that the Polish request could again be carefully considered with the view to changing the proportion between the US offer and the cash purchase requirements. The Polish delegation would be in touch with the US side on Thursday, December 27. The Secretary thanked the Ambassador for the greetings from Mr. Rapacki and stated that he would personally review the US position after the new Polish proposal had been received. The Secretary pointed out that there was one element in his mind which he had not mentioned earlier but of which the Ambassador should be aware, that is the relationship to the MFN problem. If the PL 480 agreement were on a good solid businesslike basis, it would be helpful with respect to the MFN problem. The Ambassador stated that there was one more comment Mr. Rapacki had made. He expressed deep appreciation that the Secretary had stressed the economic aspects of the agreement. The Ambassador drew attention to the fact that following the Congressional storm of last summer the Polish Government and press did not react despite the many harsh words used in the Congress. In this connection, he asked the Secretary to use his influence to see to it that this transaction not be used to harm Poland’s relations with the Soviet Union. The Secretary observed that he and the Ambassador had discussed this matter before. He had also discussed it with Mr. Rapacki in Geneva.See Document 55. We wished to develop our relations with Poland to the maximum extent possible, without regard to other issues which were not entirely within the control of either Poland or the US. Within certain limits, which we hoped will broaden, we could do that. At times, however, this might not be possible. The Secretary had discussed this frankly with Mr. Rapacki and pointed out that if Poland became intimately involved with the most difficult aspect of certain serious problems, e.g., Berlin, the limits of possibility would be narrowed. We, of course, had certain domestic problems which caused things to be said which might better be left unsaid. But we would try to be careful to take into account to the extent possible Polish sensibilities. The basis for our improving relations lay not in reconciling the ideological differences between us but in the enduring friendship between our two peoples. We should try to avoid the ideological problems and to stress those areas where we could broaden our relations. It should be recognized, however, that we both had our political problems. Concurring with the Secretary’s remarks, the Ambassador stated that he appreciated the problems. We are realists, he said. 73. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/1–1163. Secret. Warsaw, January 11, 1963, 3 p.m. 1071. Personal for Secretary from Ambassador. In view personal interest you have shown in PL–480 negotiations with Poles I am taking liberty of setting forth my views regarding them. I am disturbed by increase in our new PL–480 proposals to Poles from 37.1 million dollars to 51.6 million together with lessened purchase requirements in view of absence of adequate quid pro quo. I do not think that US-Polish relations have improved in past year. In some respects such as MFN this has been our fault but for most part this has been deliberate choice of Polish Government, i.e., repeatedly expressed Polish position on Berlin, Rapacki visit to Cuba, refusal to accept Glenn capsule and Medicine-USA exhibit et cetera.The Polish Government had delayed granting permission for the display of the Glenn capsule, and the United States withdrew its offer. During the exhibition, U.S. officials repeatedly protested against police surveillance and harassment of U.S. delegation members. On record we have certainly no reason to reward Poles for any cooperation they have given us. We must bear in mind that any PL–480 sales are ipso facto help given to member of Soviet bloc and must therefore be justified by other positive considerations. We recognize that PL–480 can be properly and effectively used to increase sales of agricultural products. Although agricultural surpluses mean relatively little to United States, their receipt is vital to Poland and its plans for industrial development. I do not believe we should accept Polish view that criterion should be Poland’s commodity needs but should rather think in terms of how we can best further our policy objectives in our relations with Poland. Unless we keep Poles on short leash we lose leverage which PL–480 sales provide us. I do not understand how Poland can undertake to repay us for additional $50 million worth of commodities if it is frankly unable to assume responsibility for paying a lesser sum of defaulted bonds. I am concerned that there is no end in sight to process of providing Poland with PL–480 commodities and this might ultimately lead to default. It is possible Poles are so short of foreign exchange that they cannot buy grain they need, but it is to be remembered that they have been buying from other markets on relatively short credit terms. If they must purchase grain they can probably secure exchange for it by curtailing plans for industrial development. I believe the Poles are in more urgent need of grain imports now than they have been for past several years and will accept best terms they can get. I have distinct impression that Poles feel confident that we are so wedded to our “special Polish policy” that we can always be pressured into meeting their needs despite lack of Polish cooperation in furthering bilateral relations or Polish willingness to grant adequate quid pro quo in negotiations. I have from time to time and most recently in Embassy telegram 988 of December 18See footnote 2, Document 70. suggested other quid pro quos which we might request. (Incidentally, Department apparently has mistaken impression free market grain purchase discussed in Embassy telegram 988 is insignificant whereas fact is substantial quantities are purchased by the state on the free market.) Since offer described in Department telegram 766Telegram 766, January 3, outlined U.S. proposals for further discussions of a P.L. 480 agreement. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/1–363) has been made, it cannot of course be withdrawn. If not accepted within reasonable time, however, I see no impropriety in making alternative offers involving other benefits to United States objectives. I am anxious to know policy considerations under which it was decided to increase our original offer by almost 40 percent since I am concerned lest we use too much carrot and not enough stick. However, whatever misgivings I may have it is obviously essential that any discussions with Polish officials here be closely attuned to those in Washington and I should therefore be grateful for any policy guidance you may wish to send me. In conversation with Winiewicz today I referred to very favorable offer we had made. He was noncommittal. Cabot 74. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/1–1163. Secret. Drafted by Wortzel, cleared by Tyler, and initialed by Rusk. Washington, January 19, 1963, 5:43 p.m. 841. For Ambassador Secretary. Embtel 1071.Document 73. I appreciate expression of your views re PL–480 negotiations and agree with implication your remarks that this instrument should be used with care and attention to what US may derive from its use. In case of Poland, more than in number of other countries receiving PL–480 assistance, political factors and considerations transcending bilateral relations play major role in decisions re PL–480 agreements. At same time, economic considerations are weighed carefully, including effect on US market, markets of third countries, and extent of contribution to Bloc economy. Further, we cover smaller portion of Polish deficit than of many other recipient countries, and agreements with Poland unique in requiring repurchase local currencies. Policy which US has pursued toward Poland admittedly involves risks and limited evidence of realization of long-term objectives. I am satisfied, however, that policy remains valid under present circumstances and that essential line should continue. Desirable that we not shift ground at this time of flux in Communist world lest this have undesired effect in decisions which Poland or others might make as result. Desirable also that we not provide further impetus beyond difficulties re MFN and boycott campaign for unfavorable development Polish policy or actions. In so far as consistent with this approach, we have sought to limit PL–480 deliveries to minimum which would meet our objectives. Since 1960, quantities have decreased materially and terms changed to require greater commercial purchases. At same time, we have held off agreements to indicate displeasure with Polish actions, for example concerning Berlin. However, as long as we continue to regard agreements as useful, it is necessary to stop short of reductions or restrictions which would make agreement impossible. I recognize that this difficult to determine and that judgments are made on subjective basis and consequently are always open to argument. Each decision has represented consensus here as to best arrangement in circumstances. Recognizing limits on what we expect in short term by way of favorable changes in Polish policy or bloc actions as well as fact that PL–480 agreements not seen as permanent fixture nor as without drawbacks, I believe we should continue review use PL–480 in light future developments. Rusk 75. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.4841/1–2263. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Katz and cleared by Vedeler. Washington, January 22, 1963, 5:07 p.m. 848. PL 480 meeting called by Poles yesterday after more than two week unexplained delay. Poles indicated general acceptance US offer January 3 but asked whether US could not agree (1) switch 100,000 tons wheat to feed grains and (2) permit half of value cash cotton purchase (estimated $3.5 million) be switched to feed. Request explained by critical need feed grains and easier availability wheat on world market on credit terms. US representatives referred previous statements on impossibility financing feed grains for Poland under PL 480. Confident US response would be negative. We intend confirm negative response later this week.The Department of State turned down the Polish request at the January 24 meeting of the U.S.-Polish negotiating teams. Minutes of that meeting are ibid., 411.4841/1–2463. The Polish Delegation accepted the U.S. offer on January 29. The text of the agreement was transmitted to the Embassy in telegram 889 to Warsaw, January 29. (Ibid., 611.4841/1–2963) On separate private basis Lychowski stated he had instructions “undoubtedly from very high sources” to request inclusion in PL 480 agreement or in associated agreement credit to purchase 500,000 automobile tires of assorted sizes for use horse-drawn peasant carts. Obviously embarrassed Lychowski stated he obliged make request but did not wish do so in plenary. Department representatives stated that Lychowski could easily guess the answer, viz., tires not eligible under PL 480 and no other financing available. Rusk 76. Letter From the Ambassador to Poland (Cabot) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Davis)Source: Department of State, Polish Desk Files: Lot 68 D 3, Official–Informal. Confidential; Official–Informal. Warsaw, February 13, 1963. Dear Dick: I enclose herewith a memorandum prepared by Pic LittellNot printed. It summarized Embassy difficulties with the Polish Government. with regard to the road blocks the Poles have been throwing in the way of our cultural program. Whereas I think the other side of the story should be borne in mind also, it does seem to me clear that there is a good deal of quiet sabotage of our cultural program in Poland. I realize that the Department is not willing to tie this matter up with PL–480 and I am not inclined to quarrel with that decision. I do think that, in any case, better tactics are open to us. It would seem to me that when we get tripped on hurdles such as those mentioned by Pic we should squawk as loudly as we can and as, in point of fact, we on several occasions have. Then when the Poles come around again for PL–480, which I confidently expect they will have to, I think that we might make a distinctly modest offer to sell them PL–480 commodities in the amount say of ten to twenty million dollars, the exact amount to be determined by the degree of cooperation they have shown in the preceding year. (Of course if they had really been cooperative I would increase the amount.) I would attach no strings to this other than publicity—in other words, I would make it so attractive in so far as it goes that they would not wish to turn it down even though they would be disappointed in its amount. Then when the Poles come storming in as they did this year and say we were not giving them anything like what they needed I would recount to them sweetly their lack of cooperation during the year, and say that under the circumstances this was all we were disposed to offer. I would trust that these tactics would convince them that cooperation is a two-way street. There are a number of other things which I have mentioned to the Department in the course of the year I have been here, but have received no satisfaction. I continue to feel that I should be instructed to discuss them with the Poles. These include such matters as the outrageous ground rents they charge us for real estate (the Embassy residence property and the school land being horrible examples), the arbitrary rents they have imposed on us, and the discriminatory exchange rate (a Pole can get 72 zlotys for his dollar and an American only 24). As it appears unlikely that anything will be done to change the Ellender amendment,The Ellender amendment to Title I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 reduced the borrowing authority of the DLF for 1963–1966. For text of P.L. 87–195, approved September 4, 1961, see 75 Stat. 426. I suggest that serious consideration be given to raising the exchange rate problem with the Poles prior to any further PL–480 discussions. I am not at all convinced that we pressed this issue with sufficient vigor prior to the 1961 agreement and the record is clear that nothing has been done about it since. This is an issue of major significance which has direct relevance to PL–480 sales. (For a recent discussion of this issue you may wish to read Embassy airgram 628 of February 8, 1963.)Airgram A–628 reported on Polish press coverage of the P.L. 480 agreement. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 15–4 Pol) I do think that in our relations with Poland it is always important to keep the door firmly open and on that account would not wish to press the Poles on PL–480 to the point that they turned down our final offer. I do believe that we should extend cooperation to them, provided there is some relation between the cooperation we extend to them and that that they extend to us. On the other hand, I think it is very important for us to bear in mind the fact (and it comes out time and again by implication in their own official statements) that our cooperation, notably our PL–480 agreements, are giving them very real help in developing the country’s economy—and after all, Poland is a staunch member of the Warsaw Pact. Therefore, much as I believe in keeping the door open, I do not think we should be over generous. I do, incidentally, believe that we should play square with them and continue to feel that we should maintain MFN for them on both moral and practical grounds. In connection with the thoughts I have expressed in this letter you might wish to read my Airgram 519 of March 15, 1962Airgram A–159 forwarded recommendations for exploitation of the P.L. 480 agreement. (Ibid., 611.48/3–1562) and Despatch No. 359 of March 22, 1962.Despatch 359 reported on Polish rent “gouging” of the Western diplomatic corps. (Ibid., 121.485/3–2262) Sincerely yours, Jack Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Pol–US. Confidential. Drafted by Wortzel on February 21 and approved in S on February 28. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk’s office. Washington, February 20, 1963, 11 a.m. SUBJECT US-Polish relations; East-West issues PARTICIPANTS Edward Drozniak, Polish Ambassador Dr. Marian Dobrosielski, Counselor of Polish Embassy The Secretary EUR/EE—Arthur I. Wortzel Ambassador Drozniak opened the conversation by expressing his gratitude to the Secretary for his important assistance in achieving conclusion on February 1 of the PL–480 agreement with Poland.For text of the agreement, signed in Washington on February 1 and entered into force the same day, see 14 UST 803. He said that this was a good and useful agreement and particularly timely in view of the bad crop which Poland had had in 1962 and the severe winter, which had already affected transportation and industrial production and which would affect agricultural activities next spring. The Secretary thanked the Ambassador for his remarks and added that he had derived personal satisfaction from the conclusion of the agreement. Drozniak said that he was returning to Warsaw February 26 for consultation and that he would like to be able to report to Polish officials, particularly to Foreign Minister Rapacki, concerning the attitude of the US Government on matters of importance to Poland. He wished, therefore, to pose two questions. The first had to do with the US Government’s view of the perspectives for 1963 concerning major international questions such as the situation in Berlin and Germany and a nuclear test ban and disarmament, including the Rapacki Plan. Looking at the general international situation, the Secretary replied, we believe that 1963 is a year in which it might be possible to work out agreements which may reduce international tensions. As for cessation of nuclear testing, we want to conclude a test-ban treaty and are disappointed that the USSR has not thus far made it possible to work out an agreement. To us, the key is to obtain adequate assurance that a test ban will be respected. We can understand that the Soviets may not feel that they require on-site inspection in the US, the nature of our society being such that a combination of 98% open observation and 2% espionage can meet their requirements. We, however, are faced with a large area not accessible to us. We thus have a difference between us not only of policy but of fact. We have, in the face of a difference as to the number of on-site inspections required, proposed that we put the issue of numbers aside and settle the rest of the treaty, leaving President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev possibly to settle the numbers question once we know what the numbers really mean in terms of treaty provisions. The Soviets have refused, and acted in a way which suggests a move toward an uninspected moratorium. We have had much experience since 1945 with the difference between agreement in principle and an actual agreement. The Secretary asked Drozniak to tell Minister Rapacki that we want very much to have a test-ban treaty, that we are prepared to believe that the Soviets also wish a treaty, and that we will continue to work hard toward reaching agreement. Turning to Berlin, the Secretary said that the key factor remains the presence of Western forces, this not being negotiable. We believe that relations between the parts of Germany and between Germany and Europe can become more normal. We expect that there will be discussions with the Soviets and we will see what happens. We see possibilities of progress, but it will take patience, care and time. Asked by Drozniak whether the Soviet proposal concerning a UN presence—the UN flag—in Berlin did not offer a solution, the Secretary commented that we have indications that this is not all the Soviets have in mind, and that their statements on this subject have not been consistent. Although we have not taken the matter up on an inter-allied basis, we think it possible that a UN presence which would insure a lessening of tensions throughout the Berlin area might be a solution. Concerning denuclearization, the Secretary said that this must be considered in the total framework of disarmament and basic issues in Europe. In a sense, he said, technology has overtaken the Rapacki Plan. If the area proposed were denuclearized, the Soviets would still have a massive capability. We thus now face technical problems which make the idea of zones doubtful. The Secretary then said that there are other problems which concern us—for example, Laos. We are disturbed by the lack of cooperation on the part of the Pathet Lao with the Royal Laotian Government. We support Souvanna Phouma and know that cooperation between him and Phoumi Nosavan is good, but that there is tension between Souvanna and the Pathet Lao.Souvanna Phouma, Prime Minister of Laos, and General Phoumi Nosavan, leader of the Laotian right wing. In August 1962 the factions involved in the Laotian civil war, including the Communist Pathet Lao, had attempted to carry out an agreement for the withdrawal of foreign involvement and the peaceful settlement of their differences. The settlement soon broke down. It is extremely important that the coalition succeed, it being a test case of a personal agreement between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev. It is in the interests of both sides that Laos be let alone. We have no influence with the Pathet Lao, and hope that those who do will use it to prevail on them to support the coalition. The Secretary commented that the role of Poland as a member of the International Control Commission in Laos is important and that Poland has a heavy responsibility. If there is not freedom of movement in Laos, we must suspect what is going on. We hope that Minister Rapacki will think about the implications of the ICC’s acting in a way to reduce suspicion. The Secretary added that we are not happy about an inspection of Air America if many other things going on are not inspected. Thanking the Secretary for his exposition, Ambassador Drozniak posed his second question. What, he asked, does the Secretary see as the prospects for our bilateral relations. The Poles are very much interested in developing our relations in all fields. He was concerned at this time with our economic relations and wondered what the chances were for reversing Congressional action concerning most-favored-nation treatment for Poland, for amendment of the Battle Act, for ending the boycott of Polish goods in the US, and for future agreements under Public Law 480. The Secretary said that he would like to be completely frank, because it is important that we understand each other. We are interested in improving our bilateral relations. This is so for many reasons, including the long history of ties between our countries. We are interested despite the fact that Poland pursues policies in matters of importance to us which we find disagreeable. However, we try to understand Poland’s special situation including its geographic location. If Poland were located elsewhere and pursued its policies, our relations would be bad, but we take into account our understanding that Poland does not have full control of its own situation. Unfortunately, the US public and Congress do not have the same understanding of Poland’s situation. The Secretary asked Drozniak to express to Minister Rapacki his appreciation for Rapacki’s understanding of our problems as we try to understand Poland’s. Concerning MFN, the Secretary said, the President has made his position and his intention clear. The Secretary added that he was not at liberty to discuss tactics and that he could not guarantee success, but that if the general atmosphere is favorable, he would be hopeful. The Secretary said that there are other things we might do to help our relations. We should press ahead in the field of exchanges. We hope that we can improve the channels of trade, although our role in that respect is limited by the nature of our economic system. In general, we would like to steer the boat of our relations in a favorable direction, but the waters are sometimes choppy. In response to a further question concerning how we see the future of US-Polish PL 480 agreements in general, the Secretary noted that it had been possible to conclude an agreement recently and believed that in the absence of a change in the situation, there was no reason why we could not have another look later. Ambassador Drozniak said that he wanted to express his thanks for the Department’s active help with regard to the boycott of Polish goods in the US and the threatened ILA boycott of Polish ships. 78. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Pol–US. Confidential. Repeated to Belgrade. Warsaw, April 1, 1963, 3 p.m. 1518. Department telegram 1174.Telegram 1174, March 30, reported that President Kennedy would seek amendment of the 1962 Trade Act to restore MFN status to Yugoslavia and Poland. (Ibid., FT 4 US/IEA) At lunch which I gave Ambassador Drozniak’s honor March 30 he described his call on Representative Mills in approximately same terms as outlined memcon his conversation Under Secretary Ball February 25.Not printed. (Ibid., POL Pol–US) Said Mills told him he would support return MFN treatment to Poland and that his previous objection had been based primarily on Department’s granting MFN without proper legislative authority. Assume Department has checked Drozniak’s story with Mills. Would be interested hearing if Mills change of heart is as real as Drozniak appears to believe. Drozniak also told me his meeting two weeks ago with Gomulka, with whom he claims close association dating from war years, lasted three hours. Said believed Gomulka now has better understanding of strength of Congress in foreign policy formation. 3 In telegram 1199 to Warsaw, April 4, the Department of State reported that Mills had informed the White House that he would not actively oppose changes in MFN status of Poland and Yugoslavia. (Ibid.) Cabot 79. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Tims on April 22 and approved in S on April 24. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk’s office. Washington, April 20, 1963, 2:30 p.m. SUBJECT US-Polish relations; East-West issues PARTICIPANTS Edward Drozniak, Polish Ambassador Dr. Marian Dobrosielski, Counselor of the Polish Embassy The Secretary EUR/EE—Richard W. Tims Ambassador Drozniak opened his remarks by saying that during his recent five-week visit to Poland he had conveyed the Secretary’s greetings to Foreign Minister Rapacki, who wished him in return to thank the Secretary. He said that the Foreign Minister was still recuperating from his recent heart attack.Rapacki suffered a heart attack on February 20. The Ambassador went on to say that he had had an opportunity to discuss Polish-United States relations with many ranking Polish officials, including Prime Minister Cyrankiewicz and Party First Secretary Gomulka, and that they had listened carefully to what he had to report from Washington, knowing that he had just come from having talks with a number of high United States officials, including the Secretary. In this connection the subjects that had interested the Polish leaders most included the questions of disarmament and Germany, as well as specific matters of US-Polish bilateral relations. The Secretary interjected apropos of this that we had been particularly interested in recent progress made in Polish-West German relations, of which the long-term trade agreement between the Federal Republic and Poland was the prime evidence. The Ambassador replied that the latter was evidence of the Polish Government’s readiness to try to achieve a normalization of relations with the Federal Republic. He added that his Government was concerned, however, over the general lack of progress in the field of disarmament and settlement of related issues. Concerning bilateral US-Polish relations, the Ambassador said that he had discussed these in detail with his Government and was glad to say that the latter had confirmed his mission of pursuing a policy of practical coexistence in all fields. This was equally true, he said, with regard to cultural exchanges, scientific exchanges, and economic relations with the United States. He mentioned that the Polish Minister of Health had accepted an invitation to visit the United States and was looking forward to coming soon. Concerning specific economic relations, Ambassador Drozniak went on to say that Poland would like to develop these relations on the basis of normal trade. He said that there was concern in Poland, however, over the fact that the question as to whether the United States would continue to give Poland most-favored-nation tariff treatment had not yet been decided. He was still in Poland, he added, when President Kennedy sent his message to Congress recommending restoration of most-favored-nation treatment to Polish imports, in connection with the Foreign Aid Bill,For text of President Kennedy’s message on MFN, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 294–303. and this message had been received with satisfaction among the Polish Government, as had the Secretary’s own statements on the subject at Congressional hearings. The Ambassador said he would be grateful if he could hear the Secretary’s comments on this problem. He also said that he had reported to his Government in a quieting manner concerning the current boycott of Polish goods in this country as well as the prospective longshoremen’s boycott of Polish shipping, saying that he saw hopes that these problems would be solved. Turning to the economic situation in Poland, the Ambassador said that he had been concerned about it before he returned to Poland and that he had found it very bad owing to a severe winter and poor crops. For this reason, he said, Poland would be very glad if it could enter into a new agreement with the United States again this year, regarding purchase of surplus agricultural commodities, and would be happy to have this in the form of a mixed agreement as before, with both credit and cash purchases included, an arrangement that appeals to the Polish Government. He asked the Secretary whom he should first approach on this matter. The Secretary replied that the Ambassador should take this up with Assistant Secretary Tyler. With regard to the most-favored-nation question, he said that the Administration had been in touch with members of the Congress and that it was his impression that if the general situation remained relatively calm the chances were good that the President’s proposals would succeed. This, he added, was not because there had been an increase of enthusiasm among Congress members for the proposals, but rather because some of the opponents of trade with Poland might remain silent. The Secretary said that he was moderately optimistic on this score. 80. Airgram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 Pol–US. Confidential. Drafted by Cabot, Sherer, Buell, Donnelly, and Davis. A notation on the source text reads: “Discussed with Amb. Cabot at Dept. 5/15/63.” Warsaw, April 25, 1963. A–873. Subject: Poland—Basic Policy. What are we trying to do in Poland? It seems to me that our basic purpose is to keep our foot in the door and our shoulder against it. We want to have contacts with the Poles, to make them feel our presence in Poland, to tempt them to try a somewhat independent line toward the Soviet Union, to maintain Poland’s Western cultural orientation, to make it more difficult for the Polish regime to be too harsh toward the Polish people, to underscore our traditional friendship and links with the Polish people. We want the Polish regime to realize that it can open the door further if it wants: it is not totally dependent on the Soviet Union and if it wishes better relations with the United States it can have them and benefit from them. We must engage the Poles on as many fronts as possible: tourism, publications, radio broadcasting, cultural presentations, consular relations, travel grants, trade, social gatherings, English teaching, cultural centers, CARE programs, films, public appearances, libraries, schools, hospitals—in any area of contact that we can keep open. To take a trivial example, it is surprising to note the interest stirred up in any Polish town when the Ambassador’s American car shows up with the American flag flying. Our opportunities in Poland are matchless in the Soviet bloc and despite some setbacks we have a good many successes to our credit. We must recognize, however, that since the heady days of 1956 the general trend has been for the Polish authorities to tighten the screw over Polish nationals rather than loosen it further. We must not fool ourselves as to what we can accomplish. We are not going to change the essential character or orientation of the regime. It is going to remain communist and it is going to maintain its adherence to the Warsaw Pact. If it differs from other communist regimes in its agricultural policy, its treatment of the church and the relatively greater freedom it gives its citizens, this is not primarily because of United States policy—it is due to domestic considerations. Important as it is for us to take Poland’s special position and interests into account, it is unlikely that we can induce Poland to adopt markedly more favorable policies from our viewpoint no matter what we do. There is even considerable question as to how far we might induce the regime to adopt less favorable domestic policies if we ourselves were harder nosed in our dealings with it. In short the communist regime in Poland is going its own way in accordance with its own concepts of its interests. If from time to time it adjusts its course somewhat to take our views and interests into account this is primarily to get what it can out of us; we should emphatically not deceive ourselves that there is anything really significant in it. All that we can hope to accomplish in the foreseeable future is to influence individuals, to create a favorable atmosphere, to chip away at the crudities of communist dogma. The principal instrument for implementation of our policy today is PL 480. Poland depends heavily on its ability to get grain and other agricultural commodities from us on what in effect are extraordinarily cheap long-term credit terms. The zlotys which it deposits in payment for our commodities, though nominally subject to withdrawal, are not going to be except in infinitesimal amounts, and the regime knows this. Most of these zlotys will simply remain in Polish banks until, in ten to forty years, they are due for reconversion into dollars. It is to be borne in mind that these zlotys so far as the Polish Government is concerned are therefore really nothing but an entry in a ledger. Moreover when commodities are distributed to ultimate consumers, the return flow of payments is deposited in currency. That currency can be used either to fight ever-threatening inflation by sterilization or for new credit operations. In a capitalist economy that would be a great advantage. The economic section of the Embassy argues that in a communist economy it is not, since the government always has the totality of the nation’s resources, human and material, at its disposal in any case. Be that as it may, there is another point which is indisputable. Since there is no interest payable either on the zlotys or on the dollars into which in due course they are to be reconverted, the real value of what we are paid is a great deal less than the nominal value. At the interest rate the United States Government pays on its long term obligations, dollars payable, in an average of 25 years in the future, are worth only a fraction of what dollars payable today are worth—and this takes no account either of probable inflation or of the possibility of default by the Polish Government. The benefit of all this on the $477,000,000 of agricultural commodities we have sold to Poland under PL 480 accrues to the Polish communist regime. It is no trifling benefit, but just so much help to the regime to achieve its economic objectives. In other words, if we are to extend material help which importantly strengthens the communist bloc we should be very certain that what we are receiving in return is worth as much to us as what Poland is getting. Although from our viewpoint these agricultural commodities are surpluses, from the Polish viewpoint they are vital to the country’s economy. If they were not to receive them, it would be necessary for the regime to tighten the belt to the point where it would really pinch. It is clear that even with all the help Poland has received from PL 480 its economy is seriously strained. Foreign exchange reserves are very low and perhaps nonexistent. The exceptionally cold winter has caused breakdowns in a number of sectors of the economy. It is to be remembered that our agricultural commodities supplied to Poland have not only helped to save Poland foreign exchange but also (by providing feed for hogs, hens, etc.) have contributed importantly to Poland’s foreign exchange earnings. The importance of PL 480 supplies to Poland is clear from many Polish statements. Recognizing the inherent limitations on what we can hope to accomplish I question whether it is necessary to enter into such large PL 480 agreements with Poland as we have customarily signed. Presumably we have signed these large agreements because of other benefits which we have secured in addition to keeping the door open. These include such matters as the settlement of our claims, tie-in sales, etc. It was perhaps the Department’s thought in raising the amount we offered the Poles in the last negotiations that this was to mitigate the blow to our relations which had been caused by Congress’ action with regard to MFN. In implementation of our PL 480 policy one point we must bear constantly in mind is the burden these agreements are going to place on the Polish economy in years to come. Repayments under the PL 480 agreements in dollars will start in 1967 and will rapidly build up as repayments under one agreement after another begin to come due. It is somewhat doubtful whether the Polish economy can bear the strain of these repayments, particularly if Polish exports to the United States are prejudiced by Congress’ action with regard to MFN, by John Birch boycotts of Polish goods and by similar measures. Presumably, therefore, it must be our policy to phase out further agreements in due course. Every new agreement adds to the hurdles which the Polish economy will have to surmount in the not too distant future. The time may come, it may indeed already have come—when it will be impossible for the Polish economy to surmount the hurdles before it. Tempting though it may be at that point for Poland to default, their record suggests that they will seek to avoid this way out of their dilemma. Yet if we continue to sign large PL 480 agreements over an extended period default might become unavoidable. At that point we would face the unpleasant alternative of stretching our already generous interest-free terms over a yet larger period or of losing much of the good will we had so carefully built up over the years. Indeed, if and when we stop signing new agreements and the Poles find they must make heavy payments on old debts while securing no new benefits, they probably will not like it. In short, we do not want our policy to be self-defeating. We cannot afford in our relations with Poland to take the attitude that sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. It would almost certainly be unwise to stop abruptly our series of PL 480 agreements with Poland. On the other hand, it is essential from our viewpoint as well as that of the Poles that Poland become more nearly self-sufficient in the near future, at least in the commodities the country can produce. It is thus the essence of good policy to cut down in the future on the size of any PL 480 agreements we may sign. If we continue to sign modest sized agreements covering, say, particularly cotton, which Poland cannot produce, we can perhaps postpone a crisis indefinitely. If we continue on our present course we are simply looking for trouble. What are we going to expect in return from Poland? We cannot expect specific political concessions. The Poles obviously are not going to, and indeed cannot, accept such conditions. We can perhaps expect as a consequence of further agreements that we will accomplish in modest measure the intangible objectives mentioned in paragraph one but this would be because the Polish authorities acquiesced in it rather than through any agreement between our countries. It is simply not realistic to expect any specific political concessions. There are a number of economic concessions which we might ask. The most important is perhaps a bond settlement, since the outstanding prewar bonds of Poland remain in total default. Unfortunately, the Poles to all appearances do not now have the foreign exchange to undertake a bond settlement and, as explained in the previous discussion, there is no strong reason to suppose they are going to have resources to undertake a bond settlement within the foreseeable future. Possibly we could secure a bond settlement by offering a large PL 480 agreement, much as we obtained the claims settlement in 1960. We should continue to press for a bond settlement but should not be unduly rigid in how we propose to secure one. Another concession which we have asked in the past and could with propriety ask again in the future is that they make commercial purchases of American agricultural commodities concomitantly with the purchases they make under PL 480. This helps us to dispose of agricultural commodities and to that extent is beneficial. I do think, however, that we have more important objectives than this to attain in our relations with Poland. The amount of commodities we thus dispose of is not very large and it would seem to me that if we wanted to sell farm products to Poland on a commercial basis it would be wise to go about doing this by clearing away any legal and practical obstacles to commercial sales rather than by making such sales a condition in future PL 480 agreements. There is surely no reason why we cannot compete both in prices and credit terms with other sellers of agricultural products in filling Poland’s large import requirements above her PL 480 purchases. What we do want to remember is that the extra commodities we sell them under PL 480 in order to make the whole transaction, including tie-in sales, attractive, are really important help to Poland’s economic development. I doubt it is wise to do this in order to pocket a few dollars. In our relations with Poland we are constantly being annoyed by petty holdups. The deposit rate we can obtain, for example, is only 24 to 1 and, since this greatly overvalues the zloty, it means that all of our expenses in Poland are greatly magnified. The Polish Government through the PKO Bank will pay Polish residents 72 zlotys for dollars which they bring in—in other words, Poland grossly discriminates against foreign residents of Poland. The black market rate is reported to be about 80 to 1. The artificially low official rate for zlotys means not only that our operating expenses are much increased but also that any capital expenditures such as those for building are greatly augmented. It has been argued that we should use the leverage of our PL 480 agreements to get the Poles to give us a more favorable deposit rate under our PL 480 agreements and thereby a more favorable rate for our expenditures. This argument is reinforced by the fact that we are selling grain to Poland, taking the 24 to 1 rate of deposit, at a considerably lower price than the domestic price for compulsory delivery of grain and at a far lower price than the free market price. There can be no question but that this is a proper matter to include in PL 480 negotiations; the rate of deposit is an essential provision in all of these agreements and the matter has specifically been discussed on at least one previous occasion. Nevertheless, I am inclined to feel that this should be discussed separately rather than in the course of any future PL 480 negotiations. The advantages to securing a higher deposit rate would not be very large. When the time for reconversion came we would get the same number of dollars for our zlotys regardless of the deposit rate. The only difference would be that, with a higher deposit rate, we would do relatively better on our operating expenses and capital costs (even here we might find that the Polish Government in its monopoly position might simply raise prices for us). There is no reason, moreover, to suppose that this use of zlotys would run to more than a relatively small proportion of the total amounts involved in our PL 480 agreements. On the other hand, I think we would run a real risk that the Poles would refuse altogether to enter into a further PL 480 agreement if we were to insist on a higher deposit rate. Of course this danger could be mitigated by offering them large amounts of PL 480 commodities or otherwise more favorable terms but, as explained above, I would consider it imprudent to continue negotiating PL 480 agreements for large amounts of commodities. We are not in the position we were in the midst of the negotiations last December for a PL 480 agreement. I believe the Embassy should be instructed to protest this discrimination, but that this should not now be directly linked with PL 480. In this connection, the question of the Ellender amendment requires consideration. As the Embassy has so often pointed out, this amendment grossly favors the CCC and enables it to gouge every United States Government agency operating in Poland by forcing them in effect to exchange their current dollars for the CCC’s dollars, which are payable only many years hence without interest. The American taxpayer does not lose by this but the real cost of our programs in Poland is distorted out of all recognition. By accepting deferred payments for our surplus commodities we secure in effect a greatly reduced amount for them. We should not turn this around and claim that our programs in Poland cost us fantastic amounts more than they really do. It does make a great difference to State, and to a lesser degree to other agencies, to spend over twice what it should for its operations in Poland. The Ellender amendment should be modified so that the real rather than the nominal value of the CCC’s money will be reflected by the rate at which it sells to other agencies. I think that considerations very similar to those mentioned regarding the deposit rate should prevail in regard to at least two other economic grievances we are suffering from. The City of Warsaw owns all real estate within the city limits and will only allow foreign governments and private individuals to enter into long-term leases for the use of land. Land so leased is preposterously expensive and, since the city has a monopoly of it, there is no recourse. We have been compelled to pay a ridiculous sum (at least nominally) for an eighty-year lease on the land on which it is proposed to build the Ambassador’s residence, and an even more ridiculous sum has been asked for land for our prospective school. I believe that we should vigorously protest this holdup (since it can be only so characterized) but I do not believe that we should tie it in with PL 480. Again the game is simply not worth the candle. If we are going to let a member of the Warsaw bloc have nearly half a billion dollars worth of agricultural surpluses in order to achieve the benefits mentioned at the beginning of this report, we certainly do not want to be so nearsighted as to gag because we are held up for some hundreds of thousands of dollars for land. We also do not want to encourage the Polish Government to hold us up in order to be thereafter bribed to cancel the holdup. The same reasoning applies, I believe, to another holdup, which is in connection with housing. Housing is extremely tight in Warsaw. The Embassy must get quarters for its staff either from the city or from private owners. The city a year ago increased its rents for foreign diplomats several fold and moreover insisted that they in effect be paid in foreign currency. (This was to prevent diplomats from using black market zlotys.) With regard to private owners the city collects 85% of the nominal rental, which means that rentals are extremely high. I believe that we should vigorously protest this situation also but I agree with what I understand the Department’s position to be, that it would be inappropriate to inject this directly into PL 480 negotiations. The possibility of building Embassy housing has been discussed in another Embassy report. It should be added that we have just discovered that the Polish authorities will not permit us to buy existing houses from private owners. We have numerous cultural objectives which we should like to attain. Most important among these is perhaps the establishment of a cultural center which would be a focus for the teaching of the English language and the dissemination of American culture among the people of Poland. Desirable as it would be to establish such a center, I fear it is not within the realm of practical possibilities under present circumstances. We could scarcely demand the right to establish such a center as a quid pro quo in our PL 480 negotiations since the Poles would doubtless strongly reject such an approach. On the other hand, the Poles are not going to permit the establishment of such a center out of the goodness of their hearts. Yet I see no harm in making an approach on it at a suitable time in the future. Although we would not link the center to PL 480, it is not improbable that the Polish decision on it would be influenced by their continued need for PL 480 assistance. An appropriate moment to raise this question might be when (and if) the Congress accepts the President’s recent recommendation regarding MFN. Also, short of establishing such a center there are certain areas where considerable amounts of PL 480 zloty holdings of the United States Government could be profitably employed in stimulating the quantity and quality of English language instruction in Poland. The Embassy’s views on this matter were submitted to the Department in detail in A–660 of February 22, 1963.Airgram A–660 discussed the future of English-language training in Poland. (Ibid., Edu 4 Pol) We should also like to see increased cultural exchanges between the United States and Poland. There are at the moment rather numerous such cultural exchanges, which I shall not enumerate in this report. On the other hand, as the Department is aware, the Polish authorities are forever putting a spoke in our cultural wheel. The Glenn capsule was in effect rejected as was the Medicine-USA exhibit. Passports for Ford and Kosciusko grantees have been refused. The circulation of American books, periodicals and newspapers in Poland is restricted. It is clear that whereas the Polish authorities are willing to have the cultural door slightly opened, they are determined to keep their foot firmly against it in order that it may not swing so far open as to be inconvenient from their standpoint. Here again I feel that there is nothing we can do except to protest as individual cases arise. We certainly cannot inject the question of specific cultural exchanges into PL 480 negotiations. In short, I believe that we should not enter into large PL 480 agreements with Poland except possibly under circumstances which cannot now be foreseen. We should try to enter into modest agreements varying annually, in conformity with the cooperation we have received from the Polish authorities in the preceding year, with no strings except adequate publicity attached. We should not insist on tie-in sales since we want the offers we make to be so attractive that the Poles will almost certainly accept them faute de mieux and yearn for more. We should sweep away any legal obstacles to the purchase by Poland of agricultural commodities under competitive conditions as to prices and credit terms with other producers. We should not wish to extend really significant help to a government which has consistently made its hostility to us clear. We should continue to give that government material assurance that if it adopts a more friendly attitude we will respond in kind. Our relative friendliness to them as expressed by our deeds should correspond to their relative friendliness to us. If they choose to be a member of a hostile bloc and yet continue to show some signs of friendliness to us we should be forthcoming in extending limited help to them. If they are more friendly we should be more friendly. They should always feel that they have something to lose by too negative an attitude towards us. They should equally feel that if they want better relations we will welcome this within the bounds of prudence. We have historic ties and we wish to preserve them. Our people are friendly towards each other and it would be a tragedy of history if we were ever to clash. We must not give the impression we shall always be friendly and helpful regardless of what they do. But we must—always—make it clear that if they want good relations that is precisely what we want, too. There are, of course, other ways in addition to PL480 by which we might influence the Poles of the Polish Government. An obvious example of this is the possibility of our recognizing the Oder-Neisse line as permanent. Doubtless the Polish Government would make concessions for a move of this nature on our part. However, since Germany is more important to us than Poland and since Germany is an ally and Poland is a member of a hostile bloc, this would be scarcely advisable. A present irritant in our relations with Poland is the question of MFN. Congress has directed that this be withdrawn from Poland (and Yugoslavia) as soon as practicable. The President has not, as yet, acted on this and has recommended that this provision be repealed. The Polish Government has claimed (and from the record, I think it is pretty clear that their claim is justified) that the extension of MFN to Poland in 1960 was part of a general agreement by which, among other things, Poland agreed to pay 40 million dollars, in annual installments of 2 million dollars, in compensation for our claims for the American property which Poland nationalized. Quite apart from the moral commitment which I believe we have toward Poland in this regard, I think it would be definitely unwise from a practical standpoint for us to cancel MFN for Poland. I think it probable that if we do cancel MFN, Poland will default on the Claims Agreement—indeed in conversations and even in notes the Polish Government has strongly intimated that it would do this. There is even danger that it might affect the reconversion of PL 480 zlotys to dollars. It would cause an unfortunate cooling in relations between Poland and the United States and to that extent prejudice the position which we have been so painfully and expensively building up in this country. I therefore strongly hope that Congress will accept the President’s recommendation. My predecessor in his Despatch 344 of January 13, 1961Not printed. (Ibid., 611.48/1–1361) recommended the repeal of the Battle Act with regard to Poland, evidently with the thought in mind that this would permit us to extend help to Poland in strictly nonmilitary fields in which we too would derive some benefit, such as research, cultural centers and possibly hospitals and similar projects. I am strongly in favor of finishing the Children’s Hospital at Krakow. Yet with the benefit of two years hindsight I question the present advisability of thus repealing the Battle Act. I do not believe that Congress would go along with such repeal. Quite apart from this, I do not think, so long as present circumstances prevail (and there is no reason to suppose that they will change) that we should extend grant aid to Poland. It has been argued that building public facilities would absorb scarce materials and skilled labor much needed in other sectors of this very tight economy even though no direct American interest were advanced. But after all, even the building of any public facilities however innocuous and humanitarian would relieve the Polish Government of the necessity of building them and would release the Polish Government of foreign debits, thereby making it possible for the country to import more from abroad for economic and perhaps military development. We do want the Polish Government to feel that relatively good relations with the United States are beneficial from Poland’s viewpoint. We do want them to conclude that there is a clear if indirect connection between what they do and the relative benefits they receive from us. We do want them to feel that the door is open and can be opened wider. We do want to use every opportunity we perceive to “engage” them, to establish more and closer contacts with them, to make our presence felt, to extend our influence, to disseminate our thinking. But we do not, I submit, want to give a member of the Warsaw Pact really significant material help. John M. Cabot 81. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Pol–US. Confidential. Warsaw, August 2, 1963, 4 p.m. 222. Pass Agriculture. Secretary Freeman met July 31 for more than one hour each with Edward Ochab, Deputy Chairman of Council of State, Adam Rapacki, Minister Foreign Affairs, and Stefan Jedrychowski, Chairman State Planning Commission.Freeman visited Warsaw July 31–August 3. The Embassy reported on his activities in airgram A–117, August 8. (Ibid., POL 2–1 Pol) All are members 10-man Party Politburo hence few if any can speak with more authority, apart from Gomulka and Prime Minister Crankiewicz, both of whom on vacation in Soviet Union. Although much of conversations devoted to friendly amenities, all 3 raised points we had anticipated: MFN, another PL–480 agree-ment, and boycott of retail sales Polish goods. Rapacki added lecture on dangers of strengthening role in NATO of West Germany, whose intransigeance he predicted would be responsible for preventing NATO–Warsaw Non-Aggression Pact. Most specific was Jedrychowski, who pressed hard for initiation PL–480 negotiations, pointing out Poland good customer for US agricultural commodities, had for example brought 200,000 tons which committed buy for cash last agreement. When Secretary suggested administration believed tactically safer wait until MFN situation resolved in Congress and better estimate made of Polish harvest, Jedrychowski countered that latter not pertinent, since even with best possible harvest Poland will be obliged import minimum 2 million tons, at most 3 million tons. Has already purchased 600,000 tons this year from Western countries in addition PL–480. Expressed his regret that US approached PL–480 transactions from political standpoint, with result that international events often resulted in postponement of negotiations. This made planning difficult and strengthened position those elements in Poland who argued that dependence on US agricultural surplusses dangerous because of uncertainty. Raised point (as did Ochab) that of those countries receiving PL–480 only Poland obliged repay in dollars, although forced admit terms were generous. Regretted that “legal obstacles” (presumably referring Johnson Act) made it impossible for Poland purchase more agricultural commodities on normal commercial terms. Predicted Poland would be grain importer until at least 1980. On MFN said first reaction within his government after Congressional action last year was stop claims agreement payments forthwith, since Poland had accepted claims obligations on clear understanding MFN would be granted. Maintained that even present situation intolerable, since uncertainty of future of MFN had resulted in cancellation or failure conclude substantial number of contracts. On boycott, Secretary Freeman said that while position taken by Administration and President himself against boycott activities was clear, American citizens free to express opinions. Emphasized that in US political system President unable to exert will over either American people or Congress. Unfortunately international events often strengthened hand of right-wing elements. Made point that Laos in this category. Comment: Both Jedrychowski and Ochab so firm in associating MFN with claims payments that we have impression reference to suspension payments in retaliation withdrawal MFN just bombast. Cabot 82. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 Pol–US. Confidential. Repeated to Belgrade. Warsaw, August 15, 1963, 2 p.m. 306. It is perhaps not necessary for me to remind Department of importance I attach to MFN in connection with American-Polish relations. Polish Government has given strong indications it will cancel claims agreement if we cancel MFN, and considering undeniable connection which exists between these two agreements I scarcely think they could be blamed if they acted in this manner. This means that cancellation of MFN will cost us $34 million. I also feel that this is scarcely the moment to disregard a moral commitment. There are distinct signs of improvement in our relations stemming largely, I believe, from test ban agreement.For text of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, signed in Moscow on August 5 and entered into force on October 10, see TIAS 5433. Publicity in connection with inauguration of tinning mill was definitely favorable. There are reports that Polish media have been instructed to play down attacks on US and also that Thee is being withdrawn from Laos. It would therefore, in my mind, be the more unfortunate at this time to hit Poles grieviously on MFN. Should Congress insist on cancelling MFN despite the President’s recommendation I suggest that Department be ready immediately to inform Polish Government that we are prepared to enter into PL–480 negotiations. This would at least indicate to Polish Government that we wish our special relations to continue. In this connection I reiterate my recommendation that we endeavor to repeal legislative obstacles to sale of agricultural commodities on credit. Cabot 83. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 Pol–US. Secret. Warsaw, August 30, 1963, 1 p.m. 404. I am seriously disturbed by information received by our military attache that basic decision has been reached in Washington to require prior notification and permission and detailed itineraries for all travel in US by satellite attaches. Others are obviously better qualified than I to comment on military advantages and disadvantages of proposed move. Nevertheless, given Poland’s geographic position and relative liberty to travel our attaches now enjoy, I question whether imposition of proposed regulations (which will probably be imposed reciprocally on our attaches) will be to our net advantage. At time of Cuba crisis last year, it was surely of vital importance to Washington to know that we observed no evidence of unusual military traffic across Poland. If satellite attache aware [were?] barred from relatively smaller areas, I question whether Poles would retaliate since they bar our attaches from small areas, but provised [provisory?] regulations are another matter. Also this seems to me poor time to make another move which Poles can only consider inimical. It will probably be taken as evidence we have changed our basic policy towards Poland and may precipitate descending spiral which I have heard [feared?]. I suggest Department take this up with DOD to be sure at least that they have considered adequately unfortunate repercussions which this move would almost certainly precipitate in Poland. Cabot 84. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Pol–US. Confidential. Drafted by Malin and approved in S on September 17. Washington, September 13, 1963, 4:30 p.m. SUBJECT US-Polish Relations; Request for new PL 480 agreement PARTICIPANTS Edward Drozniak, Polish Ambassador Dr. Marian Dobrosielski, Counselor of Polish Embassy The Secretary Mr. William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary, EUR Mr. Herbert Malin, EE To the Secretary’s opening inquiry as to the health of Foreign Minister Rapacki, Ambassador Drozniak replied that it was not good, but that Rapacki was back at his desk.Rapacki returned to his duties as Foreign Minister on July 1. Although the Foreign Minister had wanted to attend this month’s opening UN session, he was advised against it for health reasons, and Deputy Minister Winiewicz will head the Polish delegation. Ambassador Drozniak then explained that he had been in Poland for two months of vacation, but had also had opportunity for business talks with Mr. Gomulka, President Zawadzki, Prime Minister Cyrankiewicz, and Foreign Minister Rapacki. As for the internal economic situation, this year’s short period of vegetation, owing to a late spring, coupled with drought conditions in midsummer, had resulted in a crop expected to approximate that of the previous year. Harvest prospects were neither very good nor very bad, as indicated in Gomulka’s harvest speech on September 8. After a disastrous winter, sandwiched between two poor harvests, Poland was now beginning to catch its breath and get moving again, although the tasks ahead are not easy ones. Concerning international relations, the Ambassador said the Polish people and official circles were enthusiastic over the recently concluded nuclear test-ban treaty and hoped this first step will lead to other relaxations of world tension and possible new agreements. In this atmosphere he had received instructions to work toward the development of bilateral relations in the direction of peaceful coexistence, and he wished to remind the Secretary that Poland was the only Warsaw Pact country that has already been working in this spirit for several years. He wanted to continue this work, emphasizing the economic relationship between the two countries. Ambassador Drozniak said that his government entertains strong hopes that the question of MFN treatment will be resolved in the near future since unfortunate effects upon Polish trade are already being felt. He cited the attitude of US businessmen who have doubts as to the future of MFN and the hesitancy of Polish foreign trade firms to make future commitments for the same reason. It would be an unfortunate situation indeed if the withdrawal of MFN were to occur and bring about a loss of much of the good progress made between the two countries during the last few years. He explained that if he and the Poles sometimes appeared to show impatience on the question of MFN, it was because of the importance they attach to it. The Ambassador then raised the question of negotiations for Polish purchase in this country of PL 480 grain. He was referring to an agreement similar to that of February 1, 1963—i.e., one, a part under which would be procured for cash, the rest for local currencies with eventual repayment in dollars. He pointed out that although obligated on February 1 to buy for cash only 200,000 tons of American grain, Poland had already purchased over 400,000 tons from the US, a fact over which Secretary Freeman had expressed his satisfaction in Warsaw. Poland anticipates that it must import about 2.5 million tons of foreign grain annually for several years to come, and it must plan on satisfying these requirements from several countries offering a source of supply. He referred to a conversation in Warsaw on September 6 between Ambassador Cabot and Foreign Trade Minister Trampczynski,Cabot reported on discussions with Trampczynski in telegram 463 from Warsaw, September 6. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 15–Pol) in which the latter indicated that wheat purchases are so important to the Poles that they are willing to initiate cash purchases now, if the US can give some indication regarding the approximate amount of PL 480 sales envisaged. He recalled that in June Mr. Tyler had indicated that an answer to the Polish request would be forthcoming at the end of the summer. The Poles like to feel that summer is over already. He closed his presentation by saying he would be grateful if the Secretary could comment on the state of general bilateral relations and more particularly on the two specific problems he had raised. The Secretary remarked that Ambassador Drozniak doubtless would be raising these questions in more detail with Mr. Tyler. Moreover, he himself might have to see the Ambassador again soon since other commitments of his time might prevent him from saying all he wished today. He too characterized the test-ban treaty as an indication of progress. The possibility of further progress depended upon whether some points on which the US and other Western nations are willing to move ahead can be found which coincide with those on which the USSR is willing to move. Nevertheless, the Secretary conceded a general improvement in the atmosphere. Regarding MFN, the Secretary stated that Congress has not yet acted. He believed the Ambassador was aware of the Administration’s standpoint. In confidence, he referred to closed Congressional committee sessions on the MFN question, during which representatives of Congress have expressed reservations regarding Polish actions in Laos. As the US watches developments in Laos, it does not feel that the Polish ICC representative is acting in the spirit of the Geneva accords, and naturally this has a bad effect on US attitudes toward MFN treatment of Poland. The Secretary pointed out, again in confidence, that there in fact are some persons in Congress willing to move on MFN for Yugoslavia, but not for Poland, and principally because of events in Laos. While in Moscow recently, he had the impression that Moscow was more relaxed regarding Laos than was the Polish ICC representative himself. He said he felt further that Mr. Thee was more responsive to attitudes in Hanoi and Peiping than were the Moscow leaders. Ambassador Drozniak interposed to comment that while developments during the first half of this year may have caused some in the US to feel this way, he had not seen or heard any adverse comments regarding Mr. Thee since his recall to Warsaw in June and subsequent return to Laos. The Secretary rejoined that he had expressed his encouragement over Mr. Thee’s attitude to Ambassador Drozniak prior to the latter’s departure for Warsaw only to find on his desk after the conversation a cable concerning the Polish ICC representative which nearly prompted him in anger to telephone the Ambassador to take back his earlier remark. As for PL 480, the Secretary said the question requires some further thinking on the part of the US, although he agreed that the Poles deserve an answer to their request in the near future. He inquired as to the status of the February 1963 agreement. Mr. Dobrosielski explained that all sales and deliveries had been completed. Furthermore, talks on that agreement had been initiated in June 1962, but the agreement had been delayed by the long deliberations in Congress over the Trade Expansion Act; otherwise, there would have been a 1962 agreement instead of the one in February 1963. The Secretary commented that the question of PL 480 sales was affected by other considerations. The Foreign Aid Bill would not come before Congress before October. He also indicated technical problems the Department still has to think about, all of which prevented him from giving an answer today. Mr. Tyler confirmed that we are actively considering the question and hope to give the Ambassador an answer soon. Ambassador Drozniak acknowledged the existing difficulties, but reiterated his government’s interest in obtaining some indication of approximate amounts under a new agreement, particularly since Poland is ready to initiate cash purchases. He pointed out that credit terms for commercial sales of US wheat were less favorable than those obtainable from countries like Canada and France. Polish foreign currency assets are limited, and it is necessary to keep close account of the balance. Since certain amounts must be allocated for US purchases, the Poles desired to commence these purchases as soon as possible. The Secretary offered to see whether anything could be done in anticipation of negotiations that would have the effect of shortening their duration when they did take place. He agreed to study the matter carefully and to discuss it with Secretary Freeman. 85. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Pol–US. Confidential. Drafted by Malin and approved in S on November 19. The source text is labeled “Part II of II Parts.” Washington, November 7, 1963, 11:45 a.m. SUBJECT US-Polish Relations; Berlin Question PARTICIPANTS Jozef Winiewicz, Polish Deputy Foreign Minister Edward Drozniak, Polish Ambassador The Secretary EE—Herbert S. Malin Minister Winiewicz called on the Secretary during the course of a brief trip to Washington from New York, where he was heading the Polish UNGA Delegation. Following a lengthy discussion of events in Laos and Vietnam, Mr. Winiewicz took up US-Polish relations, which he described as of prime importance to Poland. Poland’s wish was to improve relations and achieve closer cooperation, so long as this did not involve any sacrifice of Polish principles. He cited as an example of the imposition of unacceptable political conditions the press tie-in last May of US demands for the recall of ICC Commissioner Thee with Polish requests for a new PL 480 agreement. The new negotiations for grain credit under PL 480 posed similar problems. Whereas Poland treated PL 480 purchases as it does any normal commercial transaction and planned to repay its dollar obligations on schedule, the negotiations for each such agreement drag on for essentially political reasons. MFN to Poland, restored in 1960, had been in jeopardy since 1962, making shaky at best the foundation for normal trade relations. He said the appeal, signed by the President on October 25, for contributions to Radio Free Europe was another incident that had aroused enormous indignation within his government.For text of the statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, p. 814. Finally, Mr. Winiewicz referred to press rumors of forthcoming travel restrictions for Polish diplomats in the US. This would surely provoke a strong negative reaction in Poland, since, other than for service attaches, no restrictions had ever been imposed on diplomats in Poland, not even during the cold war period, except for certain areas along the Polish-Soviet frontier. He urged that a distinction be made by the US for travel of diplomats, as opposed to attaches. The Poles are proud of their policy of unrestricted travel throughout their country and would hate to be forced to impose restrictions now. The Secretary stressed the need to discuss US-Polish relations within the total political framework. The US knows, he said, that Poland’s world position is governed by some limitations over which it has no control. The US also knows that ideological differences between the two countries are not going to be eliminated by negotiation. On the other hand, there is a strong favorable sentiment for Poland within the US, where even the Polish-American community, though opposed to the present Polish regime, favors granting of MFN to Poland. As for PL 480, he said, a problem arises when Poland goes to other world markets to buy grain on commercial terms, while expecting the US to provide grain under the interest-free 40-year repayment terms of PL 480. Asked what had gone wrong since the Secretary’s cordial talks with Foreign Minister Rapacki in Geneva in March 1962, the Secretary replied that if the Russians would agree to raise no questions as to the size and right of existence of Allied military forces in Berlin until a final German settlement is negotiated, it would render manageable all the other aspects of the problem. When Mr. Winiewicz indicated Polish worries over possible German acquisition of nuclear weapons, the Secretary assured him that it is in the very nature of nuclear weapons that those nations having them do not want others to have them. Hence, the US was opposed to their proliferation. The proposed multilateral force would not transfer nuclear weapons to any national government, nor permit any national government independently to determine when they would be employed. Mr. Winiewicz again thanked the Secretary for the meeting in taking his leave. 86. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 Pol–US. Confidential. Drafted by Malin and approved in G on November 14. Washington, November 12, 1963, 11:30 a.m. SUBJECT Travel in the US of Officials from Warsaw Pact Countries PARTICIPANTS Edward Drozniak, Polish Ambassador Dr. Marian Dobrosielski, Counselor of Polish Embassy G—U. Alexis Johnson EE—Herbert S. Malin Mr. Johnson explained that he had called in the Ambassador to present a note establishing restrictions on the travel within the US of all officials of Eastern European countries who are assigned here.For texts of the U.S. statement announcing the restrictions, the U.S. notes to individual countries, and a list of U.S. counties closed to travel, see Department of State Bulletin, December 2, 1963, pp. 860–863. The note specifies that some 12–13% of the area of the conterminous US is henceforth closed to travel for reasons of safeguarding national security. Commercial air and train travel would not be affected, all principal cities remain open for visiting, and two cross-country automobile highways remain open to assure automobile access to the Pacific coast. Mr. Johnson pointed out that there had hitherto been a lack of equal opportunity for travel of US officials and those of other NATO countries within the USSR, as opposed to the unrestricted access to all portions of the US by officials of Warsaw Pact countries other than the Soviet Union. He elaborated in further detail the heartland concept as it applied to USSR and the US, respective military leaders of the Warsaw Pact and NATO alliances. For these reasons, he said, the US reluctantly can no longer disregard its own national interests, and the new system of travel controls had been devised. He requested voluntary observance of the new limitations, since no requirement for prior notification of proposed travel would be imposed by the US. He made clear that when the USSR relaxes its present travel controls on Western officials, the US would be happy to negotiate similar modifications in its own system. Ambassador Drozniak, in accepting the note, first disclaimed his authority to speak on behalf of all the Warsaw Pact countries. He said that as a Pole, however, he received the news with concern and dissatisfaction. He was convinced that his government and Polish public opinion would react similarly upon receipt of the news, since Poland had imposed no restrictions on travel of Western diplomats, not even during the coldest period of the cold war. He reserved the right to reply at a later date after studying the note and receiving the views of his government. Personally, the Ambassador thought that similar restrictions might have to be imposed upon travel in Poland of US diplomats, and possibly also upon the officials of other NATO countries. In any event, he felt that the step would be interpreted as a cold war action, rather than as a step toward easing of tension. Mr. Johnson explained that the area of the US closed to travel of Eastern European officials was only half that closed to Soviet officials, and that it approximated that area in Warsaw Pact countries presently closed for Western travel. For this reason, he said he did not believe that additional retaliatory control measures were justified. Ambassador Drozniak replied that since no Polish territory was presently closed to US personnel or to anyone else, failure to retaliate could only reflect discredit on Poland’s dignity as a sovereign nation. 87. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, FT 4–4 Pol. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Warsaw, December 20, 1963, 3 p.m. 1118. Passage MFN by CongressSection 402 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1963, P.L. 88–205, was approved December 16. For text, see 77 Stat. 379. enables us for first time in some 19 months to plan our policy for relations with Poland on reasonably sound foundations. During this protracted period over-riding importance MFN and uncertainty re congressional action have made policy formulation almost impossible. On one hand we have been unable pursue effectively such matters as bond settlement and removal of Thee from Laos, not to mention numerous minor grievances. On other hand it has been difficult to know how far to go, for example with regard to PL–480, in our efforts further special relations which we have steadily tried since 1956 to establish with Poland. With MFN question settled, I hope that a new PL 480 agreement for approximately 30 million dollars will soon be concluded with Poland. I recommend that we do not offer larger amount than this even though I expect Poles will strongly seek more. If Department Agriculture insists, I would not object to our requiring tie-in sales. However I would urge that in addition we make every effort facilitate availability of competitive credit terms for Poles and I think they will then buy more from us in fact than they would be willing to commit themselves to buy in an agreement. Outstanding issue between us today which might now be negotiable is presumably question of Polish defaulted bonds. I have not pursued this in recent months since MFN uncertainties obviously impinged on Polish ability to service this Department. I believe I should now raise this matter again. In their present economic difficulties Poles will almost certainly refuse to assume these obligations and I do not think we should insist just yet, for example, on refusing further PL 480 transactions (I do feel, however, that this remains unfinished business). I also think Poles should be reminded in any PL 480 negotiations that it is difficult to see how they can assume new obligations if they are unable to meet old ones in not dissimilar amounts. Question of travel restrictions in Poland (presuming we reject their request for reconsideration of ours) might be taken in connection with PL 480 agreement but I do not recommend this. My feeling is that we would either pay too high a price for what we get or run the risk that Poles would reject whole deal with disastrous effects on what we are seeking to accomplish in this country. Department is of course aware Poles are very sensitive with regard to attaching any political conditions to PL 480 deals. We can scarcely attach any conditions with regard to actions of any new Polish ICC representative in Laos in connection with PL 480 agreement. Should, however, Polish Commissioner’s actions be subject to justified exception on our part, we should be now in stronger position object to them. In regard firmly expressed Polish intentions seek reciprocity regarding travel restrictions, I feel that they [we?] would be prepared show Poles concretely that reciprocity is two-way street. One way do this would be by abolishing immunities for Polish White List personnel. However, quite apart from legal difficulties Department has previously mentioned in this regard, I see some disadvantages to such move. It would abolish precarious protection we have been able to secure for our own non-commissioned personnel here. It might result in Polish retaliation against us in sectors where we are vulnerable, for example by stopping Embassy support or by restricting free entry privileges. On other hand, it might, in view of fact that Poles gave commissioned officers in non-commissioned positions in Washington, make our travel restrictions more effective since any improper activities of their White List personnel after immunity was cancelled might result in legal measures against their non-commissioned personnel for such activities. I am inclined to think that this is card we should hold and play later if desirable. If Poles establish travel restrictions in retaliation, I believe that I should be instructed to argue with them various matters in which we have been subjected to unfair and discriminatory treatment. Pole can go to PKO and get 72 zloties for his dollar whereas foreigners can get only 24. In Washington Polish Government and its employees can buy or lease land, houses or apartments on competitive market without securing permission from US Government. In Warsaw we can secure these only from what amounts to a government monopoly and at extortionate prices. I do not expect Poles would give us any satisfaction in these matters and I do not recommend severe pressure on them to that end. My thought is that we should keep before Poles fact that we have legitimate grievances in order to put us in better posture re action other matters as occasion arises. Polish officials can still travel over most of the US and meet with Americans in seminars and round-table discussions, can deliver speeches on any subject, and are generally unimpeded in making their presence felt in US. In Poland we are perfectly aware that such contacts between Poles and American officials are prevented by Polish authorities. We have not heard whether any final decision has been reached with regard possible retaliation against Poles for unjustified expulsion our two attaches last fall. Should Poles retaliate by establishing travel restrictions on US officials in Poland, I am inclined to think that it would now be advisable to expel some Polish officer against whom there is some evidence in retaliation for Polish action. This might of course precipitate further retaliation on their part and might start descending spiral of relations. I am inclined to think however that effect would be to remind Poles that strict reciprocity is not necessarily best basis for conducting international relations, while not sufficiently annoying them to precipitate undesirable repercussions. It is of course most important not to precipitate descending spiral in our relations but experience suggests to me that Polish Communists react better to prudent firmness than to flabbiness. I think I should also remind Foreign Office that we have yet to hear anything from them on our proposed consular convention despite several followups on our part. We surmise Poles may have wished to see in which direction our relations would turn or what would happen in our consular negotiations with Soviets before replying to our proposals. Caboty Yugoslavia 88. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/2–761. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Moscow, Cairo, and USUN. March 7 and presented his credentials on May 16. Rankin left post on April 22. Belgrade, February 7, 1961, 6 p.m. 581. Reference: Department telegram 494.Telegram 494, February 3, instructed Rankin to use the occasion of his meeting with Tito to inform him of U.S. positions on African affairs and indicate an interest in having Tito’s observations and impressions upon his return from an upcoming African tour. (Ibid., 768.11/2–361) Saw President Tito today in what I told him probably was my farewell call.On January 23, President Kennedy announced his intention to nominate George F. Kennan as Ambassador to Yugoslavia. Kennan was confirmed by the Senate on March 7 and presented his creditials on May 16. Rankin left post on April 22. (He expects leave by ship in few days to reach Ghana February 28 followed by visit to Togo, Liberia, Guinea, Morocco and Tunis. Detailed itinerary to be made public in day or two.) I conveyed message re US African policy included in reftel and in view its length I left text with him. Tito seemed pleased with message and indicated general agreement, although he wanted to study it further. Re general situation in Africa Tito fully approved United States attitude. On Algeria he agreed self-determination only solution and offered no objection to US policy as stated. Congo he believed should be unified under government chosen by Congolese people. To this end United Nations mandate should be strengthened and all assistance given through UNO channels. (He made no specific reference to Secretary General’s military proposal or to Hammarskjold personally.)On January 26, Hammarskjold appealed to the African nations to provide forces to replace 5,700 troops being withdrawn by 5 governments from the U.N. peacekeeping mission in the Congo. Lumumba must be released but Tito said Congolese should determine who is to head their government. Tito assured me of his intention to help compose difficulties rather than increase tension during his trip. Of course he must speak out against colonialism but he would not attack any particular state. Moreover Congo and similar countries were too primitive and backward to justify trying persuade them accept any particular ideology. They needed economic aid and technical assistance from more advanced countries, particularly US, but Yugoslavia could make modest contribution also. Asked if he could comment on recent visits to Yugoslavia of Sekou Toure and Ayub Khan, Tito spoke highly of former. He had been much impressed by Guinean’s grasp of world problems and was certain he would maintain his country’s full independence and right to follow its own course. He admitted some differences of opinion with Pakistan but was gratified at extent of agreement reached in drafting joint communique. Tito had heard Indian and Afghan positions and was glad to get that of Pakistan. Tito then volunteered admission that Yugoslavia had been more critical of US and West in general than of Soviet bloc. He suggested the criticism of the West had slackened recently and that further improvement might be expected. Yugoslav differences with West were specific and practical, he said, while with Soviet Union they were ideological. Further than that he said he would not discuss reasons why Yugoslavia was more reticent in dealing with the East. Finally Tito told me that as outcome of talk with Khrushchev in New York and subsequent exchanges, Foreign Secretary Koca Popovic would visit Moscow in spring and Gromyko would come to Belgrade. He observed that press doubtless would try attach exaggerated importance to this exchange. Actually, it was clearly understood that ideological issues would not be discussed; only practical matters. But Tito thought we should have advance notice of this. He wished our governments could consult each other more frequently in advance. Comment: Tito appeared in excellent health and as affable as I ever saw him. His decision on all points was most reasonable. However I still have misgivings about this African trip, since past experience suggests his statements and actions there likely to be influenced by considerations other than concern for welfare of Africans. We may hope Department’s message will have salutory effect. Memorandum of conversation follows.Transmitted in despatch 534 from Belgrade, February 8. (Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/2–861) Rankin 89. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/3–2261. Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted and approved by Kennan. Washington, March 22, 1961. SUBJECT Call on the President PARTICIPANTS The President George F. Kennan, American Ambassador to Yugoslavia I made yesterday my routine farewell call on the President. The Secretary of State came in while I was there and I remained, at the President’s request, throughout the Secretary’s visit. Most of the talk concerned Laos and other matters not directly connected with Yugoslavia. At one point, however, we did talk briefly on Yugoslav matters. The President asked me how I felt about the present situation and policies of the Yugoslav Government. I told him that the attitude the Yugoslavs were adopting did not seem to me to be entirely satisfactory from our standpoint; that they were getting the bulk of their economic and financial aid from us and yet they seemed to be supporting the Soviet position on almost every important issue in world affairs ulterior to their own bilateral relations with the Soviet Union; that while I thought it not out of the question that this could be, to some extent, corrected under the present leadership, and would of course have this in mind when I went to Belgrade, I feared that Tito and his leading associates were too deeply affected by their early Communist training to be able to get away from it entirely: that they would always be sensitive to the charge that they were becoming tools of the imperialists, and would always lean somewhat to the Communist side in world affairs as a means of salving their Communist consciences. For this reason, I thought it best for us to direct our principal hopes to the second generation of Yugoslav leaders, particularly the younger people in the echelon just under the top. I thought for various reasons that these people might be more amenable to an understanding of our point of view and less fearful of appearing to have normal and intimate relations with us. The President asked me what I thought about a visit of Tito to this country.According to a March 3 memorandum, President Kennedy had broached the subject of a meeting with Tito during a discussion with Secretary Rusk that day and asked for the Secretary’s recommendation. (Memorandum from McGhee to Rusk, March 3; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Yugoslavia) No other record of the conversation was found. Ambassador Kennan endorsed the idea of a Tito visit in telegram 1487 from Belgrade, May 8. (Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/5–862) On May 11, Acting Secretary of State Bowles recommended inviting Tito to visit the United States. (Memorandum from Bowles to President Kennedy, May 11; ibid., 768.11/5–1161) I said that this was obviously a very important question and one on which, again, I would like first to have the opportunity of getting the feel of things in Belgrade before making any recommendations. In principle, I approved of the idea of inviting Tito, but I wanted to make sure that this was done under the most favorable circumstances, and that it would produce some favorable effect of a tangible nature on US-Yugoslav relations. Incidentally, when I was leaving the White House a reporter, I believe from the U.S. News and World Report, pursued me to my car and asked me for background on what I thought about the prospect of Tito’s visiting this country. I said that I had no views that I could state on this matter at the present time, though I did not think that the possibility of such a visit at some future date ought to be excluded. George F. Kennan 90. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/5–1361. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Belgrade, May 13, 1961, 7 p.m. 909. I recognize the force of the considerations mentioned in Deptel 766,Telegram 766, May 12, noted that the Yugoslav Press Law and its “hard-line” negotiating position might necessitate a drastic reduction in USIS operations with a resulting impact on plans to invite Tito to the United States. The Department of State requested Kennan’s analysis. (Ibid., 768.11/5–1061) and agree that it would be unfortunate if in the wake of extension of such an invitation US-Yugoslav relations were to suffer drastic setback as result of failure to find solution to Press Law problem. Although I am still hopeful that at least an interim solution can be found, Thursday’s meeting certainly brought US no closer to agreement. On the other hand, it would be equally unfortunate if Tito were to be left with initial impression that change of administrations at home had brought no change whatsoever in what he probably regarded, rightly or wrongly, as inhospitable attitude in Washington with relation to his own person. This might, in fact, even affect unfavorably the Yugoslav position in the Press Law question. I propose, therefore, unless Department voices objection, to indicate to Tito, on occasion of presentation credentials, that I hope at early date to have opportunity to discuss with him various questions of world affairs and of US-Yugo relations, but this perhaps not best occasion, and that unfortunately I have found myself much preoccupied since arrival by the problems imposed by the Press Law, which are urgent in view of early deadline imposed by entry into effect of law on June 9. If Tito accepts this statement, I would hope to delay further discussions along this line until Press Law question has been clarified. Should he himself, however, contrary to expectations, raise question of visit or exchange of visits, then I think any show of hesitation or lack of instruction on my part would be unfortunate and I should say at once that this was subject President Kennedy had much on his mind; that I had discussed it with him; that it was one of the matters I had hoped to discuss with him on a more suitable occasion; that I could tell him the President definitely hoped that such a visit by Tito could be arranged but it was a question of timing—the President’s present schedule would scarcely allow of such a visit being fitted in during the current year. In absence of instructions to the contrary, I shall be guided by above when I see Tito on Tuesday, 16th.In telegram 774, May 14, the Department of State approved the procedures Kennan suggested and outlined alternative scenarios for a Tito visit. (Ibid., 768.11/5–1461) Presentation credentials now set for 9:00 AM that day. Am leaving Belgrade by air for Brioni at 2:00 PM Monday afternoon.Kennan transmitted the gist of Tito’s comments at his credentials ceremony in telegram 921 from Belgrade, May 16. (Ibid., 768.11/5–1661) In telegram 922, May 16, Kennan reported that he and Tito had agreed to a more substantive meeting in the near future and that he hoped that this would provide sufficient time to clear up the Press Law issue and extend an invitation for a Tito visit. (Ibid.) Kennan 91. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/6–861. Limited Official Use. Belgrade, June 8, 1961, 6 p.m. 1012. Called on Tito this morning to brief him on Vienna meeting.Reference is to President Kennedy’s June 2–4 summit meeting with Soviet Chairman Khrushchev. Only other person present at interview was Tito’s new political secretary, Crnobranja. Gave briefing orally and in rough summary. Tito seemed pleased and appreciative that I had done this. He made no substantive comment other than that the Soviet position on tripartite organization of United Nations Secretariat and control organization for weapons testing inspection with veto provision was also quite unacceptable to Yugoslavs. It appeared to assume, he indicated, some sort of neutral bloc capable of acting as a body, and this did not exist. His general reaction to what I told him of results of Vienna was that meeting was useful first step and it was to be hoped that both governments would now review their own positions carefully with view to seeing whether mutual concessions could not be made. He felt that if only one of the great problems could be solved this would itself be of great usefulness in improving atmosphere for further agreements. Before leaving I drew his attention to fact that final session of Press Law talks was now in progress and that I had authorized Lisle, in event of continued disagreement, to present note announcing closure of reading rooms. He immediately said this must not happen, that there was no reason why our reading rooms could not continue their activities in manner wholly satisfactory to us. Yugoslav intent had not been to make any serious difficulties. He was prepared to give me his personal assurance that if agreement could be reached among our negotiators today every liberality would be shown in treatment of reading rooms. I told him that I had just received messages authorizing our negotiators to make substantial concessions this morning,Telegram 852 to Belgrade, June 8, authorized Kennan to seek assurances “outside of the memorandum” regarding the treatment of U.S. reading rooms. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.685/6–361) and that I hoped reciprocal concessions would be made on the Yugoslav side. He said he would personally intervene at once in matter. Before leaving I spoke of uneasiness evidenced by some of our local employees over their personal position vis-à-vis Yugoslav authorities as they attempt to carry out their functions as employees our government, and said I hoped it would be possible to find means of reassuring them that Yugoslav Government saw no conflict between this work and their status as loyal Yugoslav citizens. I asked that any doubts or questions Yugoslav Government might have as to propriety of their actions be brought first to my attention and not to theirs, and to this he assented.An agreement on USIS facilities in Belgrade, signed on June 14, provisionally entered into force the same day, and definitively entered into force on December 28 following ratification by the Yugoslav Parliament. For text, see 20 UST 2826. Kennan 92. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/7–361. Secret; Limit Distribution. Belgrade, July 3, 1961, 11 a.m. 5. Deptel 901.Telegram 901, June 20, informed the Embassy that settlement of the Press Law controversy opened the way for issuing an invitation to Tito for a U.S. visit. (Ibid., 768.11/6–2061) In view Tito’s illness and prospective long absence from Belgrade (he is now in Brioni) and of fact Foreign Minister Koca Popovic will be here very little before his departure for Moscow July 7, I took advantage of casual meeting with Popovic Friday night to tell him that President Kennedy would welcome visit from Tito in coming period but that President’s program was such it would permit only a working visit in 61, at time to be mutually arranged, whereas State visit could take place only some time in 62. I said I realized that in view President’s illness he might not wish to make any decision on this at present moment, but that I was at his disposal at any time to receive any reply he might wish to make or to discuss timing and nature of such a visit. Popovic said that while he would not try to anticipate President’s reaction he knew he would be moved and gratified by knowledge that President Kennedy wished him to come. I said that for the present, and pending the President’s reply, we thought it best to say nothing about this publicly, and he indicated strong assent. I took occasion to emphasize to Popovic that this invitation was extended gladly and in all cordiality, that it was a matter to which careful thought had been given at home, and that if President Tito decided to come, I could assure him every effort would be made to make visit a pleasant and profitable one. I had the impression that Popovic was himself greatly pleased. Kennan 93. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/7–1961. Confidential. Drafted by Kennan. Transmitted as an enclosure to despatch 39 from Belgrade, July 19. Brioni, July 17, 1961. SUBJECT World affairs; visit to Brazil; Belgrade conference PARTICIPANTS Jozip Broz Tito, President of Yugoslavia George F. Kennan, American Ambassador I visited President Tito this morning and talked with him for an hour and a quarter. It was the most informal and relaxed of the talks I have had with him. The only others in attendance were the Foreign Minister, Koca Popovic, and the President’s personal secretary, Bogdan Crnobrnja. The President began by speaking Russian, and we continued in this language throughout the discussion. An initial question by the President about my progress in the study of the Serbo-Croatian language led us, by stages, to the subject of his recent speech at Tito vo Uzice. The mention of this event brought us to the subject of the partisan warfare he had conducted from 1941 to 1945. The President seemed to enjoy the subject, and it detained us for some twenty minutes. Turning to his present plans, he said that he expected to visit Brazil at some time during the current year, but did not yet know exactly when it would be. He thought Brazil was a very important country. He hoped we in the United States would be able to adjust our own relationship to Brazil in a constructive and satisfactory manner. Talk turned on Brazil’s participation in the forthcoming Belgrade conference.The Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States September 1–6. I explained to him the nature of Cabot’s interviewIn a July 11 statement in response to a reporter’s question about Brazilian participation in the Belgrade Conference, Ambassador to Brazil John M. Cabot stated that Brazil could not be an “uncommitted nation.” and told him that our Government had taken no position pro or con on the subject of the participation of other nations in the conference. He then inquired my personal opinion about the participation of Latin American nations. I said that this suggestion naturally raised some delicate questions. I personally thought that if it were a case of several Latin American nations, the significance attached to it would be less than if it were just one or two; but I emphasized again that my Government had carefully refrained from giving any advice to anyone, one way or another. He said that Yugoslavia would be very unhappy if Cuba turned out to be the only Latin American country to be represented. He asked me how I felt about the conference, generally. I said that we took a very calm view of it. We knew that there would be some extremist voices there. On the other hand, we were confident that Yugoslavia would use her influence in the direction of moderation, and we knew that she would not be the only one. To this, President Tito agreed; but he said the greater the number of the moderate countries represented, the easier it would be for Yugoslavia. He stressed, emphatically and at considerable length, that Yugoslavia had no desire that the conference should in any way exacerbate international relations: on the contrary, he deeply hoped that its role would be to help the great powers find solutions to their problems. The question had been raised, he said, as to whether they were not preempting the role of the United Nations in holding such a conference. He felt that this was not at all the case — that they were merely acting to increase the usefulness of the voice which the unaligned nations could have at the forthcoming United Nations session. I then took the liberty of saying that I had now been here two and a half months and had had some opportunity to acquaint myself with conditions in Yugoslavia. The impression I had, after this experience, was one of growing admiration for the country and the people and of a very strong feeling that our two peoples ought, by all criteria of temperament and character, to be the best of friends. On the other hand I had become increasingly aware of the depths of some of the ideological differences, and the differences of outlook on world problems, which divided us. This led to the subject of world affairs. The President said that their view on Germany was similar but not identical with that of the Russians. They knew the Germans well. They had suffered from them. They did not trust them. They continued to regret deeply the rearming of Western Germany. They recognized that this had occurred within the framework of NATO and was, therefore, not an immediate danger. But they were skeptical about the future. Some day the Germans would turn on NATO with the very arms NATO had given them. For this reason, they firmly favored a divided Germany. They made no bones about this. They did not want to see the country united. They did not want to see the military resources of Eastern Germany added to those of Western Germany. This meant that they had no choice but to support the Russian bid for recognition of the East German regime. They were sorry if this inconvenienced us; foreign policy was something one had to be consistent about. I told him that I thought it was a very serious mistake of the Russians to try to portray the Adenauer regime as a Hitlerite regime, and emphasized my reasons for feeling that this was utterly misconceived. I mentioned the special feelings we have about the people of West Berlin, told him of my own five years of residence there and of how I had known them personally during the war as the least Nazi of all the German people, reminded him of the way they had stood by us during the Berlin blockade, and explained that we could not let them down. He replied that this was all very well, but he did not see, in this case, what prevented us from sitting down at a table with the Russians and talking the matter over. I pointed out that an atmosphere had arisen in which even the suggestion of negotiation with the Russians about Berlin smacked to many people of compromise and appeasement a la Munich. He said that the parallel was wholly misconceived. He thought, in fact, that we had been very unwise to heighten the atmosphere of military tension by talking about our military plans. He could understand that we might wish to take military measures, but he could see no reason why these measures should have been publicly advertised. Things were bad enough as it was. We then spoke about the colonial problem and Africa. Much of what he had said, I had heard before. He spoke, this time, with great feeling. He said we Americans were always too late. The process of the disintegration of colonialism was marching with tremendous speed; no one could stop it; if there was not a prompt and adequate response, this could be very dangerous—dangerous for everyone, for us and even for them, the Yugoslavs. There was even a danger that they, too, would be too late. He asked us to bear this in mind when we judged Yugoslav policies toward Africa. They were trying to avoid this mistake. I said that I thought we were doing all we could. In reply he mentioned Guinea. Here, he said (rather obliquely), was a place where we had a real chance of building a constructive relationship. I said I thought we had been giving aid to a number of African countries, including Ghana and Guinea. At the mention of Ghana, he shrugged his shoulders, indicating that was a special case. (I gathered that he thought Ghana was largely out of control and beyond influencing.) But much could still be done with Guinea. He thought we had made a mistake in supporting our NATO allies so extensively on such questions as Algeria, the Congo, and Angola. Since he seemed unaware that we had opposed the Portuguese publicly on the question of Angola, I took pains to point this out to him; but I am not sure how well it registered. I said that I felt that considerable injustice had been done to us by the Yugoslavs in their view of what had occurred in the Congo. They seemed to suspect us of having inspired Mr. Hammarskjold to take positions in the Congo which were aimed at the preservation of the positions of the Belgians in that country. I could not imagine how they arrived at such a view; I was sure there was no substance to such suspicions. To this Tito replied that it was true: they suspected Hammarskjold of acting in the interests of the Belgians and felt he had in many ways exceeded his authority. They also felt that our influence had played a part in bringing him to act in this manner. In general, Hammarskjold had taken much too much upon himself. He confessed that he could not warm to Hammarskjold personally—just didn’t like him. They did not support Khrushchev’s “troika” principle in its present form, but they thought that a stricter control ought to be exercised over the activities of the Secretary General. The latter ought not to act as an independent political figure. I ended the talk by saying that I thought we were entering on a very serious and critical time, and they and we ought to be extremely careful, in this coming period, to assure that, even if we could not see things identically, at least misunderstandings were ruled out to the maximum degree. In the differences we had, there was a strong element of ideological preconception, which would not be straightened out in any short time. But there were also, I thought, certain differences which rested on real misunderstanding, and could be cleared away by the recognition and acceptance of a common set of facts. I hoped, for this reason, that they would not hesitate to give me an opportunity for explanation if there was anything in our policy that raised particular doubts or misunderstanding.In telegram 52 from Belgrade, July 18, Kennan further reported: “Tito in course of yesterday’s conversation at Brioni expressed appreciation for invitation and said his schedule would permit a visit in 1962. I said we too thought this would be better and suggested we wait until end of this year before discussing details. It was agreed that nothing should be said publicly at this time about the matter. Remainder of discussion concerned views on world events, and will be reported by air priority despatch.” (Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/7–1861) Comment. President Tito did not appear to me to be as robust as I had seen him on previous occasions. His Chief of Protocol intimated to me that he had still not fully recovered from his recent illness. His appearance and manner seemed to me to bear out this statement. I had the feeling that PopovicImmediately after meeting with Tito, Kennan met with Foreign Minister Popovic. Kennan expanded his presentation on U.S.-Yugoslav differences over international affairs. The memorandum of conversation of this meeting was also forwarded as an enclosure to despatch 39. and Crnobrnja, who spoke very little during the interview, were watching me very attentively throughout the interview in an effort to discern what was my reaction to the President—to his manner and his statements. I have the impression that these men, and others of his close advisers, entertain feelings of deep affection and admiration for him. Though they realize that his physical powers are not quite what they were, they intensely hope that a person like myself will be discerning enough to see in him the qualities they see and to share some of their respect for him. If they knew my real thoughts, they would not, I think, be disappointed. Tito is a very human sort of a figure. He is a tough old revolutionary, who has faced extraordinary trials and has survived them all with remarkable success. In many respects, he has the temperament of a born military-political leader, with all the attendant faults and virtues. When he makes a decision, he has the courage to stick to it. His judgments about people are rough and ready—not always right, but usually not without shrewdness. Once he has recognized someone as an enemy, he is ruthless and consistent in combatting him, though not vindictive. By the same token, he will not betray a friend; nor is he easily led to turn on anyone who has once given him loyalty and support within the movement. He can be crafty, where necessary, but he has none of Stalin’s refined hypocrisy and cruelty. He is, of course, still in part the victim of ideological misconceptions. He himself admitted in our conversation that he had once been an extremist himself: circumstances, he said, had required this, though perhaps he, too, had not been as fast as he should have been in seeing the writing on the wall and in making the change. His Marxist prejudices still confuse him; and the historical experience of his people renders him abnormally sensitive to any suggestion of the oppression of a smaller people by a larger one. But underneath all this, there lies an excellent, pragmatic political mind, not deeply philosophical, but exceptionally sensible and realistic. He has gained both stature and mellowness with the years. In these circumstances, there is justification for the admiration and affection in which he is held by his younger associates; and those in the Western world who tend to regard him just another Gottwald or Gomulka, but one who happened to break loose from Moscow, are making a big mistake. 94. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/7–3161. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Nicosia. Belgrade, July 31, 1961, 6 p.m. 115. Following message partially cleared with Bowles. Under Secretary BowlesBowles stopped in Belgrade on his way to the July 31–August 2 regional conference of Chiefs of Mission in Nicosia. and I visited Brioni yesterday, talked for one and half hours with Tito, in company with Foreign Minister Koca Popovic and President’s Secretary General Crnobrnja, and then lunched with Popovic, Crnobrnja and FEC member Vladimir Popovic, former ambassador to Washington, Moscow and Peking. Discussions were friendly and frank. They confirmed full depth of differences between Yugoslavs and ourselves, as revealed in previous exchanges; but we feel visit was useful and some progress made in dispelling misunderstandings. Under Secretary Bowles explained in detail our position on Berlin, in particular reasons why we had long been obliged to take measures of military precautions. Points set forth Department telegram 58, July 26Telegram 58 outlined the U.S. position on the German question. (Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–BE/7–2161) were all developed. It was pointed out that Berlin situation operated in many ways to impede or delay more constructive undertakings to which we would like now to turn in other parts of the world, and that any help Yugoslavs could give at forthcoming Belgrade conference to moderate Soviet stand on Berlin and to increase prospects for peaceful composition Berlin problem would facilitate our response to other world problems. In general, Tito’s observations followed course of previous discussions I have had with him. Following points deserve particular note: 1. While not denying Khrushchev’s responsibility for producing Berlin situation, Yugoslavs earnestly plead that we, in interest of peace, make effort to sit down and talk over problem in constructive manner with Russians. They felt we had now adequately proved we were neither weak nor timid, and were convinced we had everything to gain and nothing to lose by such procedure. World would assuredly take it as a sign of strength and confidence rather than weakness. Though not denying depth of Ulbricht’s political failure, they pleaded for recognition of GDR, feeling that this lay at heart of difficulty with Russians. 2. Under Secretary asked their view on Khrushchev’s motives: Was he merely trying to tidy up situation around Berlin which had become dangerous and embarrassing to him, or was it his purpose to embarrass and weaken US. They replied unhesitatingly that everything in Koca Popovic’s Moscow conversations had indicated the former and they were convinced this was the case. They recognized Khrushchev’s impulsive nature and tendency to flamboyant, provocative statements, but considered that beneath it lay a cold and realistic political intelligence, and that he could be sober enough when it came to responsible negotiation. 3. They reiterated and stressed at length their strong feelings on colonial problem, emphasizing once again that this constituted their major difference with US. They thought we should have put greater pressure on the Portuguese and on French over their African problems. Tito stated frankly that he had never been able to understand our attachment to NATO pact overriding priority we gave its interests. He felt this, more than anything else, stood in way of our adoption of full hopeful and constructive policies in Africa. 4. It was clear that they strongly suspected US of having opposed participation of uncommitted nations in Belgrade conference, and were deeply affected and hurt by this impression. Failure to date of any moderate invitees to agree to attend has been serious blow to them. We assured them US Government, to our knowledge, had been careful to take no position on this matter, pro or con, and had made no representations or suggestions to any government one way or another; but I am not sure we convinced them. Koca Popovic said pointedly that whereas European neutrals had been sounded out informally, none had indicated a desire to attend. Yugos felt, it was inferred, that this could not have been the case had our attitude been other than unfavorable. The same applied, I gathered, in case of South American invitees. Nigeria, they told us, had now definitely declined to attend. They did not suspect US of having made direct representations to Nigerians, but they could only view Nigeria’s answer in light of Sir Abubakar’s presence in US at time it was given, and felt that position had clearly been taken in deference to American position. In his reply to these various points, Under Secretary described recent developments of our African policy, noted particularly lack of political conditions on our aid as witnessed by their own experience and that of African governments highly critical of our policies which had, nevertheless, continued to receive our aid, and pointed out that to put pressure publicly on French with regard to North Africa would be to forfeit all real possibility of exercising moderating influence of them. He also traced effect of Korean War on development of NATO policies. So much for discussion. Our impression is that Yugoslav positions at forthcoming Belgrade meeting will be importantly influenced, rightly or wrongly, by impressions they gain on following points: A. Whether we, in meantime, have made forward effort at peaceful composition of Berlin problem on basis which takes some account of Soviet prestige and interests, and goes some distance to meet their feelings about GDR; B. Whether we have been able to overcome their belief that we have influenced moderate countries against attending Belgrade conference; C. Whether we have given further evidence of effort to restrain French and Portuguese in Africa. They will be watching intently development of US policy in intervening period. If nothing develops to give them encouragement on any of these lines, they will go into the conference with strongly negative and almost bitter feelings toward US, and disinclined to expend their influence to restrain the strongly anti-American tendencies which will certainly be represented among other delegations. In our opinion, there is not much more that can be done to alter this state of affairs by personal argument and pursuasion. Both Under Secretary and I are convinced this state of mind reflects no personal anti-Americanism on part of present Yugoslav leaders, and no complaint arising out of our bilateral decisions, but flows rather from deep and honest disagreement about wisdom of certain our policies on world arena. On other hand, we feel Yugoslavs have it in their power to be distinctly helpful at Belgrade conference, and would in principle like to do so. They are visibly impressed with Under Secretary’s reminder that if Berlin crisis could be surmounted this might be starting point for new and much hopeful era of world affairs. There can be no question of their present unhappiness or of their desire to contribute to such development if they can see their way clear to doing so.In telegram 116 from Belgrade, August 1, Kennan reiterated the concern he and Bowles felt about incorrect Yugoslav impressions of U.S. policy regarding the conference and outlined the principal points of a statement designed to promote comprehension. (Ibid., 396.1–BE/8–161) Kennan 95. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–BE/8–3161. Secret; Niact. Belgrade, August 31, 1961, 7 p.m. 328. Yesterday I sent personal note to Foreign Minister Koca Popovic informing him of my return to Belgrade and stating that while I was not requesting an appointment, I was at his disposal in case there was any information he required concerning views or policies of our government in light of forthcoming conference. I added an expression of my confidence that we could rely on maturity of Yugoslavian leaders to assure that so far as Yugoslavia was concerned, questions to be discussed at conference would be treated with the moderation and sense of responsibility which their gravity demanded. He sent word later in the day that he wanted to see me and I called on him this morning. He said he appreciated delicacy of my communication, and thought it might be desirable that we have a talk at this point. I subsequently learned that he had arranged to receive, just after myself, the Foreign Ministers of all the participating conference delegations, for discussion of the Soviet announcement on resumption of tests.For text of the August 30 Soviet announcement, see Documents on Disarmament, 1961, pp. 348–350. I told him that I took a very grave view of present situation, in light of Soviet measures in Berlin, their action in bringing up question of air corridors, and finally their announcement of nuclear test resumption. I pointed out we had made four major concessions this week in test talks; that Russians had obviously been disingenuous in stringing the discussions along in recent days; and that, if they suspected us of secretly conducting tests, they had had every opportunity to raise this question at Geneva. Said I was certain we would have welcomed impartial investigation. I pointed out great restraint with which we had reacted to resist Soviet measures in Berlin and heavy burden this had placed on our relations with West Berliners, also that Russians had shown no evidence of any desire to reciprocate this restraint and had seemingly done all in their power to render difficult, rather than facilitate, the peaceful composition of differences. I said that to my mind their conduct left room only for the gloomiest hypothesis as to their true motives. Popovic made careful note of these observations and replied, though without much show of conviction, that GOY still did not believe the Soviet Government was deliberately steering toward war. He recognized it as out of the question that we had been secretly testing nuclear weapons and said this thesis would be given no credence in Belgrade. The Yugoslav Government, he said, had been aware for some days that Soviets had been preparing an announcement about tests. Tito had expressed to Soviet Ambassador when he received him yesterday morning at airport, misgivings with which Yugoslavs took note of evidence of Soviet intentions in this regard. He, Popovic, had not yet had time to discuss with other members of his government the effect of Soviet announcement. In general, their position remained that, while there was a connection between test ban talks and general disarmament, it was desirable that an agreement on tests be reached independently and as early as possible. They thought the weakest part of our position had been behavior of French. I gathered Soviets had played this hand to very good effect in their discussions with Yugoslavs, and that latter had found no very convincing counterargument to Soviet representations on this point. Popovic then went on to say that they considered the immediate recall of Dean a mistake, and pleaded that we not respond to the Soviet announcement by ourselves announcing immediate resumption of tests but await evidences of actual Soviet testing before proceeding to this step. I told him our long patience in Geneva negotiations had already aroused much uneasiness in public opinion at home and said I thought it would be very difficult for President now to resist pressures for immediate resumption of testing, but would of course transmit his views. I asked whether test ban question would be treated at forthcoming Belgrade Conference. He said even before Soviet announcement it was planned this question should be mentioned both in President Tito’s opening address and in the draft declaration the Yugoslavs would put forward. What effect the last Soviet announcement would have on this, he was unable to say; but I gathered it certainly did not decrease likelihood that conference would address itself to this question. I asked him about Germany and Berlin. He said we knew their views. They considered rearmament of Germany had been great mistake. They thought it high time recognition was accorded to Oder–Neisse boundary, which could certainly not be changed without war, and that existence of two Germanies was accepted. I gathered he was warning me of those particular elements in respective passage of Tito’s forthcoming speech which will be disagreeable to us. He asked me how I felt about events in Brazil.On August 25, President Janio Quadros of Brazil resigned after 7 months in office. The military members of his Cabinet unsuccessfully attempted to block the return to Brazil of Vice President Joao Goulart, his constitutionally-designated successor. I said I was completely confident we had had nothing to do with change of government. He laughingly said this time even Yugoslavs were convinced of this. I said I had no indication of views of my government on change itself. As I understood it, we had not always approved all of Quadros’ actions and utterances, but we had never opposed his regime, and we had gone ahead with extensive plans in way of aid to Brazil on assumption he would continue to be in power. He said they did not regard this change as a development likely to stabilize the situation; on contrary they thought it beginning of long period of instability in Brazilian affairs. We spoke again of invitation to Latin American countries to attend Belgrade Conference. I reiterated my conviction that we had brought no pressure on anyone not to attend. Specifically, I had convinced myself in Washington we had had nothing to do with Nigerian decision despite fact it had been announced from Washington. He pointed out that decision of Brazilians not to send observer had just now been communicated to Yugoslavs through Brazilian Embassy in Washington though more direct facilities were fully available. He said even if the Yugoslav Government were prepared to believe we had nothing to do with this, people here would be unlikely to show a similar credulity. I inquired his views on Congo. He said situation there was still so uncertain that Yugoslavs had been unwilling assume responsibility for inviting new Congolese Government to Belgrade Conference and had placed this question before preparatory committee, but no decision yet taken. Asked whether Yugoslavs were not pleased by recent UN action in Katanga, he said they suspected that this was cover for similar action against independent tendencies of Stanleyville, and were therefore reserving judgment. He told me, somewhat wryly, message had just been received from Mao for Belgrade Conference. I asked him about President’s message.For text of President Kennedy’s message, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 602–604. He was noncommittal but admitted under pressure that message had contained no negative note with regard to conference and had on contrary expressed hope for its usefulness. So much for interview. Following is my own comment. While I realize we will presumably be obliged to resume tests at very early date, I think much would be gained if we could defer final announcement of such decision until Belgrade Conference is over. This would not prevent us from proceeding vigorously meanwhile with preparations for such testing as we feel it necessary to conduct. It would, however, leave Soviets holding bag for next few days and standing in their present position of having not only flaunted Tito’s expressed plea not to take this step at this time but having made something approaching gesture of contempt for conference itself. Kennan 96. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–BE/9–361. Official Use Only. Repeated to Moscow. Belgrade, September 3, 1961, 4 p.m. 377. Belgrade Conference. Tito’s statements on Berlin and on Soviet resumption of tests came as deep disappointment to Western observers here, including myself. Passage on Berlin contains no word that could not have been written by Khrushchev; and that on testing, leading off with reproach to French and accepting in full Soviet explanations for resumption, is weaker and more pro-Soviet than even those of Nasser and Nkrumah.Excerpts and summaries of the statements at the Belgrade Conference were published in The New York Times, September 4, 1961. Private information indicates Tito has been endeavoring behind scenes to play down issue of tests ever since beginning of conference, probably fearing it would adversely affect success of meeting. I have repeatedly called attention to strong Yugoslav feelings over rearmament of Western Germany and their negative reaction to impression we have given of unwillingness to negotiate or at least to make any positive proposals for settlement of Berlin problem, as confirmed by Kohler to Nikezic on August 29 (see Deptel 254, September 1).Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/9–161) But neither I nor any of my Western colleagues were prepared for so one-sided an attitude on Tito’s part as this; and I think we must reflect carefully on its implications for our treatment of conference and, in more long-term, our attitude towards role of Yugoslavs at this juncture. I am stuck with Tito’s expressed understanding that we are proposing to go to war over specific issue of signing of peace treaty itself and his evident failure to understand that our military interests could be actively engaged only if subsequent effect of treaty were to create intolerable limitations on Allied rights in Berlin or on freedom of city’s communications. I recently urged, in conversation with Secretary,Apparently in a telephone conversation. The Rusk Appointment Books have no annotations indicating any conversations with Kennan and no record of any discussion has been found. (Johnson Library) that we take steps to make plain that crucial issue in our eyes would not be signature of treaty itself but situation which would arise if attempt were made to give to treaty an interpretation and implementation which would affect these factors just mentioned. Would like now to repeat this recommendation. So long as we let stand present ambiguity on this score we will lead with our chin for line of reproach which Tito took in this respect. At conclusion Tito’s speech I had occasion talk alone with Nehru during intermission. I expressed to him my shock over image conveyed by Tito of juxtaposition in Germany of stable East German state peacefully developing under happy socialist system, as against Western Germany seething with “Fascist and revanchist conceptions and tendencies.” Pointed out this was fantastic distortion of facts, and that no attempt by neutrals to play positive role in reaction to Berlin crisis could conceivably be successful if it ignored fact that heart of difficulty was incredible political failure of Ulbricht regime, which could not even stand comparison with other Communist regimes of Eastern Europe. This, I said, was problem not only for us but for Russians themselves, and no action of this conference based on fiction this problem did not exist could come anywhere near root of difficulty or have any particularly helpful effect. Nehru listened attentively but was non-committal. Private knowledge that same thesis was forcefully put to him this morning by personal envoy of Willi Brandt leads me to hope all this may have some effect on his thinking. Archbishop Makarios’ speech, which followed Tito’s, was very constructive on Germany and nuclear testing, calling for reunification Germany on basis plebiscite and characterizing Soviet test resumption as “shocking”, while expressing concern over French nuclear tests in Africa. It is unfortunately plain that if moderation and balance are to be brought into final resolutions of conference on Berlin question, the impulse will have to come from Nehru, Nasser, U Nu and others, not from Tito.In telegram 323, September 13, the Department of State provided Kennan with detailed instructions to use in his discussions with Yugoslav officials, which stressed U.S. disappointment with Tito’s “immoderate and pro-Soviet statements.” (Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–BE/9–1361) Kennan 97. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–BE/9–1561. Confidential. Belgrade, September 15, 1961, 7 p.m. 493. This is part two of report on Yugoslav attitude at Belgrade conference (Embtel 485, September 13).In the first part of his report, Kennan analyzed Yugoslav comportment during the Belgrade Conference and its possible causes. (Ibid., 396.1–BE/9–1361) Problem of our reaction to recent Yugoslav stance and behavior at conference is highly complicated and affected by contradictory considerations. There is evidence sudden distortion of Yugoslav policy at conference in direction pro-Soviet positions did not have approval all elements within GOY. Suspect it was even opposed by certain members Yugoslav delegation at conference, among whom its main protagonist would probably have been Djerdja, possibly also Kardelj. Others must have argued such line would involve serious risk of affecting our attitude toward Yugoslavia. If therefore we fail to react in any way we let down not only ourselves but those here who have argued that such course would not be in Yugoslav interests and would have unfavorable consequences. On other hand any abrupt or petulant reaction would be vulnerable to distortion by regime and would be used to stir up feeling against US of otherwise strongly friendly Yugoslav public. There is also danger, if reaction affects aid, that we do things counter to basic purposes our aid programs, and ones that would stand out as unjustified in light our practices elsewhere. We have also to consider carefully effect of our reaction on other non-aligned nations and other aid recipients. General character of Yugoslav positions on world affairs, as revealed at conference, was largely taken into account on recommendations made by this mission in despatch 41, July 20, on our future aid program.Despatch 41 reviewed MSP programs in Yugoslavia. (Ibid., 768.5–MSP/7–2061) However, for reasons set forth part one of present report, we are faced in part with new situation. Previous recommendations must be reviewed in this light. Following are my views this respect: A. Only forms of purely grant aid we are now giving are technical assistance program and support to programs of private American charitable organizations. I suggest that technical assistance program, instead of being tapered off as previously recommended, be terminated at once in sense that we decline as a general rule to negotiate further TA contracts. Those already negotiated should be faithfully completed. We should not bar possibility that we might occasionally conclude further contracts this nature in exceptional circumstances but none should be concluded this fall and Yugoslavs should be given impression none are forthcoming. They should also be told this will involve drastic reduction USOM personnel. This step can be easily defended in light of Tito’s own remarks about technical assistance in his speech of September 3 at conference. He himself said that while bilateral arrangements should not be totally excluded, TA embraced number of negative elements, “such as rivalry, interference in internal affairs, the imposing of influence and the like,” and sometimes did more harm than good. He referred it should be channeled, in general, through international organizations. This decision will not of itself hit Yugoslavs hard, either financially or otherwise. Curtailment of USOM will however have sharp psychological effect on Yugoslav public. As for private organizations, I again recommend these programs be given very careful study at home and unless we are sure they have strong people-to-people value, which I cannot say of school milk program, they be terminated at once. B. PL 480.Formally titled the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act, enacted July 10, 1954. For text, see 68 Stat. 454. As Department is aware this Yugoslav harvest was unsatisfactory both in wheat and corn. We have already made beginning at covering shortfall by shipment 300,000 tons wheat under PL 480 contract signed in June. To maintain adequate supply and three months advance reserves of bread grains, Yugoslavs will presumably require from US another 700,000–800,000 tons before end of next July. They expect US to undertake negotiations within coming month. How much this poor crop was attributable to weather and how much to other causes cannot be determined with precision. Yugoslav leaders, especially Tito himself, seem to have given scant attention to their own internal economic problems during current year as compared with their feverish preoccupation with development their relations with Africa. They have apparently relied on us to pick up check for deficits on agricultural front while immersing themselves in foreign policy ventures often strongly anti-Western and anti-American in spirit. Unjust and undesirable as this situation is, over long run, we must admit they had some reason for underlying assumption we would make up difference. They had no reason to suppose PL 480 aid would not continue to be forthcoming in adequate amounts. Were we to cut off shipments entirely with termination existing contract, there would be nothing they could do to improve their food supply by their own efforts earlier than next July. Result would be either heavy inroads on their foreign exchange reserves or genuine hardship to Yugo people. This being so, feel we should conclude one more contract to carry them over coming winter and most of spring, though not to point of meeting their demands in toto, but should couple expression of readiness to take this step with public statement that this represents, so far as our present intentions are concerned, terminal grant on present PL 480 terms, and that new basis will have to be found for further shipments of American surplus food. Exact amount such terminal grant can be determined by experts; I would suppose it would be in range of 3 to 400,000 tons. This would put them on notice at early date that they will be on their own next summer and that it is up to them to see to it their harvest is reasonably adequate. I actually think this necessity will prove to be in their own interests. It does not preclude a change of heart on our part next year if circumstances at that time seem to warrant it. C. See no reason to restrict developmental financing by DLF beyond what was envisaged in my despatch 41. On straight political level I would urge coordinated effort by all who deal with Yugo officials, whether here or in Washington, at UN or in other international forums, to give impression we feel they have chosen their road; it is not truly neutral one; they chose it knowing it was at many points in conflict with ours and with interests of their relations with West; that we have no choice but to go on our own way, expecting little from them; and that we cannot undertake to discuss world problems with them on assumption that they are entirely a friendly or neutral nation. General tone our statements to them should be one of sorrow rather than anger but of acceptance of situation they themselves have created. This does not imply any personal coldness towards Yugoslav officials. Particularly those who are in our country, whether temporarily or for longer periods, should be treated as guests and shown every cordiality and consideration. Part three this message will follow tomorrow or as soon thereafter as possible.In part three of his report, transmitted as telegram 507 from Belgrade, September 19, Kennan made suggestions for a “tactical program” to make clear to the Tito regime U.S. displeasure with Yugoslav policy. (Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–BE/9–1861) Kennan 98. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–BE/9–1861. Confidential; Priority. Belgrade, September 18, 1961, 7 p.m. 505. Mates asked me to call on him this morning and handed me aide-memoire, abbreviated text of which follows in my next message.Telegram 506 from Belgrade, September 18. (Ibid.) The aide-memoire was delivered in response to a U.S. aide-memoire, provided to Mates on September 15, that outlined U.S. concerns with Yugoslav actions at the Belgrade Conference. The Department of State transmitted the outline of this aide-memoire to the Embassy in telegram 323, September 13; see footnote 4, Document 96. His oral remarks accorded closely with tenor of aide-memoire. They had been particularly stung, I gather, by (1) our reference to their degree of unalignment as representing a judgment they felt US not entitled to make, (2) our reference to the role of Yugo at conference, and (3) what they felt was a lack of balance in our interpretation of their foreign policy. Our language, he indicated, had been offensive to them in some respects. They had been mindful of our status as a world power as related to their own size, and had not been able to escape impression that we had endeavored to put pressure on them. They could, he said, have made an issue of the language and held us to account for it, but they had decided against undertaking any polemic over language itself, and had therefore decided to reply as they did. I said our government had had no intention of using offensive language or of putting pressure on them, and if anything in the aide-memoire had given them that impression, it was not intentional on our part. He said they resented particularly our attempt to define what constituted their unalignment and independence. Since “independence” was a word I had taken liberty of excising from Department’s original draft, I pointed out this had not appeared in aide-memoire. He said in their view unalignment and independence were identical. I explained this was not our view at all, that we had no suspicion Yugo policy was being dictated by outsiders; but that we could easily picture an independent nation ranging itself alongside one of the great powers in its foreign policy positions to a point where it could lose plausible claim to unalignment. At close of our talk, I emphasized to him that while we concerned full right of Yugo Government to determine its own positions, the positions it had recently taken on some of great world issues differed very seriously from our own, and this was a circumstance we could not fail to take into account in connection with problems of Yugo-American relations. My impression is that formal exchange should be allowed to rest here. If opportunities arise for informal talks with senior Yugo officials either here, in Washington, or in New York, I think we should not hesitate to repeat to them frankly and in detail our reasons for concern over positions Tito has taken. I have been interested to learn, incidentally, that on eve of Belgrade conference, Tito gave Nehru same impression he had given us of intention to take moderate stance and Indians themselves were surprised by subsequent change in Yugo line. We are continuing our study of possible reasons for this change, and I hope to send more on this in some days. Kennan 99. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–BE/9–2661. Confidential. Repeated to USUN. Belgrade, September 26, 1961, 6 p.m. 543. Embassy has strong impression Yugos much concerned that their performance Belgrade Conference may seriously damage their bilateral relations with the US, and impair prospects for aid projects at levels they have counted upon. Department already aware that Yugos have offered several explanations, some of them mutually contradictory. (For example, they have dropped word privately that they are seeking to protect Khrushchev from internal foes, while at same time explain use communist terminology as designed to shake Moscow domination of international communist movement. Embtel 515.)Telegram 515, September 20, reported on Yugoslav efforts to soften the impact of Tito’s speech. (Ibid., 396.1–BE/9–2061) In recent days pattern appears to have emerged from remarks dropped to Embassy officers by high and middle level Yugoslav officials, and some UN official but well informed sources, that Yugos seeking create impression that (A) Embassy misunderstands Yugo role at conference, and consequently misinformed Department; (B) Ambassador Kennan personally responsible for misunderstanding. In latter connection Yugos avoiding any acknowledgment that genuine issues at stake, jocosely suggest whole matter tempest in teapot. For example, Assistant Foreign Secretary Ejvoda last night inquired laughingly, “is the Ambassador still angry at us?” Appears likely that Yugos will develop this line in Washington and New York in effort to salvage much as possible of aid programs without significant re-examination of policies which have created current difficulties. Lisle 100. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–BE/9–2961. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Belgrade, September 29, 1961, 8 p.m. 568. Deeply appreciate Secretary’s support vis-à-vis Popovic (UN ed Secto 50, Belgrade 3).This telegram, September 28, informed the Embassy: “During outspoken but friendly luncheon conversation Secretary told Popovic we had great confidence in Kennan and shared his concern over some remarks made by Tito during conference. Popovic replied he could understand that but expressing it in aide-memoire was wrong and designed to bring pressure on GOY. Secretary replied whole conference obviously designed bring pressure on us, that Yugoslavs did not hesitate to criticize us when we did something they did not like and should not mind when we did likewise and furthermore Guantanamo was none of Yugoslavia’s business.” (Ibid., 396.1–BE/9–2861) It is naturally source of regret to me, but not one of surprise or repentance, that some Yugoslavs should make out of adverse reaction they have recently aroused in US a source of grievance against myself. Actually, they are wrong in their suspicions. My briefing to US press representatives here was not given until long after latter had filed their stories on Tito’s speech; and reactions I received on that occasion reflected much sharper resentment of Yugoslav line than anything said in reply. If Yugoslav leaders really believe adverse reaction due my personal influence, they are simply nurturing illusions about temper US opinion in light present crisis. There are unquestionably embittered anti-Western elements within Yugoslav set-up. Exactly where these lie is hard to determine. Assistant Foreign Minister Djerdja, who was member Yugoslav delegation at recent conference, and who appears now to be at Tito’s side in latter’s Slovenian retreat, obviously belongs to this category. It is significant that there has evidently been, during recent months, a quiet retirement at Foreign Office, aimed at elimination of pro-Western officials. We are safe in assuming that anti-Western advisers have often argued with Tito that he could safely take anti-American positions without fear of jeopardizing Western economic support. Past experience has seemed to confirm this view. Thesis has frequently been heard here, after all, that Western nations cannot afford not to give aid, and that ulterior political motives would house [force?] them to continue it even if economic necessity did not. If now US reaction to recent Yugoslav conduct seems to threaten validity this view, it is not surprising some people are embarrassed and find it easier to blame things on an individual foreigner than to admit to having made false estimate of limits of Western patience. Am persuaded that aside from Tito’s speech, time has now arrived when thorough re-examination US-Yugoslav relations could no longer have been avoided. Extent to which Tito has now gained full effective independence vis-à-vis Moscow changes certain of basic assumptions on which US policy toward Yugoslavia has heretofore been based. In addition to that, what was tolerable in Yugoslav official utterances in quieter times is no longer acceptable in a time of crisis, when the chips are down. At some point, demand had to be raised for greater coherence between Yugoslav political attitudes and reality of country’s economic and cultural necessities. To be forced to realize this is highly disagreeable to Yugoslavs, who are not used to taking political consequences of their own words and to whom pleasure of eating cake and having it too has become so familiar as to seem a god-given right. No US Ambassador who had task of bringing this realization home to Yugoslavs could or should expect to be universally popular here; and he would not be doing his duty if he was. This is a burden I will cheerfully bear so long as I am supported by Secretary’s and President’s confidence; for readjustment in question is not only inevitable but is in interests of both peoples. There are many people in Yugoslavia to whom this truth is no less visible than to people at home. We can be sure that for every bit of open opposition occasioned here by any effort to put relations on basis more in accord with realities of time, there will also be many friendly though muted Yugoslav cheers. Kennan 101. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in YugoslaviaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–BE/10–1161. Secret. Text received from the White House. Washington, October 11, 1961, 3 p.m. 434. Eyes only for the Ambassador from the President. I have read with great interest your cables after the Belgrade conference on both Yugoslavian and Soviet behavior. They have been of great value to me, and I want you to know that I particularly like your insistence upon representing the interests and purposes of the United States Government, even when this involves abrasions with those to whom you are accredited. Your 589Telegram 589, October 6, reported Kennan’s view of Soviet motives and intentions in dealing with the Berlin and German questions. (Ibid., 462.00/10–661) with its somber assessment of recent Soviet policy leads me to ask for further comment from you on two points: 1. To what do you attribute the change in policy, with menacing overtones, which you estimate to have occurred at the end of August? 2. In your assessment, what combination of military preparation and diplomatic activity is most likely to lead to an honorable and peaceful resolution of the Berlin crisis? You may be confident that your views on aid and trade with Yugoslavia are being carefully weighed here. My own request for prompt discussion of this problem in NSC is result of my concern that we develop a balanced, carefully considered stand on this matter. Ball 102. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Kohler) to the Ambassador to Yugoslavia (Kennan)Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Yugoslavia. Secret; Official–Informal. Washington, October 12, 1961. Dear George: Your series of three messages on the Yugoslav role at the Belgrade Conference,See Document 97 and footnotes 1 and 4 thereto. its implications for US-Yugoslav relations, and the question of our future course have moved us to a good deal of soul-searching. Also, your Despatch No. 41See footnote 2, Document 97. and your subsequent messages reporting your conversation with Mates regarding our aide-memoire and your further thoughts on the situation have been very useful. We felt it would be worthwhile, particularly in view of the suggestion made in your letter of September 20 to Harold Vedeler,Not found. to outline to you informally our present thinking on the Yugoslav situation generally and the basic considerations which we think should enter into any reappraisal of our relations and any judgments we form about the direction we should take, the objectives we should seek, and the tactics we should employ. We have considered it unwise to move precipitately to conclusions in this regard until we have had some opportunity of observing and taking due account of reactions in all quarters. Consequently, our thinking in EUR on the situation has been intentionally deliberate. The impact of Tito’s speech and Yugoslav positions at the Belgrade Conference upon American sensibilities—as reflected by the adverse reactions within both official and public quarters in the US—necessarily poses the question whether existing US policy in its basic premises and concepts now requires revision. We are strongly inclined to the view that it does not; and, in any case, we feel again (a feeling that you also expressed in your telegram No. 435 of September 6)Not found. that we should allow the dust to settle before coming to any irrevocable judgment in this fundamental regard. Our policy toward Yugoslavia, in its basic aspects, is a policy necessarily conceived in long-range terms. Briefly stated, our policy is: (1) To assist Yugoslavia—a Communist-ruled state but one which has successfully broken away from Soviet domination—to build a firm secure base of national independence and to support the determination that Yugoslavia has shown to preserve and strengthen its independent status. (2) To exert an influence upon Yugoslavia’s present and future leadership for the evolution of Yugoslav political, economic, and social institutions along more democratically representative and humanistic lines with increasing ties to the West. (3) To follow a course which would bring the US maximum benefit from the significant role of Yugoslavia as an independent socialist state outside the Soviet bloc which exerts a disturbing influence upon the political and ideological unity of the Soviet-dominated international Communist movement and tends to stimulate the Soviet-dominated Eastern European governments to seek greater freedom of action from Moscow in shaping their own institutions and policies. This policy, in respect of these essential elements, was formulated in the period following the Tito–Stalin break of 1948 and has been developed and applied with consistency and continuity over the past decade. Admittedly, it has involved a calculated risk for the US both in political and economic terms. It has been subject repeatedly to strong attack from certain Congressional and public critics, particularly at times like the present when the Yugoslav leadership has taken positions on vital international issues that appear identical with or very close to those of the Soviet Union. I think it has been to the credit of our political leadership that it has had the foresight and courage to defend our Yugoslav policy in the face of these attacks. As a result, the policy has enjoyed the support of informed public opinion and has been supported by the Congress in key legislative actions. Viewed objectively and in perspective, and notwithstanding the ups and downs of US-Yugoslav relations, the basic elements of our Yugoslav policy have, in our judgment, achieved some distinctly positive results. Yugoslavia’s course after 1948 and its general, if very gradual, evolution since the break with Stalin has been conclusively to the advantage of the US and to the Free World community and to the discomfiture and disadvantage of the Sino-Soviet bloc. We believe that in assessing the efficacy of our basic policy, it is extremely important to give careful consideration to the long-term receptivity to and the potentialities for constructive change that may increasingly be found among the rising generation of Yugoslav leaders. We cannot smugly predict a more definite shift to liberal and humanistic socialism, but it would be a serious mistake to ignore or dismiss the possibilities of such a development. In the present Yugoslav situation we are, as we have said above, pursuing a calculated risk in the basic aspects of our policy. It cannot be ruled out that we may fail increasingly in that policy as time goes on. We see no reason to believe that we are at that critical point of no return at this stage. We are also trying, in taking a hard look at the basic components of our policy, to look with equal realism upon possible alternatives. We believe that any basic departure from our present policy (and I am not referring here to some changes in attitudes and tactics—of which I will speak later) would even at this stage of Yugoslavia’s development as an independent state entail the risk of moving Yugoslavia back toward and ultimately under Soviet domination. In this regard, we frankly do not go as far as you seem to go in your estimate of Yugoslavia’s ability to maintain its national independence. You would agree, I am sure, that the Yugoslav struggle against the Soviet Union might have turned out far differently if it had not been for our support both material and otherwise. But we believe that the pressures and blandishments which the Soviets could bring to bear on Yugoslavia in circumstances where US and other Western relations with Yugoslavia began to assume a generally negative rather than a generally positive character would be considerable. Moreover, as the confrontation of Free World power and Soviet power extends throughout the world, encompasses new fields of activity, and grows sharper, it may well be that the non-aligned states, or those that aspire to such so-called status, will find it increasingly difficult to avoid alignment on one side or the other. Signs of the effect of these polarizing forces are already evident. To the extent that these forces may operate, they are relevant to the problem of Yugoslavia, even though we recognize, as you have pointed out, that that problem is wholly unique and of great complexity. In the long run, it is possible that the Yugoslavs may succeed in going their own unique and unattached way, but there may well be mounting pressure on them as time goes on to choose more definitely between the divergent and alternative paths of democratic socialist freedom and national independence within the community of free nations or of permanent Communist dictatorship and eventual return to essential orthodoxy within the Soviet-dominated international Communist movement. I am fully aware, of course, that the thoughts I have expressed above are in very broad and rather general terms. Yet, we feel that the basic concepts which are, in fact, the foundation as well as the justification of our policy are of utmost importance. If they are no longer valid and if we are unable or unwilling to defend them against current and possibly prolonged attack in this country, then our present course and our investment of patient effort and considerable funds of the past decade may come to an abortive conclusion, and there will be little purpose in any serious consideration of more effective tactics for dealing with the Yugoslavs. I have therefore concentrated on what I think are the basic elements of our policy and on which I hope we can clearly agree. You may be interested, in this connection, in the enclosed New York Times editorial which appeared on September 29.Not printed. The Times’ view is simply and categorically expressed and, though it talks primarily in terms of the continuing validity of “US cooperation with and economic aid to Yugoslavia”, it is clearly a forceful endorsement of basic US policy toward Yugoslavia. Undoubtedly, it was evoked by an awareness of the fact that that policy will now undergo searching challenge in this country as a consequence of Yugoslav actions at the Belgrade Conference. In this connection also, we were pleased to have your telegram No. 592Dated October 9. (Department of State, Central Files, 411.6841/10–961) which distinguished quite clearly between abrupt and vindictive measures which may prejudice irreparably our basic policy interests and objectives on the one hand and sober examination of certain aspects of our relations and of the tactics which we may wish to modify and hereafter employ on the other hand. If we are in agreement that we should continue our efforts to give effect to a policy toward Yugoslavia which we regard as still valid in respect of its basic elements, then we believe that our immediate problem—as identified and viewed against the background of recent events at Belgrade—is to complete our general stock-taking. We should determine, taking full cognizance of the recommendations that you have submitted, what our attitudes and tactics are to be in the various phases of our dealings with the Yugoslavs, particularly with regard to the continuation, modification, or curtailment of our several Yugoslav aid programs. These matters are presently under active consideration, as you doubtless gathered from the Department’s telegram No. 429 of October 7.Not printed. (Ibid., 411.6481/10–761) This telegram was sent out in order to have the benefit of your views in connection with the Department’s consideration of a long statement of EUR’s position on trade policy as well as general policy toward Yugoslavia and Poland. The statement was submitted to Mr. Ball for consideration with the President and the Secretaries of Commerce and Defense. We are enclosing a copy as it is scheduled to be taken up in a NSC meeting with the President on October 13.See Document 45. You will find that your views in the Embassy’s telegram No. 592 are in basic accord with ours in this document. All of this indicates that we are undertaking a searching review of our policy toward Yugoslavia. The immediate question leading to this review has been whether to continue or change our arrangements for licensing exports to Yugoslavia. The more limited consideration of trade has broadened naturally into an examination of general policy and it has been necessary to complete this review before we come to conclusions on your three basic recommendations on economic aid to Yugoslavia.Reference is to Kennan’s recommendations in telegram 493, Document 97. We have been studying these recommendations and plan to send an official instruction on this subject when it is possible to do so. With best regards, Sincerely, Foy D. KohlerPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 103. Editorial Note On October 12, Executive Secretary Lucius D. Battle transmitted to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Bundy a paper entitled “Review of Policy Factors Concerning Licensing of Exports to Yugoslavia and Poland,” which had been prepared in the Department of State on October 11. The paper was discussed at the 491st meeting of the National Security Council on October 13 when it was agreed to remove the suspension of export licenses for shipments to Yugoslavia and Poland. The October 11 paper and NSC Action No. 2439 are printed as Documents 45 and 46. 104. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/10–1261. Confidential; Priority. Belgrade, October 12, 1961, 8 p.m. 614. Embtels 486, 498.Telegram 486 from Belgrade, September 13, reported Kennan’s discussion with Popovic regarding U.S.-Yugoslav relations. (Ibid., 396.1–BE/9–1361) Telegram 498 from Belgrade, September 15, reported that Kennan had delivered the text of a U.S. aide-memoire to the Foreign Ministry that day. (Ibid., 396.1–BE/9–1561) I received this morning invitation to call at noon on Mujalko Todorovic, aide-President of the Executive Council and one of Tito’s four senior deputies. He does not frequently see diplomats, and I had not previously met him. He received me in presence of newly appointed head of American desk at the Foreign Office, Yaksa Petric, and proceeded to say in substance the following. The Yugoslav Government greatly regretted the recent deterioration in Yugoslav-United States relations. It had not wished anything of this sort, but could not avoid conclusion that it had taken place. In substantiation of this view he pointed to: (1) The attitude and tone of the American press, unfriendly to Yugoslavia in a degree not seen before. They considered that Yugoslavia was being incorrectly portrayed. People were being given a wrong opinion about it. (2) Hindrance to economic cooperation. In recent years such collaboration had taken a constructive course and had been mutually advantageous. It had recently been enriched by new forms of cooperation in new spheres of activities. In addition to arrangements between Governments there had been growing contacts between enterprises, private companies, etc. However, recently the whole program of cooperation was being blocked. Because of the atmosphere created by the press, individuals and banks had been hesitant to proceed with these arrangements. (3) Cancellation of Humphrey visit. The visit had been agreed to, the program fixed and visits arranged with the President and other leaders. Now all of this had been abruptly canceled. (4) An article had appeared in the Herald-Tribune (by query I elicited this was from the pen of Rowland Evans) which accused Yugoslavia of being anti-Western and dragged up episodes from the past. The manner in which this article had appeared was offensive. (The hint, I think, was that I had put Mr. Evans up to this.) Todorovic went on to say that he could continue this list of evidences of deteriorating relations but thought it unnecessary. They had carefully considered my oral representations to Foreign Minister Popovic (see Embtel 486) and also our aide-memoireThe aide-memoire was given to Nikezic by Kohler on August 29. Telegram 254 to Belgrade, September 1, informed the Embassy. (Ibid., 762.00/9–161) and had analyzed recent developments in our relations. They had come to conclusion there had been change in US policy toward Yugoslavia and wanted to know what it meant. Yugoslav policy toward US had not changed. It remained that of an unaligned country. Why was the US interested in a change of policy? The Yugoslavs felt entitled to an early answer. After all, the program of mutual economic cooperation was blocked on a wide scale. It was an important factor in their own plans. They were now working on their economic plan for the coming period. This was soon to be presented to Parliament. They needed to know where they stood. If the US Government did not want to continue collaboration they would have to look elsewhere, also they would have to inform their public which they had thus far refrained from doing. They considered on basis of experience of recent years that this collaboration was on an equal basis, was mutually advantageous, fruitful and useful, not only economically but politically, and that it had strengthened the forces of peace. It was, they thought, a good thing and ought to be continued. If it was not continued Yugoslavia would have economic difficulties but she had known such difficulties in the past and would not shrink at facing them. She had, however, herself done nothing to damage relations. To restore their harmony would be contributing to peace. What the Yugoslavs could not do was to change their foreign policy. They had a debt of consistency to themselves. He asked me to inform my Government and the President of what he had said. I replied that since my presentation of the aide-memoire to Mates on September 15 (Embtel 498), I had received no further indication of the policies of my Government either on the political side or with respect to economic collaboration. I understood the importance of these matters to them and undertook to transmit his statement to my Government and President at once and to urge an early reply. I emphasized that we had no information here of any restrictive measures taken with regard to economic collaboration except that earlier this week we had heard something of a tightening of controls on export licensing, but did not have full information. With regard to Senator Humphrey I pointed out that it had been our understanding that if he came to Yugoslavia he would not be received by President Tito or any other senior official. In these circumstances I had been unable to encourage the Senator to believe that a visit here at this time would be pleasant or profitable for him. I particularly regretted the cancellation of his visit. I knew the Senator as a man of outstanding intelligence and knowledge of international affairs, and as one who had been favorably disposed in the past toward our collaboration with Yugoslavia. I thought it a shame he had not been able to come here and said if the Yugoslav Government had second thoughts I would be glad to try to see whether the misunderstanding could not be cleared up and the visit arranged after all. To this he made no comment. On Herald-Tribune article I said I had not seen the article and was unable to comment on its content. I pointed out that Mr. Evans and his two companions had also not succeeded in making appointments with any of the senior Yugoslav officials while here. To this he said they had descended on Yugoslavia too suddenly and appointments could not be arranged in so short a time. I then said that while I could not respond to his statements at this time on behalf of my Government I would like to make some private observations. Anticipating his observations, I had already prepared handwritten notes, from which I talked. These I left with him at the end of our talk as a reminder. They are transmitted in the following message (Embtel 615).Dated October 12. (Ibid., 611.68/10–1261) I embroidered on them somewhat. In conclusion I emphasized that if we reacted as sensitively as we did to Yugoslav attitudes on world affairs it was because our understanding for the unusual position of this country and our regard for experience and personal qualities of President Tito made it impossible for us to take these differences casually. Todorovic ended the interview by saying that my remarks had confirmed him in the belief that US policy had changed. He wanted to stress that it was with us, not with them, that the change had occurred. Their policy was still one of positive unalignment based on their own free judgment and independence, and was aimed at good relations with the United States in the interests of world peace. In addition to this message containing text of notes (Embtel 615) I shall send another shortly commenting on this demarche and possibilities for our response.In telegram 617 from Belgrade, October 13, Kennan forwarded his suggestions for a reply to Todorovic, urging that the United States avoid linking its criticisms to economic aid. (Ibid., 611.68/10–1361) Kennan 105. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in YugoslaviaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/10–1361. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Mudd, cleared by S/S, and approved by Kohler. Washington, October 20, 1961, 10:11 p.m. 468. Embtels 614, 617; Deptel 449.Telegram 614 is printed as Document 104. Regarding telegram 617, see footnote 4 thereto. In telegram 449, October 14, the Department of State informed the Embassies in Belgrade and Warsaw that the President had suspended issuance of export licenses to Yugoslavia and Poland and had instructed the Secretary of State to review all types of economic assistance to the two nations. (Department of State, Central Files, 411.6841/10–1461) We believe Secretary’s press statement on Yugoslavia October 18For text, see Department of State Bulletin, November 6, 1961, p. 750. and Kohler’s conversation with Ambassador Nikezic October 19 provide initial response to Todorovic’s approach re our views on US-Yugoslav relations. Pursuant urtel 617 Department called in Nikezic for meeting with Kohler. Following is summary conversation: Kohler indicated that as Yugoslav Government aware considerable disappointment has prevailed in official US circles as well as in general public as result Tito speech and Yugoslav role Belgrade Conference non-aligned countries. Current press attacks on our Yugoslav policy in part symptomatic that disappointment. However, drawing unfounded conclusions re this policy from press stories, many of which incorrect or distorted, could be misleading and damaging to US-Yugoslav relations. Kohler noted this connection importance of Secretary’s October 18 press statement as well as President’s remark October 11 that US aid policy aimed at helping countries maintain their independence and sovereignty.For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, p. 661. We wished to make clear that, contrary Todorovic’s inference in his conversation with Ambassador, we have taken no action to hinder economic cooperation (Embtel 614). On contrary, we have encouraged private individuals, banks and corporations to go ahead with their arrangements. Todorovic misunderstanding this point example how premature and erroneous conclusions, if made public, could create type of climate harmful to trade which Yugoslav Government seeking to avoid. We desire normal relations and hope for realistic understanding on part Yugoslav Government to contribute to that end. Patience and tact required now and we hope that we can count on Yugoslav Government to avoid ill considered and inflammatory statements which might exacerbate situation further. Nikezic said he understood need for caution and tact and appreciated both Secretary’s and President’s statements. Embassy felt, although press stories were to some extent evidence reaction administration re Tito speech Belgrade Conference, press had exaggerated administration’s true feelings. However, President’s personal reaction to Belgrade Conference, and Nikezic’s conversations with Bowles, BallA memorandum of the September 22 Bowles–Nikezic conversation is in Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–BE/9–2261. No record of a September 8 conversation with Nikezic has been found. and others during which he had been told US evaluating implications Yugoslavia’s role there raised questions at Belgrade re our real attitude toward Yugoslavia. For this reason Todorovic had to seek clarification US policy. US economic cooperation highly important to Yugoslavia. Plans for coming period now being drawn up and Government must know where it stands. Impression that US changing policy reinforced when Ambassador Kennan told Todorovic that economic arrangements prevailing between Yugoslavia and US already ripe for modification and that he would have been obliged to suggest certain changes in these arrangements even without present troubled period. Asked what likely to be practical effect of present situation re Yugoslav requests (PL 480, DLF and Exim Bank). Kohler replied press stories re US attitude on PL 480 shipments unfounded. Yugoslavia’s recent request not yet having been reviewed. We were now undertaking consideration of this request within US Government. US review aid programs always comes up about this time as we weigh resources available against requests from different countries. Yugoslavs must realize that US faced with many new demands for aid, particularly from countries far less developed than Yugoslavia. It not possible now give any indications final US aid program outcome. After all factors weighed and decision made reply would be forthcoming through normal channels. Nikezic said he had already advised Belgrade of problem of increased competition for US aid dollar. Special effort made in this conversation to urge Yugoslavs to avoid public statements and actions which might exacerbate further US-Yugoslav relations. Department now studying recommendations urtel 617 re economic aid. Pending review our economic program Yugoslavia (Deptel 449) we are not yet in position to make more specific comments to Yugoslavs on this subject. Rusk 106. Letter From the Ambassador to Yugoslavia (Kennan) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Yugoslavia. Secret. The source text is handwritten. Belgrade, October 27, 1961. Dear Mac: I thought you might like to see the attached copy of a letter I am addressing today to Foy Kohler, on the subject of Yugoslav-American relations. I also enclose a copy of his letter to me, of October 12,Document 102. to which this is a reply. I send this to you because I am somewhat afraid that there may be a lack of coordination here, as between the European Office of the State Department and others in Washington who have an interest in this subject. I feel particularly that in view of the delicacy of Yugoslav-US relations as a matter of congressional and public opinion, the President ought to have knowledge of any actions taken by the Department in this respect which conflict with the recommendations made by this Mission and indeed with the analysis of the elements of the problem at which I have personally arrived. I feel this especially in view of the tenor of the President’s telegram to me of October 11 (Dept’s 434 to Belgrade),Document 101. which gave me the impression that the view I have taken of this situation had commended itself to him. Life here has its ups and downs, but continues generally to be absorbing and agreeable. Very sincerely, George Kennan AttachmentSecret; Official–Informal. Belgrade, October 27, 1961. Letter From the Ambassador to Yugoslavia (Kennan) to the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Kohler) Dear Foy: On my return to my desk here Wednesday, I found your letter of October 12, commenting on various of my communications on US-Yugoslav relations. I am most grateful to you for taking the trouble to give me this comprehensive statement of the Department’s thinking on these matters. With much of it I can go along; but there are some points with which I cannot fully concur, and others which give me some concern. Let me tell you frankly what I have in mind. Your discussion opens by stating that “the impact of Tito’s speech and Yugoslav positions at the Belgrade Conference upon American sensibilities” poses the question whether our policy towards Yugoslavia requires revision. This suggests to me a certain misunderstanding of my position. I have at no time taken the position that it was only, or even primarily, the Yugoslav performance at the Belgrade Conference which posed the question of a reconsideration of our policy towards this country. You will recall that the paper submitted with my letter to you of July 31,Not found. actually drafted in June, gave a summary of Yugoslav positions on international questions which accorded very closely with the views Tito later put forward at the Conference. In my despatch 41, of July 20,See footnote 2, Document 97. I submitted recommendations on aid which implied changes in the concept of our basic policy. If, in the wake of the Belgrade Conference, I tightened up the recommendations on aid, it was because I felt that Yugoslavia’s performance at the Conference represented a final demonstration of the failure of my own efforts and those of others in the new Administration to make an impression on Yugoslav thinking, and a serious renewed commitment by the Yugoslavs to the use of their international influence for purposes not conducive to world peace and stability. This made it impossible for us to hope for any early change in the Yugoslav position, forced us to regard the Yugoslavs as being for the moment beyond our power to influence with the means available to us, and left us no choice but to take most serious account of their present stance in world affairs. The question, therefore, as I see it, is not whether Tito’s performance at the Conference justifies a change in our policy. The question is whether policies which may well have been generally effective in the more distant past retain their justification today, in light of the present international situation and of Yugoslavia’s present stage of economic development, and in the face of a renewed and highly formalized commitment by Tito to an anti-American policy scarcely distinguishable from that of the Russians. You list three purposes to which you conceive our present policy to be addressed. Let me just comment on each of them: (1) The first is: “To assist Yugoslavia—a Communist-ruled state but one which has successfully broken away from Soviet domination—to build a firm secure base of national independence and to support the determination that Yugoslavia has shown to preserve and strengthen its independent status.” The Yugoslavs, in my opinion, have already built a firm and secure base of independence, and need neither foreign inspiration nor foreign support in their determination to maintain it. Forgive me if I expand on this point, for it is a very important one. Two things are often confused here: (a) identity of policy with Soviet bloc, and (b) acceptance of a position of virtual or formal subordination to Moscow. In the first of these we have nothing to lose; in the second, we have nothing to fear. Yugoslav attitudes on international affairs are already either identical, or very nearly identical, with those of Moscow on all major world questions. The Yugoslav leaders have themselves repeatedly asserted this. There can be no question but that Yugoslav policy, like that of Moscow, is aimed generally at the frustration of United States efforts in the cold war and the elimination of our country as a major factor in world affairs. This policy is not the result of any lack of independence; it represents a deliberate choice on Tito’s part. He could, if he wished, take quite a different line. What Tito disagrees with Moscow about is only whether he should again accept, as before 1948, a relationship of direct subordination—formally to the collective body of Moscow-approved communist parties, actually to the leaders of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. In relation to international affairs, this question has secondary significance; it is only a matter of whether certain views are to be entertained, and certain policies followed, voluntarily or by way of formal obedience to external authority. The views and policies would be substantially the same in either case. With respect to domestic policies, however, the significance of this question is immense and painful. To accept Moscow’s authority once more would mean not only the sacrifice of all those features in which the Yugoslav social and economic system now differs from that of the Soviet Union (a sacrifice which the Yugoslav people could not be brought to accept today other than by the application of the most extreme Stalinist terror) but also granting Moscow in effect the right to determine, and to change at will, the political leadership of the Yugoslav party. I can assure you that rather than make these concessions, Tito would go back into the hills and resume the life he led in the midst of the German occupation. I can conceive of no circumstances in which it would be worth his while to make such a journey to Canossa. To do so would negate all that he has striven for, and all that he has achieved, in thirteen years of independent existence. It would involve a personal humiliation so drastic as to wipe out completely the formidable image he has attained in the eyes of his own people and the underdeveloped world and to make it plainly impossible for him to carry on in the leadership of the Yugoslav party. Nor would it even be a hopeful solution to Yugoslavia’s economic problems. Even if our aid were to be wholly terminated (which, as you know, I have never advocated) the result, in my opinion and in that of the senior economic officials in our establishment here, would be merely a slowing down of Yugoslavia’s rate of growth, not a collapse of her economic system. A renewed submission to Moscow might bring some relief, but it would scarcely enable the Yugoslavs to avoid a falling off in the rate of growth. I cannot conceive of the Russians, if they again had control of Yugoslavia, permitting it to have a rate of growth higher than that of other Eastern European satellites. For these reasons, I have to give it as my considered opinion, after a half-year at this post, that Yugoslavia’s independence does not today depend on our aid. Our aid does, no doubt, facilitate to some extent the maintenance of this independence. This being so, there is a measure of justification for continuance of certain forms of aid; and this has been taken into account in the recommendations from this Mission. But we are overrating ourselves, and underrating both Tito’s amour propre and his will to survival, if we think that his unwillingness to submit once more to Moscow’s authority is kept alive only by our largesse. (2) The second of the purposes you mention is “To exert an influence upon Yugoslavia’s present and future leadership for the evolution of Yugoslav political, economic, and social institutions along more democratically representative and humanistic lines with increasing ties to the West.” This is certainly a worthy aim, but I have strong doubts as to how far our aid programs promote it today. The Yugoslavs are now engaged in drawing up a new constitution which will presumably determine the organization of their society—politically, economically, and socially—for a long time to come. They are also drawing up specific economic plans for the coming years. I know of no evidence that they, in undertaking this effort of forward planning, are appreciably influenced by our aid programs as such. They have come—and this cannot be too often emphasized—to take these programs largely for granted. They believe that we are giving this aid out of internal compulsions of our own, and that we will continue to give it regardless of their behavior either domestically or in foreign affairs. They therefore feel under no obligation to take our aid programs into account when it comes to shaping the character of their society. Tito has said publicly, only this last Thursday (October 26), that there are no differences of opinion between himself and Moscow “on the ultimate aims of the building of socialism.” That has always been, and remains, his view. Nothing is further from his thoughts than to alter this attitude by way of reaction to our aid programs. It must be understood that the Yugoslavs receive aid from us unhappily. To them, it is a humiliation to take help from a capitalist country. They accept this humiliation as the price of economic necessity. But they feel toward us all the resentment and humiliation one normally feels toward someone whom one does not really regard as a friend but on whose financial charity one is momentarily dependent. They do not have confidence in the soundness of the structure of our society. They consider us doomed to ultimate failure in our undertakings on the world scene. Our readiness to aid them, in the given circumstances, is something which they regard, for the most part, with a cynical and ironic humor. In certain ways, of course, the Yugoslavs are influenced by our example in the shaping of their own society. There are certain respects in which they feel that methods and approaches adopted in the United States are separable from the social and political system prevailing there and can therefore be appropriated to Yugoslavia without danger. But in this area it is their own observations by which they are influenced, not our aid per se. I consider that our DLF operations are helpful in enabling them to make such observations; and I have, as you know, recommended that these operations should continue. I cannot say the same thing of the PL 480 aid, nor of the various programs implemented through private agencies. As for the technical assistance: this is a debatable point. I cannot bring myself to believe that the trend of Yugoslav society would be much different today had we never conducted programs of this sort. All in all, then, I would have to say that our aid is not an important factor in influencing the shaping of the development of Yugoslav society. Whatever value it might have along these lines would certainly not be materially reduced if the modifications in our programs proposed by this Mission were accepted. (3) The final purpose of our aid policy which you mention is “To follow a course which would bring the US maximum benefit from the significant role of Yugoslavia as an independent socialist state outside the Soviet bloc which exerts a disturbing influence upon the political and ideological unity of the Soviet-dominated international Communist movement and tends to stimulate the Soviet-dominated Eastern European governments to seek greater freedom of action from Moscow in shaping their own institutions and policies.” To this passage one would have to repeat, in the first instance, the comment made concerning (1) above: namely, that Yugoslavia’s independent role is today not primarily a product of our aid. We do indeed benefit from this independent role in the sense that it stands as a living proof of the possibility of a socialist country’s pursuing aims identical with those of Moscow, yet from a platform outside the scope of Moscow’s disciplinary authority. It is good to have this possibility documented currently. This constitutes a constant source of doubt and uneasiness within the communist camp. This benefit, however, is one which flows automatically from the fact of Yugoslavia’s independence. It represents an effect which the Yugoslavs cannot help producing, so long as they persist in defying Moscow’s authority. In so far as their independence gives them discretion in determining the effects of their actions on the bloc, it is plain that they make every conceivable effort to avoid causing trouble to Moscow. They seem concerned, in fact, to demonstrate at every point that there is therefore no reason for Moscow to take umbrage or to try to reassert its previous authority over Yugoslavia. It is to this end, I think, that Tito takes such great care never to criticize the Russians publicly but to identify himself, wherever possible, with their positions on world affairs. In this sense, it may be said that we are deriving not maximum benefit from Yugoslavia’s role as an independent state but minimum benefit. It is the considered desire of Yugoslav leaders that this should be so. So far, then, as concerns the purposes of our policy, I feel that these purposes are being served only in limited degree by the approaches and devices we have heretofore employed. The reason for this is simply that times have changed and conditions have changed; responses which were effective and justified in an earlier period have lost much of their effectiveness and justification today; Yugoslav capabilities and necessities have changed; and, as is so often the case in life, stimuli which produced a certain effect when novel and unaccustomed, no longer produce this effect when they have become routine and expected. In addition to this failure to serve positive aspirations, there are certain ways in which our present practices have directly deleterious effects. The regularity and inelasticity of our aid programs—the extent to which they have become matters of habit and routine rather than responses to conditions of the moment—and the unwillingness on our part to recognize any connection between them and the current political attitudes and behavior of the Yugoslav Government—all these things have contributed, in my opinion, to reactions on the part of the Yugoslavs which I find detrimental to the wider purposes of our relations. It is these conditions which cause the Yugoslavs to take our aid so extensively for granted, and to believe that we are incapable, for domestic political reasons, of not giving it. In addition to this, aid given in this manner—with so little relation to the behavior of the recipient government—amounts simply to a blanket underwriting of all the economic and financial policies of this government and indeed even of such of its political policies or actions which (like the recent Belgrade Conference) cost a good deal of money and represent luxuries for a country of these resources. To some extent, in both the external and the internal fields, the policies which we underwrite are ones directly contrary to our own purposes. An example of this is in the agricultural field, where surplus American food, if given too generously, simply relieves the Yugoslav Government of the need of worrying about the productivity of Yugoslav agriculture and enables it to afford the luxury of ideological experiments, aimed against the individual peasant, which are economically counter-productive. Similarly, in the field of external relations, I feel that one of the effects of the extensive aid we have recently given to the Yugoslavs has been to relieve them of the necessity for coming to grips with the problem of their economic relations with Western Europe, and to permit them to indulge in all sorts of activities in Africa which no doubt contribute to Tito’s personal prestige but which are certainly not going to be the answers to Yugoslavia’s long-term problems of international trade and finance. One should also bear in mind, in this connection, the extent to which the Yugoslavs have involved themselves in extending to African countries very much the same sort of credits and technical assistance which they have been getting from us. These favors, let us recall, are being exploited politically not for purposes which contribute in any way to those of our own foreign policy but rather to ones which are almost identical with the Soviet Union. It seems to me that we are taking a heavy responsibility, in the face of American opinion, by investing American resources in such a manner as to underwrite uncritically any and all policies, internal and external, which the Yugoslav Government wishes to pursue. In recent years, as you know, Yugoslavia has been the leading per capita recipient of United States surplus food. In addition to this, she stood, as I understand it, third last year on the list of recipients of United States aid generally, being exceeded only by South Korea and India. Now there is room, in my opinion, for a moderate and highly discriminate measure of American economic assistance to this country; and you will note that my recommendations have allowed for this fact. But I think it unrealistic to suppose that U.S. public opinion will long be willing to adjust itself to a situation in which a country whose policies on the international scene operate almost 95 per cent to the favor of the Soviet Union figures among the leading recipients of U.S. aid. These things are of course a matter of degree; but when was degree not important? It is true that we should not demand of the recipients of our aid that they agree with us on all international questions. But we may demand of them a reasonable degree of objectivity at least in the treatment of our differences with the Soviet Union; and we may demand from them the evidence that they feel some concern for the preservation of our power and influence as a factor in world affairs. These things we do not receive from the Yugoslavs. In my opinion, it is dangerous to suppose that our economic collaboration with Yugoslavia can continue for very long, in its previous dimensions, without arousing violent and possibly unmanageable adverse reactions in the United States. To try to continue them in this way is therefore to assume the risk that when the scales are finally tipped, they will be tipped too violently, and even that modest measure of economic collaboration between the two countries which is warranted by circumstances will be jeopardized. The best way to assure an even and fruitful development in our relations with this country is to take account betimes of the basic unfriendliness and lack of objectivity in its treatment of ourselves and our world interests, and to scale our favors down to a level which can be more easily defended in the face of domestic opinion. The fact that the Department has thus far been successful in resisting attacks on our aid programs for Yugoslavia is not a guarantee that this will always be so; nor is it in itself an argument why these programs should be maintained without change. One last point. On September 15 I was sent down to the Yugoslav Foreign Office to deliver a very stiff aide-memoire. I stated on that occasion that the U.S. Government was compelled to take a serious view of recent Yugoslav actions and it would necessarily have to give continuing study to their implications for U.S.-Yugoslav relations. Such a statement would obviously never have been made to the Yugoslavs if we had not intended to follow it up with some action, and it ever occurred to me that this would not be the case. Had I supposed that this was merely a matter of words and that we proposed to do nothing further to make our displeasure felt to the Yugoslavs, I should have remonstrated most vigorously against making any such representations; for their only effect could then be to demonstrate to the Yugoslavs the emptiness of our statements and to confirm them in the view that they have nothing to lose by opposing us on the world arena. This is why I was startled to see it stated in your letter that the Department is “strongly inclined to the view” that no revision of existing U.S. policy “in its basic premises and concepts” is now required. I can only take this to mean that the Department disapproves of any modification of any sort in the aid program which we have been carrying out in recent years, and which are now rapidly coming to assume a routine and institutional character. I am sure you will understand that if this is to be the response to the recommendations that have gone forward from this Mission (recommendations of whose general tenor the Yugoslavs are, I am sure, aware) the weight of any words I may personally have occasion to address to them in future on questions of world affairs will be precisely nil. My own views as to the line we should take toward the Yugoslavs today are set forth in my various telegrams on aid and in my proposals for the reply to Todorovic. I think we must recognize that our aid programs have come to be taken so extensively for granted by the Yugoslavs that their psychological and political effect is minimal. We must recognize that it is not realistic to hope that a country whose government is deeply committed to the support of Soviet foreign policy can long continue to be a leading recipient of American aid without this provoking strong negative reactions in American opinion. I think that by failing to modify these programs at present we will be increasing the risk that some day our economic collaboration with this country will be entirely and abruptly destroyed by violent reactions in American public opinion. I feel, finally, that we will be making an egregious tactical error, and will lose such slender possibilities as we still have for influence over this Government if, having now talked widely and strongly, we fail to give any substance to our words in the form of action. For these reasons, I hope the Department will give renewed and serious consideration to the recommendations that have been made from this Mission, and will let us have an early indication of our Government’s attitude on the matters in question. Sincerely yours, George F. KennanPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 107. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/11–661. Secret; Priority. Belgrade, November 6, 1961, 1 p.m. 708. Eyes only for Under Secretary Bowles. In view forthcoming NSC review policy towards Yugoslavia, must request your personal attention to following. I have, as you know, made various recommendations over recent weeks concerning general policy and aid to Yugoslavia: particularly despatch 41, July 20; series three messages following Belgrade conference (485, 493, 507); and telegram 614 reporting Todorovic’s approach and suggesting nature our reply.Telegram 493 is printed as Document 97. Regarding telegrams 485 and 507, see footnotes 1 and 4 thereto. Regarding despatch 41, see footnote 2 thereto. Telegram 614 is printed as Document 104. President’s personal message (434)Document 101. of October 11 gave me impression approach embodied in these messages had met with his approval. Am now troubled by two circumstances, to wit: 1. Letter from Kohler, dated October 12,Document 102. indicated basic disagreement with me on analysis Yugoslav situation and general policy, but did not specifically mention my recommendations concerning aid. 2. I now understand on basis indirect and informal information from AID that Department, without notifying me or communications in any way, has approached AID with proposals concerning future aid programs for Yugoslavia which take no visible account of my recommendations and are in most respects in conflict with them. Assume it is intended results this consultation between Department and AID will be laid before NSC as agreed paper. Am thus constrained to fear that unless something is done my own views will not come to attention NSC at all in context forthcoming review. Do not mind being disagreed with but do dislike being silently by-passed. No one in Department has at any time commented on my recommendations re AID or suggested to me they were unacceptable. Feel I should be given opportunity for consultation and rebuttal, before Department commits itself to contrary views. Importance of AID concept within framework general policy is such that out of hand rejection, without consultation, would, if based on President’s authority, seem to raise serious question of confidence. Besides, in view present temper public opinion should think it obviously disadvantageous that Congress be faced with AID decisions for which Ambassador on spot could not share responsibility. Hope therefore you can see to it if contrary views are to be presented to NSC, my opinions are also made known to that body and that President, in particular, is made aware existence and nature of differences. For your convenience, differences as I understand them on basis this indirect information are these: A. I have recommended DLF assistance be continued unchanged; EUR proposes to cut it. B. I have recommended no new technical assistance contracts along previous lines be concluded: EUR proposes to continue this program for at least several more years. C. I have concluded programs of private agencies (CARE, Church World Service, etc.) no longer called for by circumstances and have, with concurrence local representatives here, recommended they be gradually tapered off over two or three years and terminated; EUR challenges this judgment and proposes continue them unchanged. D. Have no idea what Department proposes to do about PL 480 aid, in coming period, but if this differs sharply from my recommendations, would very much like to know this and to know reasons therefor before Department finally commits itself in NSC.In telegram 535, November 7, Bowles replied that “whatever emotional reactions may have existed here a few weeks ago in regard to Yugoslavia have largely been brought back into fair balance.” (Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/11–761) Kennan 108. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/11–1461. Confidential; Priority. Belgrade, November 14, 1961, 7 p.m. 757. Wish to draw attention to implication of statements on US-Yugoslav relations in Tito’s Skoplje speech.The Embassy transmitted a summary of Tito’s speech in telegram 752 from Belgrade, November 14, and made a preliminary analysis of the speech in telegram 755 from Belgrade, November 14. (Both ibid., 768.11/11–1461) In his speech, Tito charged that the United States was using food as a weapon to try to force Yugoslavia to follow its policy line. He rejected aid on such terms and insisted that Yugoslavia would go it alone. To facilitate consideration, full text these passages submitted in next following message.Telegram 758 from Belgrade, November 14. (Ibid.) Department will wish to make its own study this language, but it seems to me from careful study Serbian text that for Yugoslav reader or listener following inferences were inescapable: (A) US has recently been refusing to sell wheat to Yugoslavia on normal commercial terms or any other. (B) US has recently declined to sell planes to Yugoslavia, though we had previously done so. (C) US is refusing to accept Yugoslav visitors in US. (D) All these positions have been taken by us with view to bringing pressure to bear on Yugoslavia. (E) Yugoslavia has in recent years not received from us any grant aid, nor is it asking for any. (This last is flatly stated and goes beyond limits of inference.) I have no information as to what action our Government is considering taking on 1962 Aid Programs, but understand decisions of some sort may be expected in near future. Wish to point out that if above inferences are allowed to stand uncorrected, any decisions we may make known along these lines can only lead to further misunderstandings among Yugoslav public. If, for example, in face of these statements, we now go ahead and simply express readiness to conclude contract for further surplus wheat, we create erroneous impression that, shamed by Tito’s logic and sobered by threatening reference to bitterness of Yugoslav people, we have yielded to pressure and agreed to do what were unwilling to do before he spoke. Same applies to DLF. If, similarly, we offer to renew contracts for grant aid, it will look as though we are proffering a type of aid Yugoslavs have not recently been receiving, do not want, and did not ask for. In these circumstances, to ignore Tito’s statements and to act on aid requests as though nothing had been said would be to compound a confusion not our own making. It would also bring discouragement to those people within the regime who have been trying to warn against Tito’s anti-Western course. For these reasons, I feel we must react in some way. Several courses are open to us. It is difficult for me to recommend any course in absence information our intentions with respect to 1962 Aid Programs. Before we do anything at all, we should make up our minds about PL 480 Aid. Assuming that we are inclined, other things being equal, to make further contract for delivery PL 480 wheat, would suggest course of action along following lines: 1. Make private communication to GOY, complaining of Tito’s innuendoes, asking for their clarification by Yugoslavs, and stating that we ourselves will be obliged in any case to put facts before public. At same time we state to Yugoslavs our readiness, notwithstanding Tito’s misleading statements, to conclude further contract PL 480 wheat in near future. 2. We make public statement announcing our readiness, in view recent drought and resulting difficulties, to conclude new PL 480 wheat agreement, reminding public we have always been ready, in addition, to sell Yugoslavia any amount of wheat she required on normal commercial terms and that GOY has never been left under any doubt about this. At same time, and with specific reference to Tito’s statements, we publish full factual data on recent sale of planes to Yugoslavia, on reception Yugoslav officials in US, and on form and amounts of grant aid extended in recent years. In same statement we make it plain that at no time have any threats been made to Yugoslavs or has pressure been brought to bear on them in connection with any of these matters. 3. We use every means at our disposal to bring these statements to attention Yugoslav public, using VOA and USIS media to limit. (Something of this sort should in fact be done even though decisions on aid should be further delayed.) 4. Until this last has been thoroughly done, we refrain from making any statement to Yugoslavs or public concerning any other positive decisions we may have taken about 1962 Aid Programs. In explanation of above, would say I think we would be inviting further misunderstanding in public mind if we were at this time to refuse to supply further surplus wheat or to delay much longer in making known our readiness to supply it. In the particular case of grant aid, fail to see how we can consider further extension such aid until Tito in some way corrects his flat statement that no one-sided aid has been received from us by Yugoslavs in recent years. Kennan 109. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Battle) to Secretary of State RuskSource: Department of State, S–S/NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Misc. Secret. Washington, November 15, 1961. YUGOSLAV PAPER FOR NSC Attached as Annex AAnnexes A–D are not printed. Annex E is telegram 757, Document 108. is Mr. Hamilton’s memorandum of November 7 to you recommending that the U.S. should stop all aid to Yugoslavia except P.L. 480. At Annex D is EUR–Mr. Tyler’s memorandum of November 14 setting forth the political implications of such termination of aid to Yugoslavia. At Annex B is EUR–Mr. Tyler’s review of U.S. policy and assistance programs to Yugoslavia. Annex B includes EUR’s recommendation that, in addition to P.L. 480 assistance, the U.S. should provide development grant assistance in the amount of $2.8 million for FY 62 and development loans in the magnitude of $15 million or $20 million. At Annex C is a memorandum to Mr. Hamilton from his staff along similar lines except that it recommends development loan funds be limited to $2 million. Annex E is Ambassador Kennan’s most recent expression of views. A summary of the conflicting recommendations follows. Mr. Hamilton believes there is no justification from an economic point of view for development grants or development loans in any magnitude. He argues that the development grant funds (spent primarily to support U.S. technicians in Yugoslavia and the training of Yugoslavs in the U.S.) are of little economic significance and desperately needed in newer and much less developed countries where an amount of $2.8 million would make a highly significant contribution to development. While he believes that there is a political value attached to bringing these Yugoslav personnel to the U.S., he does not consider this of sufficient importance relative to the usefulness of this money in other areas. He notes that less than one hundred U.S. technicians were sent to Yugoslavia last year under this program and that only three hundred Yugoslavs came here. He observes that Ambassador Kennan recommends that no new technical assistance contracts of this kind be entered into this year. With regard to development loan funds, Mr. Hamilton reasons that other sources of credit are available, that the small amount which the U.S. might make available would not be decisive, and that the need for these funds is incomparably greater in other countries. EUR believes that over the next few years our assistance activities should be phased out and our development lending be replaced by private commercial credits. It recommends, however, that we avoid actions which it feels might be interpreted as abrupt or vindictive. Mr. Hamilton and EUR agree in the wisdom of continuing P.L. 480 assistance. The NSC Record of Actions also requested that the Department’s recommendations “should rest on a review and restatement of U.S. policy toward” Yugoslavia.NSC Record of Action No. 2439, Document 46. EUR’s proposed review and restatement is Annex B. EUR’s political analysis of Mr. Hamilton’s recommendations (Annex D) reasons that termination of all U.S. aid to Yugoslavia at this time (other than P.L. 480) would lead the Yugoslav regime to react strongly to the implied pressures of the U.S. action and would seriously prejudice our relations with that country. It also states that such action would be regarded as a basic change in U.S. policy towards Yugoslavia and might influence other Western countries and private trading interests to take similar action.According to a November 16 memorandum by Battle, attached to the source text, Secretary Rusk requested further study of actions on Yugoslavia. L. D. BattlePrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. G.R. Olsen signed for Battle. 110. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of State RuskSource: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Misc. Secret. Attached notes indicate that the memorandum was drafted on November 15 and delivered to the Department of State on November 17. Washington, November 16, 1961. I saw Tito’s statement about food in this morning’s paper.See footnote 1, Document 108. This statement makes it more difficult now. About three weeks ago the Committee was asked to report on this. The Committee should have completed its report some time ago. Could you let me know immediately about this? John Kennedy 111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in YugoslaviaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/11–1461. Confidential. Drafted by Vedeler; cleared by Tyler in draft, B, S/S, USIA and AID; and approved by Davis. Washington, November 18, 1961, 5:58 p.m. 565. We appreciate your suggestions for action Embtel 757Document 108. and agree we should take no steps vis-à-vis Yugoslavs, at least publicly and officially, until decision reached on PL 480. We now have under consideration possibility of coming to decision on this separate item before review of general policy and other assistance programs completed. Re your point 1 we think it desirable at time when any PL 480 discussions begin with Yugoslavs to bring up subject Tito’s November 13 speech seeking clarification obscure references about economic relations with US and making point such statements subject to uncertain construction not helpful to interests either party in solution mutual problems and in continued development relations between the two countries. Meanwhile we will suggest informally to Yugoslavs here along line of Kohler in conversation with Nikezic October 19 (Deptel 468),Document 105. and hope you proceed in similar way, desirability avoiding public statements that are misleading or prejudicial US-Yugoslav relations particularly while we are trying to work out solutions to problems in our economic relations. Re point 2 we believe public statement of type you suggest should be deferred until PL 480 agreement concluded if decision taken for such agreement. We have already released to press full information on sale of aircraft and given material on grant aid to number of correspondents who have made inquiries. Secretary’s press statement October 18 already makes point US not using aid to purchase agreement from Yugoslavs with our views. Re point 3 we have carried facts of US assistance programs and US official statements re Yugoslavia over media to Yugoslavia and plan to continue do so as our future actions warrant.In telegram 782 from Belgrade, November 20, Kennan replied: “Continuing delay over PL 480 is helping to spread general impression, not only here but apparently in other ‘non-aligned’ countries, that we have definitely refused consider further surplus food contracts unless Yugos publicly recant some of views expressed at Belgrade conference. This is of course exactly impression Tito wishes to establish, and it tends to become stronger with every day uncertainty continues. To extent it prevails, eventual affirmative action on our part will appear as evidence belated recognition Tito cannot be budged in his views and triumph for him in his determination not to have his policies dictated by us under economic pressure.” (Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/11–2061) Rusk 112. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Yugoslavia. Secret. A notation on the source text indicates it was taken from the President’s weekend reading book. Washington, November 21, 1961. SUBJECT Proposed PL 480 Sales to Yugoslavia Background At the NSC meeting on October 13 you requested that I review all assistance programs to Yugoslavia and make recommendations to the Council on these programs on the basis of a review and restatement of United States policy toward that country. In your memorandum of November 16, you asked to be informed about the status of this study.See Documents 103 and 110. Discussion Status of Review of Yugoslav Policy We have virtually completed within the Department the reexamination of United States policy towards Yugoslavia. In essence, our review reflects that the United States policy, maintained since 1949, of assisting Yugoslavia to build a firm base of national independence and of exerting our influence upon the evolution of the Yugoslav system has shown striking successes. Yugoslavia today maintains its national sovereignty and is wholly independent of Soviet control. Economically and culturally it is tied to the West. Internally, the Yugoslav system remains essentially Communist; but in the years since its break with the Soviet bloc, the system has evolved in the direction of decentralization and liberalization, so that today Yugoslavia bears little resemblance to the model Soviet satellite it was 13 years ago. Internationally, Yugoslavia is more likely to support Soviet positions on international issues, but it does not invariably do so. Its over-all position is more akin to leftist non-aligned countries, such as Indonesia, rather than to Soviet bloc states. Yugoslavia’s principal significance remains that of an independent Communist regime which successfully resisted Soviet imperialism. The dramatic economic growth achieved by this regime, along with the evolution of its system, has fortified its role as a disruptive element in the international Communist movement and as a source of encouragement to nationalist anti-Soviet tendencies in the bloc. Our reexamination concludes that it is important for the United States to continue to pursue basic United States objectives towards Yugoslavia, including the continued development of our economic relations so as to continue to derive benefits from Yugoslavia’s unique position. Our efforts to develop recommendations on specific programs have, however, been complicated by factors which transcend Yugoslavia. Given the world-wide demands on our limited aid resources, we have not yet agreed whether Yugoslavia should be eligible for development-type assistance and if so the amount which should be programmed for Yugoslavia. We are concerned about the impact on our relations with Yugoslavia, as well as on Yugoslavia’s relations with the West, of any abrupt termination of assistance programs. We are planning on consultations with some of our principal allies in this connection. The one program which presents no problems from the viewpoint of available resources concerns sale of agricultural commodities under PL 480. The Department and Ambassador Kennan strongly believe that we should proceed at this time with agricultural sales under PL 480, irrespective of the decisions taken regarding development-type assist-ance. Moreover, from the viewpoint of timing, it is the question of a PL 480 program that requires immediate consideration. I urge, therefore, that a decision be reached on this matter at once, in advance of the over-all review of policy towards Yugoslavia by the NSC. The Role of PL 480 United States Policy Towards Yugoslavia On August 4, the Yugoslav Government requested a further Title I program made up of the following commodities: Metric Tons Millions of Dollars Wheat 1,000,000 $ 63.6 Cotton 35,000 18.9 Tallow 6,000 1.1 Edible Oil 30,000 9.2 Ocean Transportation 9.5 Total $ 102.4 The large amount of wheat requested in the program results from the poor harvest, complicated by a late summer drought which, for psychological reasons, is affecting the deliveries by peasants. Ambassador Kennan has recommended a program which, he estimated, would carry the Yugoslavs through to June 30, 1962 without any increase in reserves. Specifically he has recommended a maximum of 500,000 tons of wheat, 5,000 tons of cotton and no tallow or edible oil. The Ambassador has also recommended that the Yugoslavs be informed that we can give no assurance that a PL 480 program will be available for them next year and they may therefore wish to take account of this possibility. The provision of agricultural commodities has represented a major ingredient of our assistance programs to Yugoslavia, over the past eleven years, comprising $1 billion out of the total of $1.3 billion in economic assistance provided to Yugoslavia between 1949 and 1961. By helping to assure the regime of its essential requirements for foodstuffs, we have contributed rather directly to the change in Yugoslav agricultural policy from one of forced collectivization and coercion to a more reasonable policy of voluntary cooperation and incentives. Failure to proceed with a PL 480 agreement at this time will not of itself induce the Yugoslav leadership to return to the old agricultural policies; they might, however, be led to introduce harsher regulations in order to obtain necessary supplies from the peasantry. A more predictable and, from our viewpoint, disturbing effect, is the likelihood that the strain on the Yugoslav balance of payments would lead to a postponement of certain of the trade liberalization measures planned earlier this year in connection with a foreign trade and foreign exchange reform. Since we have provided $100 million in support of this reform, as part of a $285 million multilateral program, such a development would not be in the best interests of the United States. It is our conclusion, therefore, that the United States should provide further PL 480 assistance, although in a somewhat different form from previously. We would recommend the provision under Title I (sales for Yugoslav currency) of up to 500,000 tons of wheat and 30,000 tons of edible oils. Such a program is estimated at about $45 million. This should enable the Yugoslavs to meet their requirements through June 30, 1962 with stocks on hand at that date equivalent to one month’s consumption for wheat and two months’ consumption for oils. In view of the tighter cotton supply situation in the United States and its consequent ineligibility under Title I we would propose to finance up to 50,000 bales of Yugoslavia’s cotton requirements under Title IV (sales on long-term dollar credit basis). We would similarly offer to supply the 6,000 tons of tallow requested under Title IV. If cotton should become unavailable under Title IV we would propose sale of cotton under normal Commodity Credit Corporation credit terms. Ambassador Kennan has also recommended that we inform the Yugoslavs we can give no assurance in regard to PL 480 assistance after this year. In our view it would be advisable to avoid this step since the situation in Yugoslavia may develop so as to make such assistance desirable. Instead we believe it would be more in keeping with our policy interests in Yugoslavia to inform the Yugoslavs of our intention in future years of shifting increasingly away from Title I transactions (sales for local currency) in favor of those under Title IV (sales on a dollar loan basis). Tito’s November 13 Speech In speech at Skoplje on November 13, Tito stated that “certain capitalist circles” in the United States and “other reactionary minded people are persistently spreading propaganda against Yugoslavia, saying that every form of aid to Yugoslavia should stop, that the Yugoslavs should not be fed, that wheat should not be sold in our country, that no aircraft should be given to us, that our people should not be admitted there, and so forth.” He charged that economic pressure has thus been brought upon Yugoslavia when it has been severely hit by drought and when it is in an unpleasant situation. Tito went on to say that if no aid were given to Yugoslavia he would be prepared to buy wheat. I agree as you have noted in your memorandum of November 16 that Tito’s speech complicates matters. I do not believe, however, that our actions should be based solely on what Tito says. His speech was directed primarily to his own people and was probably intended to dispel anxieties arising from the bad drought and reports of a change in United States policy. Tito was also reflecting sensitivity to the attacks on his regime which have appeared in the United States press. These attacks have engaged his prestige. Further delay in concluding agricultural sales arrangements will undoubtedly aggravate this situation by supporting the view that these attacks represent United States policy. Tito may thus be led to take some action which could engage our prestige in a way to make it increasingly difficult if impossible for us to pursue policies which have proven to be in our national interest. Despite Tito’s recent statements on economic relations with the United States which tend to be obscure on some points, I believe we should proceed as soon as possible to inform the Yugoslavs of our readiness to provide wheat and other available agricultural commodities. Otherwise unnecessary damage may be done to United States-Yugoslav relations and to the position we have built up in Yugoslavia. RecommendationA handwritten notation in the margin of the source text reads: “approved by JFK.” I recommend that Ambassador Kennan be authorized to inform the Yugoslavs as soon as possible of our readiness to conclude an agricultural sales agreement and to initiate negotiations in the nearest future. Negotiating instructions should be prepared in consultation with the Department of Agriculture with a view to arranging sales of agricultural commodities as indicated above. Dean Rusk 113. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Kohler) to the Ambassador to Yugoslavia (Kennan)Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Yugoslavia. Secret; Official–Informal. A copy was sent to Bundy. Washington, December 4, 1961. Dear George: We have been giving much thought to our exchange of correspondence—my letter of October 12 and yours of October 27Document 102 and the attachment to 106.—which go into the basis and rationale of our policy toward Yugoslavia and the assistance programs associated with that policy. There is a great deal in common in our views particularly where both of us come out as regards recommendations for various types of economic assist-ance. In this regard there is more agreement between you and EUR than between either of us and the Director of AID. Yet certain differences exist in each of our approaches. Some of these differences are due perhaps to semantic difficulties in finding the same meaning in a given description or in our failure to develop sufficiently certain concepts in my last letter. In this letter I shall try to reach more common ground by developed explanation and, hopefully, reduce those differences that appear at first sight to exist. We took the position that our basic policy toward Yugoslavia is a good one, a successful policy over the years, and that it should not be abandoned or changed in a fundamental way. This did not mean that it must always remain identical in scope or details, in implementation, and in courses of action from year to year. Our EUR concept would permit adjustments as circumstances require—adjustments to take account of developments in Yugoslavia or to express our reaction, when necessary in our own interest, to moves of the Yugoslav Government. But this, as we see it, is not a change in our basic policy as presented in my October 12 letter and in our EUR policy review (copy of which I enclosed in my last letter). In fact since 1949 we have had our ups and downs in relations with the Yugoslavs and we have made those tactical adjustments as required. It is also true that our assistance activities have varied considerably from time to time to take account of new developments and we do not believe that the Yugoslavs have a basis for taking for granted the continuation of certain types and amounts of assistance. The continuation of our basic policy does not by any means require the continuation of economic programs without change. We believe, therefore, and I think there is agreement in the Department at least outside AID that the basic aspects of our policy (in premises and purposes) should continue. As to Yugoslavia’s independent position we have never questioned that it is determined today to remain separate from the bloc and we see no prospect unless a great change occurs in the international situation of its going back to Moscow on the old terms of subordination. It is difficult to believe however that Yugoslavia will not need some assistance to take care of contingencies such as the present food stringency created by the severe crop conditions or to adjust its institutions to the requirements of a market economy as in the extensive credits by the West in support of Yugoslavia’s reform of its foreign trade and exchange rate systems. The consolidation of its independence and economic development in our view necessitates at this juncture still some support from the West. The Department has never thought that Yugoslavia should become economically dependent on the US with the expectation of receiving the same forms and amounts of assistance indefinitely. We find it hard to believe that the Yugoslavs have this expectation or desire this although we gather from our experience here that they are not unhappy to receive aid from the US in the form of credits and PL 480 sales. In fact they seem anxious to get it when they need it and give evidence of appreciating such forms of assistance. They have undoubtedly not wanted certain kinds of assistance at various times—for example military grant aid in 1957 and technical assistance in the beginning. We feel sure too that they would like to be in the fortunate position, just as would any nonaligned state, where they would need no assistance at all from other countries. In our judgment their attitude toward receiving assistance from the Soviet bloc in 1956 was about the same. They show, whatever they may say in public speeches, that they know very well we extend assistance to their country for political purposes of our own national interest rather than for some reasons of internal necessity. In any event our purpose is not to continue various assistance programs for an indefinite period but to move gradually as soon as circumstances permit toward a basically commercial relationship. We would do so in a manner to perpetuate worthwhile activities on a self-sustaining basis and to keep doors open to essential modes of access to the Yugoslavs. You have yourself recommended against abrupt termination of assistance and with this we agree. The sudden withdrawal or drastic reduction of aid by the US would not be limited to the effects of our government action. Other Western countries would probably be guided to a great extent by our example and the actions of governments would influence private bankers and traders. The total result might well do considerable damage to the Yugoslav economic position. If the West generally was to take a negative attitude toward Yugoslavia, the repercussions might drive Yugoslavia back toward some kind of close connection with the bloc particularly if the policies of the bloc should become less conservative with Soviet acceptance of increasing national autonomy in the bloc and if the bloc held out the promise of economic aid. The bloc did the latter in 1956 and so this does not appear to be a farfetched possibility. In these circumstances Yugoslavia might conceivably become a member of a kind of a Communist Commonwealth. It is any chance of such an eventuality involving Yugoslavia’s virtual return to the bloc which we seek to avoid. In regard to the present direction of Yugoslavia’s institutional developments, we believe the evolution of the internal system and Yugoslavia’s network of relations with the West, which are becoming institutionalized, are moving Yugoslavia constantly toward a closer and broader association with the West. These developments serve to consolidate Yugoslavia’s independent status and make it irreversible. We think we should assist these tendencies and certainly not take actions that might check, impede or decelerate them for an indefinite period. As we have considered this problem over and over, we end by finding no alternative basic policy that will bring such advantages to the US from the standpoint of our long range interests. We still think this to be the case taking into account the present international situation, the stage of Yugoslavia’s development and the policies of the Tito government. Concerning the last, we find no fundamental change in the recent attitude of the Yugoslav Government on international issues. Tito’s speech at the Belgrade Conference struck us as setting forth essentially his traditional line except for two important points: (1) his condoning of Soviet resumption of nuclear testing and (2) the assertion that some powers were making a fetish of controls as a pretext for avoiding disarmament. On these points the speech was particularly objectionable to the US and chiefly for this reason the Department suggested that you make vigorous representations at Belgrade. In our view the US in addition should have shown displeasure by some delay and some reduction in extending assistance. This was one of the principal reasons for our pressing for a reduction in developmental lending from $25–30 million as contained in the Congressional presentation to $15–20 million as submitted in the EUR recommendation to the Secretary. We would also have deferred the PL 480 discussions long enough, although probably not so long as has actually been the case, to support and reenforce the representations you made. We fully appreciate your view as set forth in your despatch of July 20Reference is to despatch 41; see footnote 2, Document 97. that there should have been adjustments in economic assistance to Yugoslavia in any event. We go along with the view that assistance should be adjusted from year to year as the circumstances indicate. Our difference with you on this is on the amount and types of assistance when reductions are made. We come now to a point where EUR sees things differently from your view. You say “There can be no question but that Yugoslav policy, like that of Moscow, is aimed generally at the frustration of US efforts in the cold war and the elimination of our country as a major factor in world affairs.” and again: “ … and we may demand from them the evidence that they feel some concern for the preservation of our power and influence as a factor in world affairs.”Ellipsis in the source text. If Yugoslav policy were like that of Moscow in seeking the elimination of the power and influence of the US as a factor in world affairs we would find no reason to extend any assistance whatsoever to Yugoslavia any more than to the Soviet Union itself or to a complete satellite like Bulgaria. It seems to us that an appraisal of Yugoslav policy in this way leads to the inescapable conclusion that the US should treat Yugoslavia only as a full satellite member of the bloc and follow the same general policy toward Yugoslavia as toward the Soviet Union. In our dealings with Yugoslavs here we have not found this to be their attitude nor can we read Tito’s speeches to imply the desire to eliminate the US as a power factor. This would not be in the interest of the Yugoslavs since it would leave the Soviet Union the supreme power in the world and in a position then to proceed with its apparent long standing objective in dealing with the heretic regime at Belgrade. It is our impression that the Yugoslavs realize clearly that their position of independence in the world depends in the last analysis on the essential balance of power between the US and the Soviet Union. Tito and other high Yugoslav leaders doubtless desire to see socialism triumph as a system but we gain the impression that many of the lower echelons and younger Yugoslavs do not have the same interest in this development. To be sure, on international issues the Yugoslav Government takes, and will doubtless continue to take, a position different from ours in most instances. In fact this attitude including Tito’s recent expressions of anti-Westernism is not in any sense new. This is partly because they are communist and partly because they are neutralist. The score can be counted in the UN and there they usually line up with India, Indonesia and the UAR. Sometimes in fact India causes us more trouble. We fully appreciate of course the unalterable Marxism of Tito and his desire to see socialism spread everywhere together with his conviction that it will. Regarding the question of our influence on Yugoslavia’s development a powerful force is certainly at work in Yugoslavia’s evolving situation making for pragmatic departures from the Soviet model. At the same time we are convinced that our exchanges and contacts with the Yugoslavs, many of which have depended on our economic assistance, have had an important formative effect on the evolution of the Yugoslav system since 1949. The Yugoslavs, we agree, do not shape their institutions or plans in order to get our economic assistance. In receiving our assistance however they have made numerous visits to institutions, organizations and plants in the US and bought many of our products. They have developed continuing contacts with individuals, firms and institutions. They have had a chance to be exposed to this vast country and its great economic system. They have been influenced, whatever their interests or wishes. We have seen this time and again in talking with them here. This is especially true as regards the middle and lower echelons who will step into influential positions in the future—ones who desire to make changes and move ahead. Technical assistance, which is mostly an exchange program, has perhaps most of all provided a channel for this kind of influence to make itself felt. Then too with the assistance from us and other Western countries the Yugoslavs can take steps to change their system in a Western sense which they could not otherwise do so soon or at all. In agriculture it seems clear to us that our assistance has actually relieved the lot of the peasantry (as well as of the population as a whole); otherwise in the effort to achieve large unit efficiency of operation the regime might well have applied pressure for collectivization by administrative means. We are frankly at a loss to understand to what you refer in saying that our PL 480 transactions allow Yugoslavia to indulge in ideological experiments in agriculture or to cease efforts to increase agricultural productivity. We had thought that the Yugoslavs had made considerable progress for a communist country in increasing agricultural production through the introduction of new seeds, the use of machines and fertilizers, and the utilization of peasant incentive. The Yugoslavs still have a way to go in achieving a rational price system and, of course, they still have not licked the problem of weather. We are puzzled by the comment that one of the results of our extensive aid has been to relieve the Yugoslavs of the necessity for coming to grips with the problem of their economic relations with Western Europe. We had rather understood that they had built up extensive and healthy economic relations with Western Europe, a development which the US has welcomed and encouraged over the years as a means of associating them more closely with the West. We had believed that our assistance had contributed to this favorable growth. The trade between Yugoslavia on the one side and Western Germany and Italy on the other, for example, has expanded greatly and we hope it will continue to flourish. We realize that the Yugoslavs have constant balance of payment problems, yet these seem due to their extensive investment, procurement of capital equipment abroad and rapid economic growth rather than to essential weakness of the national economy. They naturally push for the sake of these interests their balance of payments margins to the limit and they could reduce the scope of their problem if they were to limit the rate of their capital expansion. The Yugoslav activities in the underdeveloped countries are also a matter of interest and concern to us. While granting there is a political purpose in these activities, we do not overlook the economic motive as well. The rapidly growing Yugoslav industrial output demands markets and they are not in a position to compete so well in Western markets as Western industries since they have broken away only in part from the noncompetitive features of the typical communist system. Their capital and technical products however are desired in the markets of the underdeveloped countries but can be purchased in any quantity only on the basis of long term credit. Hence we would see in the extension of such credits for the sale of capital goods to underdeveloped countries partly a desire of the Yugoslavs to find markets for their products. Although we would certainly not wish to promote Yugoslavia’s role in this area, if any communist country has to trade with these underdeveloped countries it seems better for Yugoslavia to do it than for one of the bloc countries. We have seen in a number of instances Yugoslav competition with bloc countries in Africa and the Middle East. Moreover, there is good evidence that one of the things the Yugoslavs do in the underdeveloped countries is to point out the danger of becoming economically dependent upon the Soviets and the Chinese Communists. As I come to the end of an already long letter I feel that if one or two of the principal points made in your letter are valid, no justification exists for extending any further assistance to Yugoslavia and for the continuance of our basic policy toward Yugoslavia. We cannot feel that this should be our conclusion. We think we have gained important benefits from that basic policy and continue to do so. We do not get all we would like out of Yugoslavia’s situation. It is a communist state but not like the bloc states; it has evolved a long way from being the model satellite it was in 1948. The doctrinal cleavage between even Tito and Moscow over separate roads to socialism and a system involving more humanistic, individualistic and pragmatic concepts is deep. And Tito is not Yugoslavia. There are different Yugoslavias; they are changing and I am sure will continue to change. We should do what seems basic to our long range interests to assist this evolution in a Western direction and to win the younger generation in support of this evolution. That perhaps is the essence of our views on our policy toward Yugoslavia. Sincerely, Foy D. KohlerPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 114. Airgram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/12–2261. Confidential. Drafted by Kennan. Belgrade, December 22, 1961. A–200. Subject: Conversation with Edvard Kardelj and Leo Mates. Ref: Embtel 898, December 14, 1961.Telegram 898, December 14, summarized Kennan’s meeting with Kardelj. (Ibid., 668.00/12–1461) On December 13, 1961, Mrs. Kennan and I went to tea with Vice President Edvard Kardelj and his wife, at their invitation. Tea was offered at their own home. The only other people present were Mr. Leo Mates, Assistant Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and Mrs. Mates. After tea with the ladies, the men withdrew and we had a long discussion of Yugoslav foreign policy and Yugoslav-American relations. We remained in conversation, in all, for three hours. While the ladies spoke English, my own conversation with Kardelj was mostly in Russian, occasionally in English. One of the subjects discussed was American aid. Kardelj expressed the hope that within two or three years Yugoslavia would be substantially self-supporting in wheat and would require no further extensive PL 480 aid. Serious mistakes had been made this year in handling the problem of subventions in connection with agricultural production. They had ceased too early to prime the pump. These mistakes were now being corrected. He was fairly confident the results would be effective. However, the effects of this summer’s drought would be even more severe in 1962 than it was in 1961, so too much could not be expected from the 1962 harvest. As for the other forms of aid, Mr. Kardelj attached high value to the DLF loans. With respect to the work of private relief organizations, he showed no particular interest. I doubt that he knew what I was talking about. As to Technical Assistance, he thought that this should not be considered a permanent feature of United States-Yugoslav relations. He felt, however, that there was a particular need at this time for Technical Assistance in the field of agricultural economics. Kardelj did not conceal Yugoslav disappointment with Khru-shchev’s failure to reciprocate the support they had tried to give him in major questions of world affairs. The Yugoslavs had come recently to suspect that he was actually embarrassed by their efforts. He was inclined to regret that Vukmanovic-Tempo had been sent to the WFTU meeting in Moscow. He thought this had been premature. Kardelj had the impression that Khrushchev was still lacking in adequate support in the Soviet Apparat. His real strength lay in his sense of touch with the common people. The Soviet-Chinese conflict, he thought, was too profound ever to be entirely healed. It would inevitably become deeper in the future. I told Kardelj of our unhappiness over the anti-Western and anti-American extremisms of the Yugoslav press. Kardelj did not deny that there had been distortions here. I gathered he proposed to use his influence to improve matters. [The editor of Borba, Dr. Joze Smole, telephoned me a day or so later to say he wished to arrange a dinner for me next week.]Brackets in the source text. The Yugoslavs had plainly been stung by the Secretary’s statement on September 18 that Yugoslavia had had a divisive influence on world communism, and was a source of dissension within the communist bloc. Kardelj pleaded that we should regard Yugoslavia as a country with which our relations were worth cultivating for its own sake, and not as an instrument to be used for tactical purposes. I said that this represented my own growing conviction, as I lived and learned in this country. I hoped the Yugoslavs, too, would learn to see in the United States something more than a bargaining backstop for their relations with Russia. Tito’s speeches were not mentioned. I sensed that the Yugoslavs wished only that these should now be forgotten. In general, the interview was exceptionally cordial. In my opinion, it unquestionably marks a sincere effort to repair fences in our direction. Kennan 115. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/1–562. Secret. Belgrade, January 5, 1962, 6 p.m. 972. Lunched this noon alone with Foreign Minister Koca Popovic and had long and frank discussion problems of Yugoslav-US relations. Highlights as follows: 1. Yugoslav-Soviet relations. Popovic said it was his conviction Yugoslav-US relations were actually much better than they appeared on surface to be; Yugoslav-Soviet relations, on other hand, much worse. Split of 1948 had run deeper than most of us in West realized. Never had chances for complete understanding between Yugoslavia and USSR been poorer than today. As example of Western misreading this situation he cited Sulzberger story of rumored Soviet-Yugoslav deal over Albania and said this reflected fantastic misunderstanding real nature Yugoslav-Albanian relations. He inferred any such thing was far beyond realm of political possibility. On my reminding him of abundant evidence of Yugoslav concern for Soviet opinion and on emotional involvement of leading Yugoslavs with affairs of Socialist world, he said this represented form of pro-Russian romanticism which had both traditional and more recently political roots, which was a passing phenomenon and not in accord basic trends Yugoslav society, by which we should not be misled. As Socialists they had to regard Russian revolution and subsequent emergence of bloc of Socialist countries as something which, whether or not fortuitous in origin, was now permanent fact of international life. They were more concerned than we were with what occurred within this bloc, regarded Soviet Communism as preferable to Chinese and Khrushchev as preferable to other Russian Communists. Within their possibilities, they acted accordingly. With obvious but not specific reference Tito’s recent statements, he pleaded that we not attach long-term significance to things said within context of a specific moment and for achievement of momentary effect. He had recently had bitter arguments with Yugoslav editors over their tendency to make this same mistake. 2. Germany. He agreed readily that Yugoslav press had recently been guilty of much extremism in treatment German problems. German press reaction to Vracaric caseOn November 11, 1961, Yugoslav authorities arrested a West German businessman, L. Vracaric, and charged him with war crimes. Following protests from the West German Government, he was released. had actually contained many positive items [but?] Yugoslav press had failed to mention them. For this, too, he had taken editors to task, pointing out by this tendentious treatment they were encouraging precisely those tendencies they feared in Western Germany. He thought the truth lay somewhere between Yugoslav exaggeration dangers German militarism and our underestimation of it. He spoke so eloquently of folly of Yugoslavia’s attempting to take upon herself task of combatting nationalistic trends in Germany that I suspect he was personally responsible for recent change Yugoslav press line this subject. In this connection he mentioned particularly damage to German tourist traffic in Yugoslavia and other economic exchanges resulting from Yugoslav polemics. 3. Ustashi activities. I confessed my own chagrin over activities Ustashi and other violent elements in US interested in embarrassing Yugoslav-US relations and explained to him difficulties we had in controlling this problem. He said while he would personally place this perhaps 17th on list of US-Yugoslav difficulties there were many others who would place it much higher and I was right to give it importance. Since he mentioned Artukovic, I said I could not conceive that Yugoslavia wanted an Eichmann case of its own at this moment, or that US-Yugoslav relations would be benefited by Artukovic’s forced return to Yugoslavia. To this he readily assented, said we would notice Yugoslavs had refrained from exploiting Eichmann trial in this connection. However, Artukovic would continue for long to rankle in many Yugoslav minds. Some people would never understand how we could harbor such a person if we ourselves wished well to Yugoslavia. He added incidentally there were now evidences of Ustashi infiltration in French OAS as well as other European neo-Fascist activities. 4. Colonialism. On this subject we were farthest from agreement. In response my statement we would prefer to see more use self-determination of principle governing liquidation Colonialism, he said this would lead to impossible fragmentation of Africa and other areas. World had no choice but to create boundaries artificially and encourage formation larger national units. 5. Cold war. He viewing emotional preoccupations of Soviet-American conflict as principal source of difficulty for US-Yugoslav relations, since they lead to grievous oversimplification of extremely complex Yugoslav position. Cold war interfered this way not only in our relations, but also in Yugoslavia’s relations with USSR. Earnestly request this information be tightly held and Popovic’s name protected, since he talked with much frankness and these statements could easily be used to affect adversely his personal and political position. Kennan 116. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/1–1262. Confidential. Drafted by Mudd on January 12 and approved in S on January 18. Washington, January 8, 1962. SUBJECT US-Yugoslav Relations PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Mr. Marko Nikezic, Yugoslav Ambassador Mr. Robert C. Mudd, EE Ambassador Nikezic called on the Secretary by appointment at 3:30 p.m. on January 8. After a brief exchange of amenities the Ambassador began the conversation by thanking the Secretary for the decision to proceed with the negotiations on PL 480 assistance. He said the food made available to Yugoslavia under the agreement just concluded was of great assistance to his country. The Secretary replied that the US was happy to be able to proceed on this matter despite opposition in some quarters to US assistance in any form. After outlining in some detail the basis of Yugoslavia’s foreign policy, Ambassador Nikezic informed the Secretary that he was leaving Washington on January 15 to return to Belgrade for a period of three to four weeks consultation. He said he was certain that on his return he would be asked by Yugoslav authorities about the extent to which the US is prepared to accept Yugoslavia as a non-aligned country which is pursuing an independent foreign policy. He said Belgrade would also be interested in the US attitude towards Yugoslavia’s requests for further economic assistance. The Secretary replied that Yugoslavia’s independence is just as important in the US view now as it has always been in the past. The US does not expect Yugoslavia to side with the West. Yugoslavia’s non-alignment, and for that matter the non-alignment of other countries, is satisfactory to the United States. From time to time as US-Yugoslav relations develop one is likely to touch on an exposed nerve of the other. That there are differences between the US and Yugoslavia is a political fact of life. We have, for example, different views on Berlin, and Cuba, which the Yugoslavs regard in a different light, is of special concern to the US. These differences, however, do not place any insurmountable obstacles in the way of the development of positive and friendly relations. The underlying fact of importance is that Yugoslavia is working out its own national future as it sees fit. As far as economic assistance is concerned, the Secretary said that the organization of the new agency AID and the necessity to take into account new legislation had slowed down consideration of Yugo-slavia’s requests. We are currently engaged in a review of all of our continuing economic programs, including those of several allied countries, such as Norway, Denmark, Greece, and Turkey. We want to make our future programs more efficient by profiting from the experience of the last fifteen years. As the Ambassador is undoubtedly aware, many new demands are being made on US assistance resources, particularly from the under-developed areas. We hope to have a decision soon on the Yugoslav requests which must be weighed against those of other countries and in the light of the total resources available. Subsequently, during the course of the conversation Ambassador Nikezic made the following points: (1) the USSR had opposed the calling of the Belgrade Conference and had worked actively through Guinea and Cuba to sabotage it; (2) Yugoslavia should be accepted for itself and not as an instrument to be used in the cold war; and (3) he agreed with the Secretary’s point that the US and Yugoslavia should find ways to cooperate on things which they have in common and to insulate themselves where they do not. The Secretary observed at one point that he felt the Yugoslavs had a tendency to regard the USSR as sensitive and the US as not. For this reason, Yugoslavia tends to take the US too much for granted too often. The point is, he said, that the US should not be pushed too far. Ambassador Nikezic remarked wryly that after the Belgrade Conference he did not believe that the Yugoslavs would be inclined soon again to abuse US tolerance. In closing the discussion of US-Yugoslav relations Ambassador Nikezic said that the Yugoslavs had analyzed US actions during and after the Belgrade Conference. He had discussed US reaction to the Belgrade Conference with Foreign Minister Popovic during his last visit to this country. They had concluded that Yugoslavia’s action at the time of the Conference had been interpreted in this country as evidence of a shift in Yugoslav foreign policy. He wished to emphasize that no shift had taken place in Yugoslav foreign policy. The truth of this assertion, he declared, would be borne out by an objective analysis of Soviet-Yugoslav relations. 117. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Yugoslavia. Secret. Washington, undated. SUBJECT U. S. Policy and Assistance Programs Toward Yugoslavia Attached for your use at the meeting on Yugoslavia to be held Monday, January 15, is a paper with three annexes embodying the Department’s recommendations on U.S. policy and assistance programs toward Yugoslavia. Annex A is a review of U.S. policy. Annex B is a paper on U.S. military sales to Yugoslavia. Annex C deals with export control policy toward Yugoslavia.The report and annexes are not printed. Our principal recommendations are given on pages three and four of the attachment and can be summarized as follows: 1. Technical Assistance: A technical assistance program in the magnitude of $500,000 to $750,000 should be continued in the current fiscal year under the Development Grant category of AID funds. The desirability of continuing technical assistance, if any, beyond FY 1962 will be the subject of review after an evaluation by Ambassador Kennan of the effectiveness of the program. 2. Development Loans: We will encourage Yugoslavia to rely henceforth on lending sources other than AID, while indicating the willingness of the U.S. Government, as a transitional measure, to accept further loan applications for consideration. Within the U.S. Government it would be understood that loan assistance would be in the range of $10 million to $20 million of which the DLF portion would not exceed $10 million. The Export-Import Bank will be requested to give priority attention to Yugoslav applications. The terms of DLF loans should approach those of the Export-Import Bank. 3. P.L. 480: P.L. 480 agreements with Yugoslavia should be considered from time to time to meet minimum Yugoslav consumption requirements. With an increasing shift in the future from Title I to Title IV, Title III activities should be phased out over the next several years. 4. Military Sales: We should continue to sell Yugoslavia military equipment and spare parts and to train Yugoslav military personnel in the U.S. 5. Export Licensing: Yugoslavia should be considered on the same basis as non-Soviet Bloc nations for export licenses. We understand that the unresolved inter-agency issues relate primarily to export financing. Defense and Commerce appear to believe that more severe export license review standards should be applied to Yugoslavia. In addition, due to limitations of time, the recommendation with regard to the Export-Import Bank has not been discussed with the Bank. Dean RuskPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 118. National Security Action Memorandum No. 123Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Yugoslavia. Secret. Copies were sent to the Secretary of Defense, Secretary of the Treasury, Director of the Agency for International Development, Director of Central Intelligence, Director of the Bureau of the Budget, and President of the Export-Import Bank. Washington, January 15, 1962. MEMORANDUM TO The Secretary of State SUBJECT Policy Toward Yugoslavia As a result of discussions with representatives of the interested departments on Monday, January 15, 1962, at 5:15 PM, the President reached the following decisions:No record of this meeting has been found. 1. Technical Assistance—A technical assistance program of the magnitude of $500,000–$750,000 should be continued in the current fiscal year under the Development Grant category of AID funds. The desirability of continuing technical assistance beyond FY–62 will be the subject of review after an evaluation by Ambassador Kennan, who will submit a rounded recommendation. 2. Loan Assistance—The U.S. will grant development loan assist-ance of about $10 million in FY–62, and it is hoped that the Export-Import Bank will give priority attention to Yugoslav applications for additional loan funds up to $10 million. Terms of DLF loans should approach those of the Export-Import Bank. The problem of appropriate levels of assistance for FY–63 will be reviewed by the Department of State, but meanwhile the Government will plan to go ahead with a modest level of development loan assistance in FY–63. The President does not wish an abrupt cut-off in this kind of aid at the end of FY–62. The United States Government will also seek to increase the interest of other Western governments—especially Italy—in credits to Yugoslavia. 3. PL 480—PL 480 agreements with Yugoslavia should be considered from time to time to meet minimum Yugoslav consumption requirements. It is expected that there will be an increasing shift from Title I to Title IV assistance, while Title III assistance will, as recommended, be gradually phased out over a period of years. 4. Military Sales—Continued military sales to Yugoslavia are approved to the extent that they amount to no more than reasonable spare parts and supplies for existing equipment. It is not expected or desired that Yugoslav military personnel will receive training in the United States, and future Yugoslav applications for other new military purchases should be reviewed case by case. 5. Export Licenses—Yugoslavia should be considered on the same basis as non-Soviet Bloc nations for export licenses, on the understanding that license applications will be reviewed with appropriate care, and that appropriate efforts will be made through the Embassy to ensure against transshipments, to the Bloc, of goods falling within COCOM and U.S. strategic criteria. In reaching these conclusions, the President made the following additional requests: 1. That Ambassador Kennan should write a brief explaining the reasons for U.S. aid to Yugoslavia. This brief should then be used as appropriate in defending the program before Congress and in public statements. 2. That the Italian, Austrian and Greek Governments should be asked for their opinions with respect to policy toward Yugoslavia. If, as we expect, these comments support the current general line of U.S. policy, they may also be helpful in explaining our policy within the United States. McGeorge BundyPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 119. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.00/1–2562. Confidential. Belgrade, January 25, 1962, noon. 1044. Embtel 1043.Telegram 1043, January 25, summarized Kennan’s discussions with Popovic that day. (Ibid.) I had impression tenor of my statement to Popovic had been pretty well anticipated by Yugoslavs: that they have grasped fact that country of their political orientation can hardly expect remain major recipient of US aid in present circumstances; that Tito is nevertheless determined to persist in placing higher value on political relationship with Soviet bloc than on that with Western countries; that they realize this will necessitate greater effort to obtain development capital from bloc sources if rate of growth is to be maintained; and that they are prepared if necessary to pay reasonable political price, though not an inordinate one, to achieve this. This does of course present certain risks from our standpoint, but only such as are to be expected in face of what appears to be growing difficulty of obtaining long-term developmental capital from Western sources. That such capital will be available from the East on suitable terms and in adequate amounts is, of course, so far as we know, also far from certain. Kennan 120. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/2–1462. Confidential. Belgrade, February 14, 1962, 11 a.m. 1122. Assistant Secretary for Foreign Affairs Ivo Vejvoda told DCM last night that Yugos, now they have examined full text of Rusk February 5 statement,For text, see Department of State Bulletin, February 26, 1962, pp. 346–348. are much disturbed. Had thought after Ambassador’s talks with Kardelj and others that Yugo’s independence and good Yugo-US bilateral relations were accepted as good in themselves. Now they find statement treats Yugo independence as tool in cold war. Communist Chinese had printed full text Rusk statement, as yet without comment, but with clear implication this will provide further fuel for attacks on Yugo as tool of imperialists. Yugos are sensitive people and disturbed by implication they being used to achieve cold war objectives of West. Statement, while emphasizing Yugo independence, in fact tends to cause Asian and African countries to question Yugo independence, will weaken Yugo influence in those areas, and complicate relations with Eastern Bloc. Vejvoda said he had not expected to see American officer that evening and had not prepared approach but February 5 statement was subject of extensive discussion in Foreign Secretariat and we might hear more of it from others. Department will note similarity Vejvoda’s point to that presented first paragraph Ambassador Kennan’s paper brought by him to Washington as basis for talks on Yugo with British.Not found. Kennan 121. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.00/3–2362. Confidential. Repeated to Bonn and Moscow. Belgrade, March 23, 1962, 6 p.m. 1283. From several indications we gain impression Yugoslav leaders are just now in throes of some sort of crisis of decision with possible far-reaching implications for both domestic and foreign policy. We are reliably informed that last week’s session of expanded plenum party executive committee under Tito’s chairmanship was devoted entirely to considering Yugoslavia’s economic plight and its many bitter implications. No decisions have yet been announced, and it is possible no final ones have yet been taken. Am confident that policy of economic liberalization which prevailed throughout 60 and most of 61 is now under heavy critical pressure; and that [garble] persons, in many instances Slovenes and followers of Kardelj, who sponsored or favored its introduction, are in difficult position. Even Todorovic may be affected. It is plain that barring some new major source of external assistance severe restrictive measures will have to be taken to bring economy better under control and improve finance external payments. These measures will presumably affect adversely both living standards and rate of growth. But even this will probably be insufficient to meet external payments problem which, as recently reported, is now assuming serious forms, particularly in inability of government to meet promptly current external obligations and to assure adequate imports raw materials and component parts for Yugoslav export industries. Leading Yugoslavs have recently shown themselves preoccupied and more reticent than usual about major problems Yugoslav policy. Efforts to get answers from them on pending questions economic collaboration have encountered unusual difficulties and delays. Technical assistance program for 62 has been pending for nearly two months with no reply. Attempts to elicit even informal comment unsuccessful. Although some textile factories are understood reduced to 30 percent capacity operation for lack raw material, we have now been waiting nearly three weeks for reply our offer to make available 50,000 bales under Title IV, PL 480. External debt statement, which has repeatedly been promised us since December 1960 and which they know would be helpful to us in meeting applications developmental loans, still not forthcoming. We have no evidence Yugoslavs have yet made their wishes fully clear to AID or Export-Import Bank. They have as yet given us nothing specific here. Yesterday they finally rejected long-standing Canadian offer to help with construction oil refinery at Pancevo, although they are just in throes of sending high-powered commercial delegation to Canada to stimulate trade. All in all their behavior is hesitant and partly contradictory, and contrasts sharply with eagerness for Western aid they might normally be expected to show in present difficult situation. Have noted no particular signs of irritation against our government, this mission, or myself personally. They seldom take initiative in communicating with us; but this is standard practice. Have not even had any direct complaints re curtailment of AID programs, though there have been various warning hints that in circumstances they would have to look elsewhere, including eastwards, for help. Have impression they realize our present plans represent limit of what is possible in light public and Congressional opinion in US. Possible hypotheses recent Yugoslav behavior are these: (1) that Tito, having been preoccupied with Africa and relations with unaligned nations throughout 61 and until end February 62, has only recently become aware full seriousness balance of payments situation, and has put some sort moratorium on current decisions, particularly those involving new obligations, until future policy course fully determined. (2) That Yugoslavs are preparing some major appeal to Western countries and international organizations to increase their maneuverability in dealing with their present payments situation, and detailed decisions being held up pending completion this approach. (3) That discussions or soundings are being taken with Russians, in deference to which other decisions, particularly ones concerning us, are being held in abeyance. I think we must be prepared for possibility that in light narrowing dimensions our assistance, and increasing severity financial terms, Yugoslavs may be approaching point where they would appreciably facilitate achievement of alternative solutions. I personally do not see much probability of this last at present time. Yugoslavs are clearly disturbed and miffed over continued failure Gromyko to return Popovic visit. Their pride is such that I cannot conceive their going to Moscow as supplicants for economic aid so long as this courtesy is being withheld. But their distress is so acute that no one can entirely vouch for their conduct. And it may of course be that a date for Gromyko visit has been fixed confidentially but not yet announced. Kennan 122. Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Yugoslavia. Secret; Personal. Initialed by Klein. Washington, April 17, 1962. SUBJECT Belgrade’s 1397In telegram 1397, April 16, Kennan commented on the visit of Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko to Belgrade. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.6168/4–1662) Since this is my day for candor, I might just as well exploit it. I read Ambassador Kennan’s telegram No. 1397 with some dismay. While most of his facts are probably indisputable, his conclusions are questionable. Kennan clearly has a personal problem with Tito, probably not unrelated to the Belgrade Conference experience and it seems to color many of his conclusions. The Ambassador argues that as long as Tito is on the scene, our relations with Yugoslavia will remain difficult. I do not disagree but I would go further. As I see it, as long as a Communist regime is in power in Belgrade, our relations with Yugoslavia will be difficult. Tito obviously governs Yugoslavia but there is no evidence to support the view that our problems with Communist Yugoslavia will end with Tito’s departure. We can live with this situation. There are also certain curious details in the Ambassador’s commentary. He sees this as a peculiarly propitious time for a Soviet-Yugoslav rapprochement, yet he goes on to say that although there is evident Yugoslav eagerness, this is not reciprocated by the Soviets. The Ambassador also noticeably avoids any discussion of the recent Sino-Soviet developments and talks in terms of this problem as it appeared several months ago. The fact is that so long as Moscow and Peiking can arrive at some modus vivendi, Tito’s maneuverability in playing the Soviets against the Chinese is clearly limited. In my view the most troublesome element in Kennan’s message is that he seems to be carefully building up a case for a basic revision in our Yugoslav policy. The direction in which his thinking seems to be going is that so long as Tito is looking increasingly toward Moscow and the Bloc, the United States should take a second look at its commitments to Belgrade. There is nothing wrong in reexamining our policy and the considerations that went into making that policy. But we should also recognize that our policy has not been directed at converting Yugoslav political thinking, but rather in keeping it tied, to the extent possible, to the West and thereby limiting its dependence on the Soviet Bloc. That policy has been successful. Therefore, before we begin to move off this line, I think we should be certain that we are not doing the very thing that concerns us most—pushing Yugoslavia closer to the Bloc. 123. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in YugoslaviaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.00/5–262. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Mudd; cleared by Tyler, EUR, and S/S; and approved by McGhee. Washington, May 2, 1962, 3:04 p.m. 1106. Embtels 1455, 1456, 1458.In telegram 1455, April 30, Kennan reported that he had denied Mates’ charge of frequent visits to Djilas by “a member of the official American community.” The telegram forwarded the draft text of a proposed letter to the Yugoslav Foreign Ministry stating that no unsanctioned visits had taken place. (Ibid., 768.00/4–3062) Telegram 1456, April 30, reported that Yugoslav officials believed the Embassy had provoked the actions leading to the Djilas arrest. Kennan reported that the Embassy had not been involved. (Ibid.) In telegram 1458, May 2, Kennan reported that the acting director of American Reading Rooms in Yugoslavia, a non-government official, had met with Djilas. (Ibid., 768.00/5–262) We have given careful consideration your reftels and, on balance, have concluded US interests best served by approach aimed at forcing Yugoslavs either: (a) to drop their thinly-veiled insinuations and allegations re official US involvement in events leading up to Djilas rearrest;Djilas, who had been released from prison in 1961, was rearrested following the publication of his book Conversations with Stalin. He was charged with revealing State secrets. or (b) to produce specific and concrete evidence to back up these charges. We agree with you, particularly since trial of Djilas obviously in offing, that it is impermissible that such unsubstantiated charges made in official Foreign Office discussions should be allowed to stand unanswered by US Government. We believe however that, in view imminence Djilas trial and large number imponderables inherent this situation, it is preferable for US approach to be oral rather than written and to Mates who first raised question rather than to Popovic. Accordingly, at your discretion, you are authorized to approach Mates along following lines: Since your April 16 conversation with Mates and your subsequent letter to him denying any incorrect behavior on part members US Embassy staff in Djilas affair, you had hoped matter would be dropped by Yugoslav authorities. Instead, Yugoslav authorities have chosen to raise matter again in official FonOff conversation with member Embassy staff, even going so far as to suggest that only public denial US involvement Djilas affair by authoritative US source would be convincing. US Government has no choice but to take serious view of unsubstantiated Yugoslav charges re US involvement in events leading up to rearrest of Djilas as well as Yugoslav insinuations re alleged US motives. US Government has no knowledge of circumstances leading up to rearrest Djilas beyond public statements issued by Yugoslav authorities. US Government cannot permit allegations to stand that conduct US officials in any sense has been such as to give cause for reproach or complaint on part Yugoslav authorities. We must therefore request that Yugoslav Government, if it has any information of a specific and concrete nature that would indicate to contrary, present such information to US Government. If Yugoslav Government has no such specific information we suggest that matter be dropped. Ball 124. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.561/5–362. Secret. Repeated to Moscow, Sarajevo, and Zagreb. Belgrade, May 3, 1962, 11 a.m. 1459. Appearance of twenty newly acquired Soviet tanks of fairly recent vintage and one Soviet-type assault gun at May Day parade here has naturally aroused much comment among four [foreign?] observers, since with exception of a few helicopters these are the first major item of military equipment known to have been acquired here from Soviet sources since 1948. While authentic information is not available, we think it likely that acquisition these items dates back to tension in US-Yugo relations following Belgrade conference and to difficulty encountered by Yugos at that time in discussing further deals for purchase US military equipment. Lack of dollars and other Western currencies, and existence unused clearing balance with Soviet Union, may have been further Yugo motive for purchase Soviet tanks. Perhaps equally or more significant than Yugo willingness to purchase Soviet tanks is Soviet readiness to supply them to Yugos. Other neutral states besides Yugo have received Soviet weapons, but since 1948 Soviet Union has not been willing send military equipment here. Having purchased these items, it is probable, in order to avoid offending Russians. There are also signs, however, of a deliberate desire in some Yugo quarters to make a demonstration of some sort in exhibiting these items. While Yugo military circles deny that this signifies any change in Yugo political or military policy, we think Yugo Government may not have been averse in trying to arouse in Western circles some alarm over results of relative cold-shoulder which Western countries have recently turned to Yugo and her needs with respect to credit and facilities for military purchases. On top of this Tito yesterday morning, May 2, just prior to his departure for Split (purpose not announced) received Soviet Ambassador Yepishev and conducted with him, according to official announcement, a long conversation. This deserves careful attention. Yepishev had accompanied Gromyko back to Moscow on April 21. He appears to have returned Belgrade April 30, evidently demanded urgent interview with Tito and was fitted into latter’s schedule at only possible point between strenuous May Day ceremonies and departure Dalmatia later Wednesday morning. Conclusion inescapable that Soviet Government, after receiving Gromyko’s report on visit, decided to make further communication of urgent nature to Tito. This could have been, and in my view most probably was, effort to enlist Yugo support and influence with neutrals for some new Soviet move re testing (Department Circular telegram 1857).Circular telegram 1857, April 30, reported Soviet efforts to call a special session of the General Assembly on disarmament. (Ibid., 700.00(S)/4–3062) But we must remember Yugos had evidently pressed hard and vainly during Gromyko visit for discussions on economic problems. Information now available indicates with fair degree reliability Yugos urged, in particular, that special negotiations be instituted at relatively high political level to discuss closer association Yugo with COMECON. While Russians would scarcely be so crude as to couple these two things explicitly for bargaining purposes, there are many ways to skin such a cat. Yugo financial distress is acute. So is concern here over effects on Yugo of Common Market. XXII Congress and Gromyko visit have unquestionably whetted Tito’s hopes for accommodation with Bloc on terms that would not require Yugo concessions on party-ideological plane. While he would probably like retain outwardly good relations with West to extent possible, he would, in my opinion, sacrifice much even in terms of relations with US to obtain accommodation on such terms. In such circumstances must reiterate we can take nothing for granted concerning Yugo policies in coming period. Kennan 125. Editorial Note On May 3, Executive Secretary of the Department of State Lucius D. Battle sent a memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, spelling out the consequences of denial of most-favored-nation treatment to Poland and Yugoslavia. For text of the memorandum, see Document 59. 126. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.00/5–762. Confidential. Belgrade, May 7, 1962, 8 p.m. 1484. Embtel 1462.In telegram 1462, May 3, Kennan reported on discussions with Mates regarding the Djilas affair and the apparent confusion within the Yugoslav Foreign Ministry over the level of its official reaction. (Ibid., 768.00/5–362) In private conversation with Foreign Minister Popovic on May 5, I took occasion to express my concern over the suspicions that had been voiced by Yugoslav officials of complicity of our government in events leading to rearrest of Djilas.He was rearrested on April 7. Popovic reiterated that these statements had not been official and that there had been no intention to make any formal representation to us over this matter. He believed, he said, that official American circles had not been involved; nevertheless, there had been certain Americans who had had an interest in stirring up this sort of trouble. We did not go into this further. I now think it unlikely that anything directly embarrassing to our government will be said at the Djilas trial, even if latter is held in public. Exchanges we have had thus far would make it difficult for Yugoslavs to raise such charges. This would not however, preclude vague hints that Djilas was influenced by American elements hostile to Yugoslav regime and permitted himself to become their tool. Kennan 127. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/5–2962. Confidential. Drafted by Vedeler and approved in the White House on June 8. Washington, May 29, 1962. SUBJECT Meeting with Yugoslav State Secretary for Foreign Affairs PARTICIPANTS US The President Foy D. Kohler, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs George F. Kennan, Ambassador to Yugoslavia Harold C. Vedeler, Director, Office of Eastern European Affairs LS—Mr. Glenn Yugoslavia Koca Popovic, State Secretary for Foreign Affairs Marko Nikezic, Ambassador to US During his visit to Washington the Yugoslav State Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Koca Popovic, met with the President today for 70 minutes in a frank discussion principally concerning US-Yugoslav relations, Soviet-Yugoslav relations, and Yugoslav positions on international issues. In response to the President’s question about his trip to Latin America, the Foreign Minister said that he was very interested in the process of development in the countries visited; Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, and Mexico. He agreed with the President on the vitality and dynamism in the development of Brazil, where there was a growth rate of 4 to 5% a year in spite of great inflation, in contrast to the stability but depression in Bolivia. The President asked where the US and Yugoslavia were going together and what was the prognosis and prospects for our relations. He subsequently raised a number of subsidiary questions related to this theme. The Minister thought that our relations were not bad and were developing. Because of the complex policies both of Yugoslavia and of the US it was not too surprising if some misunderstandings arose. It must be borne in mind that the Yugoslav purpose above all is to maintain independence. At the present time our two countries are engaged in putting their relations on a realistic basis. This is a necessary development. In reply to the President’s question about a realistic basis for relations between Communist Yugoslavia and non-Communist United States, the Minister said it was important not to exaggerate ideological differences and not to use ideology to justify positions on international issues. The President wondered in this connection what the real differences, beneath the cloaking in ideology, were between the four regimes—Soviet, Chinese Communist, Yugoslav and Albanian—and whether the Minister considered nonideological factors more significant than ideology in relations among these states. In explaining these differences the Minister pointed to the differences in political conception, in policy, in interests, in development and in economic matters, especially as concerns the utilization of resources available to the Bloc and more specifically the extension of aid from Bloc states to China. He suggested therefore that ideology was an after effect of those factors and that ideological difference was not as important as it seemed. The President asked why the Chinese Communists attacked Yugoslavia. The Minister indicated it was no secret that there were bigger things behind the Chinese attitude toward Yugoslavia, that is, the Soviet-Chinese antagonism. As to the President’s question concerning what might be done about Communist China, the Minister thought that the policy of the US had served to push China into isolation and make for its militant attitude. Referring to Communist China’s aggressive posture toward India, the President wondered whether the approach of the Communist Chinese would be much different if we had followed another policy. The President turned to relations between Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union with a question that if it is not ideological difference, what prevents a close rapprochement between the two states. Minister Popovic said this had been impossible because the Soviet Union had desired Yugoslavia to enter the Bloc in a dependent relationship. He explained the closer relationship between Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union existing today, a matter which the President raised, as a result of Yugoslavia’s desire to have good relations with all countries, the development over the years of a more realistic attitude toward Yugoslavia on the part of Soviet leaders, a Soviet willingness to take into account the independent status of Yugoslavia and a change in the quality of relations generally between the Soviet Union and other countries. He found the present improvement in relationship due not to a change by Yugoslavia in the conception of its position, but to a change in the Soviet view of its relation to Yugoslavia. He asserted strongly that this did not mean Yugoslavia was becoming an ally of the Soviets and he saw no reason for putting a question this way. He did feel that there would be a steady improvement in Yugoslav-Soviet relations if there was no basic change in international relations generally. The President commented that he was not attempting to pry into Yugoslav affairs but he was interested in the association of our two countries. From this standpoint he thought it desirable that as Yugo-slavia’s relations developed with the Soviet Union its relations should also develop with the US. Our problem of maintaining cordial relations with Yugoslavia involves the element of public opinion. It must be clear to our public that US policy toward Yugoslavia is in accord with our broad policy objective of establishing a world of free and independent states. It is to our interest if Yugoslavia becomes one of these states but does not become a member of the Soviet Bloc. The President hoped consequently that Yugoslavia was interested in improving its relations with the US. The Foreign Minister replied that the Yugoslav people are the guarantee of Yugoslavia’s independence. They are not prepared to lose independence and they will pay again, as they have in the past, the cost of keeping it. Yugoslavia would not want to have good relations with the Soviets at the expense of bad relations with the US. The President noted that in insuring its own independence Yugoslavia contributed to the maintenance of Greek independence and the more independent position of Albania at the present time. The President then asked what the Minister saw Cuba becoming, a Yugoslavia or a Communist China. The Minister referred to his conversation at lunch with the Secretary of StateNo record of this conversation has been found. who he said had taken exception to the invitation to Cuba to attend the Belgrade Conference because Cuba was not uncommitted. The Minister had replied to the Secretary that they had tried through such steps as this to encourage Cuba to move to a status of nonalignment. When the President questioned why this had not happened, the Minister answered that one of the reasons was that the US had closed the door on Cuba too early. Its future now depends on the policies and moves of the great powers. Referring to differences from time to time between Yugoslavia and the US in Africa, the President asked what kind of Africa does Yugoslavia support. The Minister replied that Yugoslavia can go along far with the US in its policy toward Africa. It desires to see an end of colonialism there and supports moves in favor of independence, both political and economic independence. The President said that the US has no real history of a presence in Africa and not an interest as in Latin America. The US therefore has taken a clearly disinterested attitude toward African developments. In the Congo we have supported the independence and unity of the country and in this interest the government of Adoula, whereas Yugoslavia supported Gizenga. The Minister commented that Yugoslavia’s support was first for Lumumba and then for Gizenga as the heir of Lumumba against Tshombe. Yugoslavia is for the unity of the Congo. They took account of the realities of the situation by inviting both Adoula and Gizenga to the Belgrade Conference and now by having diplomatic representation at Leopoldville. The President then put a question to Minister Popovic about ways of improving relations between the US and Yugoslavia. The Minister said that he agreed with Ambassador Kennan on this subject. Ambassador Kennan remarked that he agreed with the Minister to a considerable extent but was concerned about a possible tendency of Yugoslavia to take positions on international issues on the basis of ideological principles and to become in effect a political ally of the Soviet Union without being a military ally. If we can feel that Yugoslavia judges us only on the merits of issues we and other Americans will be relieved. The Minister thought that any conclusion about the existence of such a tendency was not correct and saw no danger in this regard. The US and Yugoslavia differed in substance on a number of international issues and often because of the US position in relation to allies on questions involving colonialism. The US position on disarmament in the past was harder for Yugoslavia to understand than the Soviet Union’s. Until recently the US, for example, had not declared in a general statement its positive attitude toward disarmament. The President suggested the Minister look at our position on Angola in the UN, which led to differences with Portugal; on the Congo, which raised problems with the UK; on West New Guinea, which complicated our relations with the Netherlands; on Berlin, which was against some elements in Europe; on the diffusion of nuclear weapons, which was in conflict with the view of De Gaulle. How could Yugoslavia help but object to East German developments if it followed principle as well as reality in determining policy. We think our policy stands up very well and should receive the sympathy of Yugoslavia if it takes positions on principle. It would contribute to our aim of maintaining good relations with Yugoslavia if it would show more sympathy or support for our positions. This would count with public opinion here which is influential in policy matters. The Foreign Minister indicated that Yugoslavia has no reason to present American policy in bad colors. They agree with the US position when it is also Yugoslavia’s but not to please the US. Ambassador Nikezic commented that if Yugoslav positions were examined by the other side the latter would find a number of them unsatisfactory as was brought out in the statement of March 5 by the Secretary of State (statement before the Kitchin Committee).Secretary Rusk made a taped statement on trade expansion on March 5. The Rusk Appointment Books do not indicate any personal appearance before the House Committee on Armed Services of which Representative Paul Kitchin (D.–NC) was chairman and which, at that time, was preparing legislation modifying the Export Control Act. The Minister referred to a speech of his in the UN in 1958 which satisfied neither side and which must therefore have been all right. Ambassador Nikezic said that if the Yugoslavs had not been not only willing to seek independence but also struggling to maintain it they would have been sucked up under foreign control long since by reason of factors of geography, power, etc. This attitude to preserve the independence of Yugoslavia is the will of the Yugoslav people and not just of the Tito Government. The will to preserve independence is the essence of Yugoslav history and he thought they could be trusted to go that way in the future. The President said that our position in the world was thrust upon us and considerable isolationist opinion, which was not sophisticated, still existed here. In maintaining friendly relations with the US it was important to take this into account. In connection with this background we had our troubles in relations with Yugoslavia over the Belgrade Conference and the planes dealReference is to the sale of military aircraft to Yugoslavia by the Eisenhower administration and the training of Yugoslav pilots in the United States. For documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1951, vol. IV, Part 2, pp. 1677 ff. This arrangement, which was terminated in 1957, became public in October 1961. as the supporters of those who said we were soft on communism took up the issue. We have had to carry our policy toward Yugoslavia against these difficulties. If Yugoslavia takes account of this and shows good will it will help to make it possible to maintain and develop our relations with each other. The basis for maintaining a friendly policy is the preservation by Yugoslavia of its independent status. Anything Yugoslavia can do to manifest this status makes it easier for us. The President asked whether the Minister would carry this message home and he replied that he would of course. The President wondered whether the Minister as a Communist has an explanation of any new development in world affairs. The latter replied that they did not believe that “we with Mr. Khrushchev” would bury you. They do think that a gradual socialization is in process everywhere including the US which has some degree of socialization already. They consider that socialism will evolve in different ways in different countries and it is impossible to have uniformity of development even if all countries were socialist. This had been and is a basic issue with the Soviets. 128. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Brubeck) to the President’s Administrative Assistant (Reardon)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 468.119/6–262. Secret. Drafted by Katz and cleared by Kitchen, Kohler, and the Department of Defense. Sent through Bundy. Washington, June 2, 1962. SUBJECT Military Sales to Yugoslavia In response to your request by telephone today we are submitting additional information to you on the above subject. Following the Belgrade Conference last September, and the uncertainties which beset United States policy toward Yugoslavia in its aftermath, there was a virtual suspension in the processing of military sales cases for Yugoslavia. The processing of certain cases was long delayed; other Yugoslav requests were rejected. On January 15 United States policy toward Yugoslavia was reviewed by the National Security Council. Policy decisions were made at that time regarding several facets of our policy including that pertaining to military sales. The pertinent paragraph of NSAM 123Document 118. provided that: “Continued military sales to Yugoslavia are approved to the extent they amount to no more than reasonable spare parts and supplies for existing equipment. It is not expected or desired that Yugoslav military personnel will receive training in the United States, and future Yugoslav applications for other new military purchases should be reviewed case by case.” In the light of this policy decision there was a review of the backlog of Yugoslav military sales cases in the Department of Defense. Yugoslav requests which had not been previously refused were acted upon favorably. The principal Yugoslav requests which were rejected were sonar equipment, Bofors guns, and G-47 aircraft. The sonar equipment was denied for “security considerations”. The other two items were no longer available from excess United States stocks. Following an approach by the Yugoslav Ambassador to the Secretary of State inquiring about United States military sales policy toward Yugoslavia, a meeting was arranged in early April with Yugoslav officials in Washington. The Yugoslavs were informed that we anticipated no difficulty in meeting Yugoslav requests for spare parts and supplies for United States origin military equipment in Yugoslav hands. With regard to new items of equipment, the Yugoslavs were urged to investigate the possibility of procurement in Western Europe either from United States stocks there or from NATO countries. We promised in any case to cooperate with them in working out the most feasible arrangements. It was similarly suggested that training of Yugoslav military personnel be considered first in Yugoslavia, secondly in Western Europe, with the United States to be considered as the least desirable possibility. The Yugoslav representatives were pleased by what they considered to be a cooperative attitude on the part of United States officials although they were not completely reassured that their military equipment requirements could be met from the United States. The Yugoslavs indicated particular concern about the denial of the sonar equipment. They pointed out that on the basis of an offer they had received from the United States Navy they deposited a check in payment for the equipment and purchased helicopters in the United Kingdom on which the sonar was to be used. After the Belgrade Conference, the Navy offer was withdrawn for “security reasons” and the Yugoslavs were informed that the equipment was no longer releasable to them. There is another pending case involving a request of the United Kingdom to release to Yugoslavia the Thunderbird rocket. The United States has refused concurrence to such release on grounds that the rocket contains classified United States technology. We have no indication that the Yugoslavs are aware of our blocking of this proposed sale by the United Kingdom but they will undoubtedly learn about it. A meeting will be held on Tuesday, June 5, between the Departments of State and Defense to reconsider the sonar and Thunderbird cases. An effort will be made to evaluate the “security considerations” to determine the extent to which classified information is embodied in these equipments and if so whether release to Yugoslavia is nevertheless appropriate. The Department of Defense has concurred in this memorandum. William H. BrubeckPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. C.K. Johnson signed for Brubeck. 129. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/6–1262. Confidential. Drafted by Katz and approved in S on June 18. Washington, June 12, 1962. SUBJECT Call of the Yugoslav Ambassador PARTICIPANTS Mr. Marko Nikezic, Yugoslav Ambassador The Secretary Mr. Julius L. Katz, EE The Ambassador said that he had requested this appointment on instruction of his Government to obtain the Secretary’s evaluation of the situation arising from the Senate’s action to deny further aid to Yugoslavia.See Document 130. As a result of the recent visit of Foreign Secretary Popovic, there was full understanding in Belgrade that this action was contrary to the wishes of the Administration. Moreover, Belgrade had been heartened by the prompt and vigorous reaction of the Administration and important segments of the US press. Nevertheless, the Ambassador said, there was great anxiety in Yugoslavia. Denial of US aid, particularly at a time when the Yugoslav economy was in serious difficulty would be a severe blow. The amendment restoring PL 480 was, of course, very important but the inability to obtain development loans would be very serious for Yugoslavia’s investment program. Finally, the Ambassador said, the Senate’s action on aid following upon the House action on MFN had created uncertainty about the future direction of our relations. The Secretary stated that he would wish to make the following comments: 1. The attitude of the Executive Branch was clearly reflected in the legislation it had presented to the Congress. This legislation did not, of course, contain restrictive provisions. 2. The Congressional moves on MFN and Aid were contrary to the position of the Administration. Moreover the vote in support of the Lausche amendment was larger than what would be an accurate reflection of the true attitude of the Senate. A number of Senators switched their votes in favor when it was clear the amendment would pass. It should also be noted that some Senators were voting their anti-aid views rather than anti-Yugoslav or anti-Polish views per se. 3. The Senate vote came as a surprise to the Administration. But the Administration immediately went to work to get a reversal of the amendment to the extent possible. The result of the Administration’s effort so far was the Mansfield–Dirksen amendment restoring authority with respect to PL 480. 4. The Administration would continue to work for improvement of both the Aid and Trade legislation but it was impossible now to know what would be the final result. The Secretary proceeded to describe in some detail the complicated and delicate parliamentary situation at this stage of the legislative session in an election year. 5. Whatever the final results of legislation, the Administration would seek to limit the effects to the programs legally affected. In other words, while US technical assistance might be precluded, it would not affect our support for UN technical assistance. Nor would it affect our support for Yugoslavia in the OECD and other international organizations. The Secretary concluded his remarks by stating that he did not wish to mislead the Ambassador into over-optimism. He did, however, wish to assure him of the Administration’s position. The Ambassador expressed appreciation for the Secretary’s comments and indicated he would reassure Belgrade of the Administration’s intention to work for improvement in the pending legislation and at any event to seek to limit its effects. 130. Editorial Note The House Ways and Means Committee, chaired by Wilbur Mills (D.–AK), began consideration of the Kennedy administration’s request for widened authority to negotiate trade agreements in March 1962. On June 12, the Committee reported legislation (H.R. 1818) that included a provision withdrawing most-favored-nation (MFN) status from Poland and Yugoslavia. The bill passed the House on June 28 by a vote of 298 to 125. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee took up the bill in July and held 4 weeks of hearings. The Department of State recalled Ambassador Kennan from Yugoslavia and made him available for discussions with members of Congress as part of its effort to secure removal of the provision denying MFN to Yugoslavia and Poland. Kennan recounted his lobbying efforts in Memoirs, 1950–1963, pages 299–305. The effort resulted in a bill that restored MFN status, which the Senate passed on September 19 by a vote of 78 to 8. The two versions of the bill were sent to a joint House–Senate committee for reconciliation. During these negotiations, Representative Mills insisted on retaining the MFN denial provision, and the final conference report (H. Rpt. 2518) restored the House language on MFN. This bill was passed in the House by a vote of 256 to 91 on October 4 and in the Senate on the same day by a voice vote. The legislation, the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, instructed the President to suspend “as practicable” MFN status granted since 1930 to “any country or area dominated or controlled by communists.” President Kennedy signed the measure into law on October 11 as Public Law 87–974. (76 Stat. 872) 131. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/6–2362. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Warsaw. Belgrade, June 23, 1962, 4 p.m. 1692. Long discussion yesterday with Yugoslav official of senior rank bears out and reinforces without exception every point made in my previous messages. People here concerned with Yugoslav-US relations felt, it was said, unable to explain to remainder Yugoslav officialdom and to public why Yugoslavia should suddenly at this point be confronted with measures of restrictive discrimination considerably more drastic and unfriendly than those which prevailed under last administration at time when US policy was ostensibly much less sympathetic to attempt of neutrals to maintain independence between the two blocs. Yugoslavs, while striving in coming period to improve commercial relations with Russia and satellites (which represented only favorable openings still available), proposed to do all in their power to maintain their political independence vis-à-vis Moscow, whether our Congress had any sympathy with that policy or not. But they were unable to understand why people in Washington wanted to go out of their way to complicate this task for them at present time or to see how this could be reconciled with US interests. They feared, and had some evidence to support this, that effect of various Congressional actions would be felt in Yugoslav relations with other possible sources of Western economic and financial support. They were obliged to view these actions, accordingly, as designed not just to deprive them of aid from US and to damage their trade with US but to create maximum difficulty in their economic relations with Western countries generally. Fact that this was moment of great economic distress here, when any unfriendly measure in this direction was bound to be doubly painful, was no secret to anyone. It would be difficult to persuade Yugoslav people that timing of these actions had not been selected with deliberate view to exploiting their present plight and creating maximum hardship for everyone concerned. Kennan 132. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Dutton) to Secretary of State RuskSource: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Yugoslavia. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Kaysen. Washington, September 27, 1962. SUBJECT Reconsideration by Wilbur Mills of Prohibition in Trade Bill Against Availability of Most-Favored-Nation Clause for Poland and Yugoslavia Although we appear to be faced with a fait accompli, I want to urge that a vigorous effort still be made no later than Friday to get Wilbur Mills to reconsider the prohibition he has insisted on in the trade bill against the availability of the most-favored-nation clause for Poland and Yugoslavia. I recognize that Mills has already talked with the President and you on this issue, and that the Conference Committee has made a decision. I have also talked with him and realize his adamacy. However, the conference report will not be submitted until very early next week, and it is therefore at least theoretically still possible to get the conference to reconsider the issue. The information that I have obtained is that Mills was the principal, if not only, major advocate in the Conference Committee for this prohibition and the Senate Conferees held out against him for quite awhile. In both the Senate and House strong sentiment exists, of course, against trade, aid, or intercourse of any kind with the two communist countries. But Mills has been the moving force for including this prohibition in the trade bill in the Ways and Means Committee, then in the House, and now in the Conference Committee. If he could be turned around, it would seem that the whole situation might be reversed. He has stated that the Conference Committee report on the trade bill would be rejected on the House Floor without this prohibition. However, I have talked with several key members, including the Speaker, and they indicate a contrary opinion, although I doubt that they are anxious to press this matter. Their opinion of the situation on the House Floor is relevant, however, in that if Mills could be persuaded by the President, the prospect of smooth sailing thereafter is in sight. If the prohibition remains in the trade bill, it would seem only realistic that a similar ban will have to be included in the aid bill. The Congress can hardly be expected to approve giving away money and food to the two communist countries if it has already declared we are going to penalize trading and making a profit from them. My principal reasons for seeking further consideration of this matter are that (1) the issue was resolved quickly and quietly without orga-nizing a vigorous stand on it, and (2) great substantive damage apparently will be done to our economic offensive against the Communist Bloc in Eastern Europe. If we do not fight for this issue, great damage will be done to an international relationship and intrusion on Communist solidarity accomplished over the period of the last decade. After the damage done by the trade issue, we must face further injury in the aid ban that would likely follow, and then in a possible effort later to intercept their trading with Cuba. In this series of events we are giving in to Mills on the point on which it would be easiest to take a defensible stand. All of this damage is occurring, of course, just at the moment that the Soviets are trying to win them back—and just at a time when the Yugoslavs have shown through their new constitution that they want to expand Western concepts of individual initiative. Our default at this juncture would appear to be difficult to rationalize in later periods tactically as well as strategically. If the present problem cannot be resolved on its merits, as I would hope, I would think that the Administration would at least want to make a strong public record of having sought to continue trade with the two countries and place elsewhere the responsibility for any events in the coming year which clearly demonstrate that Yugoslavia is turning back towards the Soviet Union. Surely this Administration would not want to be left open to a later charge that such progress as the previous one had made exploiting the loosening of the Poles and Yugoslavs from the Communist Bloc had been defaulted without major effort. I believe that at the very least a good strong record needs to be made before anyone charges we have let these two countries slip back behind the Iron Curtain without publicly raising even a finger.On September 28, the Secretary of State sent a memorandum to President Kennedy protesting the denial of MFN status to Yugoslavia and Poland; see Document 66. Frederick G. DuttonPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 133. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.0041/10–462. Confidential. Repeated to Moscow, Warsaw, Paris, Sarajevo, and Zagreb. Belgrade, October 4, 1962, 2 p.m. 484. Paris also for USRO and NATO. Deptel 358,Dated October 3. (Ibid., 411.0041/10–362) apprising us of failure of final efforts to achieve modification of MFN denial, has been received. It remains now to take note of its implications and to be prepared to face them. When congressional action is complete with final passage aid and trade bills, we will submit message setting forth predictable or possible consequences of this action for various phases of work this mission and our relations with Yugo. Wish now to stress only following: 1. In Embtel 370Dated September 19. (Ibid., 811.0000/9–1962) I stated that if we continued to be confronted by congressional gestures designed apparently only to express hostility to Yugo, behavior of this government would move increasingly beyond range of our influence or power of prediction and that in this case I would have to disclaim all responsibility for turns Yugo policy might take. Action which has now been taken with respect to MFN is even more serious and destructive than what I then had in mind. It would be quixotic for us to expect, in light of this action, that either this mission or indeed our government as a whole will be able to exert significant political influence on Yugo in coming period and so long as this discriminatory treatment of Yugo trade prevails. Responsibility for whatever this means in terms of Yugo’s world position and her relations with Soviet Union must lie squarely with congressional figures who have insisted on this action face of contrary advice from every qualified quarter. Up to moment of approval of this provision by House–Senate conferees last week, nothing had occurred to change basically independent position Yugo had taken in recent years, a position which has probably had greater effect than any other single factor in promoting polycentrism within Soviet bloc and reducing its power to act as an effective unit in world affairs. US policy under three administrations, now effectively repudiated, had importantly contributed to this situation. I can make no estimates or predictions as to what will occur in future. If previous position and role of Yugo, so favorable to our interests, are preserved, this will be despite, not because of, what we have recently done. 2. We must now expect to experience whatever forms of retaliation Yugo Government finds it possible and expedient to take. Yugos have repeatedly warned us this action would affect our relations adversely. These were not empty words. I trust that such adverse developments will not be occasion for surprise or indignation at home, and that no one will forget that we have no very good basis on which to protest or oppose them. 3. Yugo reaction to congressional action must not be expected to be confined to Yugo relations with Russians and ourselves. Yugo influence with other nonaligned nations will plainly now be exerted in ways detrimental to our relations with those nations and detrimental to support we can expect from them in US and other international forums. Official party magazine Komunist will carry article in tomorrow’s edition pointing to relation of MFN action to questions up for discussion at forthcoming world economic conference, and raising question whether discrimination against Yugo does not amount to condemnation of policy of unalignment generally and threatens all countries that follow Yugo’s example. Kennan 134. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2153. Confidential. Drafted by Davis and Valdes and approved in S on October 5. The meeting was held in Secretary Rusk’s suite at the Waldorf Astoria. New York, October 4, 1962, 3 p.m. SecDel/MC/67 SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE SEVENTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York, September, 1962 SUBJECT Relations with Yugoslavia PARTICIPANTS US The Secretary Mr. Richard H. Davis (EUR) Mr. Philip Valdes (SOV) Mr. Peter Thacher (USUN) Yugoslavia Mr. Vladimir Popovic, Member of Federal Executive Council, Chairman of Yugoslav Delegation The Secretary said he would like to talk about our bilateral relations, since these are in a state of what he hoped would be temporary complication. First, he wanted to discuss the trade question. President Kennedy is trying hard to prevent Congress from taking action with respect to the most-favored-nation clause. We still did not know what the final result would be but at no time has there been any question of the view of the Executive Branch. The Secretary said he had met at least eight times with Congressional committees to explain to them the importance of keeping our relations with Yugoslavia on a normal basis. He urged upon Mr. Popovic the importance of neither the Yugoslavs’ nor our reacting too quickly. We on our side should take time to look at what possibilities there are, then we both should sit down and talk over actual trade problems and possibilities. He realized it would not be easy for the Yugoslavs in view of the political atmosphere resulting from Congressional action. He said that on the practical side he was not discouraged about the possibilities. Secondly, he said he wanted to talk about the EEC aspects. The powers granted to the President under the Trade Bill will let us negotiate vigorously for a common reduction of external tariffs. It is in our interest to do what we can to prevent the EEC from becoming a small, closed trading community rather than a broad, open one. We hope that what Yugoslavia can do by its trade with Western Europe and what we can do because of our Trade Bill will help ensure this. The Secretary said he would like to hear Mr. Popovic’s views. Mr. Popovic said he wondered what possibilities the Secretary saw in our bilateral trade relations. The Secretary said we would have to wait to see what flexibility Congress will permit. For example (and this was speculation rather than a promise) the treaty of 1881For text of the Treaty of Commerce between the United States and the Kingdom of Serbia, signed in Belgrade on October 2, 1881, and entered into force on November 15 of that year, see 22 Stat. 963. provides for a one-year advance notice before denunciation, and perhaps we can get a legislative amendment during that period or in the absence of the most-favored-nation treatment we could see what we could agree to bilaterally on specific items under our new trade legislation. Mr. Popovic said the Yugoslav people and Government very much want good relations between our two countries and this will not change. Nevertheless, the trade question does concern Yugoslavia greatly. He realized the U.S. Government has made efforts with Congress. He would like, however, to suggest additional arguments that might be of use. MFN is a mutual obligation embodied in a bilateral treaty, signed long ago, providing a one-year period for denunciation. Secondly, Congressional action came at a particularly unfavorable moment during the Brezhnev visit. The Secretary interjected that we had already used these arguments. Moreover, Popovic continued, Congressional action would affect Yugoslav relations not only with the U.S. but also with the EEC countries. Next year obligations fall due on loans Yugoslavia has received in order to liberalize its economy. The question will be how to meet these obligations. Generally, one can say there is no doubt that Congressional action will affect our political relations. This is neither in Yugoslav nor U.S. interest. The U.S. press calls Yugoslavia Communist but, at the same time, the U.S. recognizes Yugoslavia as non-aligned. Yugoslavia is very active in this way in a positive manner. For example, Ambassador Klutznick mentioned the Cairo Conference very favorably yesterday. Yugoslavia sees more such possibilities. Mr. Popovic hoped Congress realized this. He suggested there were some things the U.S. Government can do. He has talked to some of his commercial people and they reported that the Americans with whom they deal are now stopping negotiations on the grounds they don’t know what will happen. The U.S. Government might, therefore, make a statement which would help in this respect. The Secretary said that on the basis of the final Congressional action we will examine the possibilities as quickly as possible. He did not think this would take very long. He said that to some extent our bilateral relations are caught in a crossfire of matters for which Yugoslavia is not responsible and over which Yugoslavia has little control. The Soviet pressures in Berlin are a prime example. We have not been able to assure our people that Khrushchev is willing to settle the Berlin question peacefully. The Berlin question should not make any difference in our relations with a non-aligned country but the fact is it does. Another factor is the unnecessary and inflammatory buildup of military equipment in Cuba. In this atmosphere a non-aligned but Marxist nation comes under criticism. This general atmosphere is not related to the Yugoslav problem but Yugoslavia is caught up in it. The Secretary pointed out there was also a domestic factor. He said that, whereas most of the Polish nationality groups in the U.S. have supported the concept of increased trade with Poland even though they did not favor the existing Polish Government, the Yugoslav nationality groups here generally have not, and have been unhelpful with Congress. Mr. Popovic said that the Yugoslavs support the U.S. attitude for a peaceful settlement of the Berlin and German question and recognize the efforts the U.S. Government has made to this end. These efforts make it easier for Yugoslavia to use what influence it has with the other side not to take a rigid position; that is, the more the U.S. shows willingness for a peaceful settlement, the more Yugoslavia can do to help. He commented, however, that the Federal Republic shows no willingness to normalize its relations with Yugoslavia and this affects Yugoslav public opinion. As for Cuba, Yugoslavia would, of course, like to see it non-aligned. Yugoslavia is not on very good terms with Cuba. On the other hand, self-determination and non-interference are basic principles in Yugoslav policy and Yugoslavia still thinks there is a possibility for the U.S. to settle the question peacefully. As for the Yugoslav immigrants in the U.S., there are two groups, one of which does support good relations. There is a large Croat organization which does and he thought the Slovenes did too. In fact, the great majority of Yugoslavs here want good relations but perhaps they are not active enough. He was certain that the political immigrants are more active, and sometimes misinform U.S. politicians. Turning to our action with respect to shipping, he said that he thought that technically we could avoid problems as far as the Yugoslavs were concerned. On principle, however, he felt the action was not correct, involving as it did third countries. Yugoslavia ships no military cargo to Cuba. This affects only Russia. The Secretary said we are not imposing a blockade. As for a settlement, the Cuban problem does not involve ourselves alone but other countries in the Hemisphere as well. There are only two points that are not negotiable. The first is the military and political connection with Moscow. The second is Cuban interference in other countries of the Hemisphere with agents and funds. This is active interference. As to Germany, the Secretary said that he could understand why Yugoslavia might not want to see Germany reunified now. Mr. Popovic interjected that what worried them was re-militarization, not reunification. The Secretary continued that we may not agree with the Yugoslav position but we could understand it. We think, however, that it would be a mistake to close the door to reunification. Nationalism being what it is, the prospect of permanent separation may bring the wrong Germans to the top in both parts of Germany. As for militarization, he said, our memories are short. The Soviets armed the East Germans for one year under repeated Western protests before the Federal Republic started to arm. The all-German problem, however, is separable from the Berlin problem. Our commitments are such, and our agreements with the Soviet Union are such, that we cannot and will not agree to turn over two and a quarter million Berliners to the East Germans. If this fact is understood as a basic point, all other questions can be handled. Khrushchev, however, talks only about West Berlin, saying that East Berlin and East Germany have already been settled and are no longer under discussion. Mr. Popovic said he thought there were possibilities for solving the Berlin question peacefully. President Tito and he had stressed the need for the Big Two to negotiate. Not only the Russians, but others in the bloc as well, want to settle the question. He did not, however, see any willingness here to make efforts toward a settlement before our elections. The Secretary said that our elections have nothing to do with it. No U.S. President could give up West Berlin, elections or no elections. Mr. Popovic said he did not think anyone was asking for that. He was sure the Soviets are not very much interested in the Cuban question now; they are concentrating on settling Berlin. The Secretary said we are talking in circles with the Soviets on this. First they say they want to bring World War Two to an end. We say all right, let’s discuss how to do this—self-determination, etc. Then they say look at the fact, there are two Germanies. We say there is a third fact—Berlin. They say they want to change that fact, so we are back to the question of putting an end to World War Two. Given this circle, we have tried to convince them that the problem is now to accept the fact of disagreement. How then do we manage this fact of disagreement without war and how do we work out a modus vivendi. Up to now, the Soviets have shown no interest in this. Mr. Popovic said that if we could agree on (1) demilitarization of Germany and (2) guaranteeing the frontiers, then the Berlin problem would disappear. The Secretary said we have had some experience with demobilization. Our military budget in 1947 was 10 billion dollars; it is now about 50 billion dollars. The graph of the increase coincides with pressures on Greece, Turkey, Korea, Berlin, etc. If we take ten billion dollars as our normal peacetime military budget, then we have spent, since 1947, 420 billion dollars above normal because of Soviet pressures in addition to the lives lost in Korea. We have seen nothing in our experience since 1945 which gives us any confidence in demilitarization as a solution. He said he did not expect Mr. Popovic to comment on this but he wanted to say that, given the situation in Central Europe, the presence of U.S. forces in Berlin and West Germany is a stabilizing element. Mr. Popovic said he could agree to this if we made efforts to settle the Berlin question. The Secretary said he wondered why the Soviets did not destalinize East Germany. If the regime were more accepted by the people there would be fewer tensions. Mr. Popovic commented that he was not sure. The East Germans do recognize their frontiers, they have negotiated a trade agreement with Yugoslavia and in general the Yugoslavs have found them easy to deal with. He repeated that he thought it was possible to reach a peaceful settlement. The Secretary replied that we do not say it is impossible; he just did not see any possibilities now. He asked Mr. Popovic how long he intended to stay in the U.S. Mr. Popovic replied he would be here about two weeks. The Secretary said that before Mr. Popovic left, we should have something more precise to say about the trade problem. There is some prospect that statements will be made on the floor of Congress which will ease the problem as far as the legislative history and Congressional intent are established. Mr. Popovic asked if the Government could make a statement. The Secretary replied he felt sure the President’s efforts with Congressional leaders were more important at this juncture than any statement that could be made. He urged Mr. Popovic not to be prematurely discouraged. 135. Editorial Note On October 5, following passage of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 with the provision denying most-favored-nation status to Yugoslavia and Poland, Ambassador Kennan offered his resignation. (Telegram 496 from Belgrade, October 5; Department of State, Central Files, 611.0041/10–562) Both McGeorge Bundy and President Kennedy, in separate messages, requested that Kennan withdraw his resignation. (Telegrams 367 and 373 to Belgrade, October 5 and 9, respectively; ibid.) The Ambassador agreed to do so on October 10, thanking President Kennedy, but underlining that congressional action had “severely narrowed” the “possibilities for successful action here.” According to Kennan, the defeat of efforts to protect Yugoslavia’s MFN status was the culmination of a series of events that led to his decision to return to academic life. (Memoirs, 1950–1963, pages 305–306) 136. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.0041/10–962. Confidential; Priority. Belgrade, October 9, 1962, 7 p.m. 519. Policy. Petric has emphasized to us great importance his government attaches to strong statement by President at time signing of Trade Expansion Act indication administration’s dislike of Congressional action denying MFN treatment to Yugoslavia. This was central point that emerged from general discussion between him and JonesOwen T. Jones, Counselor for Economic Affairs at the Embassy in Belgrade. 9 October concerning implications of recently concluded Trade Expansion Act and appropriations bill. While noting with interest press reports on final provisions appropriations bill, Petric focused his attention on MFN. He recalled hope expressed by Foreign Secretary Popovic in Washington that aid would not be needed much longer. But without MFN future US/Yugoslav economic relations plainly insecure. PL 480 would not alone provide secure basis. Trade was foundation of sound economic relations and it was denial of MFN treatment under the Trade Expansion Act that was of immediate and deep concern to his government. He then went on to make following principal points: 1. This government could not understand our handling Yugoslavia legislatively as if it were member of Warsaw Pact. While he did not make point explicitly he implied that coupling of Poland and Yugoslavia showed lack of understanding of fundamentally different position these two governments bear to Soviet Bloc. He posed rhetorical question several times, “do you want to push us into the Bloc?” There was, he asserted, a basic misconception in US of Yugoslavia’s independent posture and of its relations with Soviet Bloc. 2. His Foreign Minister had been led to believe in Washington, as had Yugoslav Embassy there, that MFN provision was under control and that it would be deleted in final stages of legislation. It came as great surprise to find things turning out otherwise. We pointed inter alia to situation that had developed with respect to Cuba, the strong feelings within our country on this issue, and how it added to the administration’s legislative difficulties. In noting this Petric said his government had been quite correct on Cuban problem. Noting in passing but without elaboration that his government was unhappy over Barin Drzic case, he said Yugoslav carriers had standing orders not to transport anything of dubious character to Cuba and that he had specific knowledge of cases where Yugoslav carriers had declined to carry such material although sought to do so by Western shippers. His government, he concluded, would be sensitive on problems of free trade and free navigation with Cuba. 3. While no action had been taken on matter yet, entire MFN subject was under active review by his government. At the moment it was waiting to see if the President would make strong statement at time of signing Trade Expansion Act making it clear administration saw differently from Congress on Yugoslav problem and denial of MFN privileges. His government needed such public statement so that its own people could understand there is basic difference of view in US on this matter so crucial to Yugoslavia. Petric noted with satisfaction recent articles by Walter Lippmann and Chalmers Roberts as well as editorials that have appeared in the US press. But what was needed was short of Presidential statement that he described. To this he clearly attached the utmost importance. He reverted back to it repeatedly. When we expressed surprise that there should be any doubt in anyone’s mind on where administration stood on this issue, Petric said record was clear until about two weeks ago when first real trouble was encountered with MFN clause during final stages of negotiation. Since then the administration had made no clear-cut public statement that was helpful to Yugoslav Government. In looking to future, we recalled to Petric some of points made by Secretary Rusk to Valdimir Popovic recently as measure of desire to deal with MFN problem promptly and constructively. We noted that in any event it presumably would be twelve months after notification before tariff rates would actually change and the interval afforded both of us opportunity to deal with problem constructively. Petric quickly pointed out that effective date of rate changes was less important than present psychological impact. In anticipation of abrogation of MFN treaty, commercial and trading circles would now be more diffident about doing business with Yugoslavia and her credit position was likely to be adversely affected. Moreover, voice of US Government would now carry less weight with Western European circles in those forums such as OECD and EEC where US had been helpful on Yugo-slavia’s behalf in past. Western Europeans could point to our own actions and call into question whatever influence we might now try to exert. Meeting concluded with Petric’s observing that appropriate public statement by administration was essential first step to any constructive action on problem and that in absence such statement his government could only assume Congressional action represented administration as well as Congressional attitude toward Yugoslavia. Kennan 137. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in YugoslaviaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.0041/10–1262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Bundy, cleared by Tyler and S/S, and approved by Rusk. Washington, October 12, 1962, 7:22 p.m. 386. Eyes only for Ambassador from Secretary and Bundy. Reurtel 534.Telegram 534, October 11, reads in part: “This will be very bad. Only strong statement by President at this time could have convinced Yugos that Executive Branch has not during past fortnight changed its attitude and abandoned determined effort to oppose MFN provision. It would be an illusion to suppose that statements made to Yugos at any lower levels, including myself, will be of avail in countering this impression, and much less press reaction. A Presidential statement at later date might on principle be useful; but it will probably be too late.” (Ibid., 611.0041/10–1162) What happened at signing ceremony was that President had strong paragraph prepared and then found that arrangements called for him to read the whole statement in the presence of large Congressional group including Wilbur Mills who was at once indispensable in passage of bill and determined and sincere opponent of President on MFN issue. President thus faced choice between softening language to point of ineffectiveness out of personal friendship to Mills, or else risking press assertions of personal affront to Congressman who is powerful on all issues and helpful on many. This led him to omit the paragraph, and to issue it separately has not proved practicable, as President initially intended, because he is out campaigning. All of us recognize difficulty this creates for you, but we suggest that if Popovic or others raise question with you, you should make it clear that you know directly from the President of his continued determination to press for removal of MFN prohibition in next session and your understanding from White House that his position will be made clear at earliest moment appropriate in terms of political effectiveness in US. Our expectation is that this will be at next press conference, but you might emphasize to Yugoslavs that President’s determination is the essential point and that even from their own point of view political effectiveness within the US is more important element in timing of statements than understandable need for reassurance in Belgrade. Rusk 138. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 411.6841/10–1362. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Zagreb and Sarajevo. Belgrade, October 13, 1962, 3 p.m. 550. Have just visited Foreign Minister Popovic at his request (Embtel 545).Telegram 545, October 12, reported that Popovic had asked Kennan to call on him, adding that Petric had called the defeat of MFN for Yugoslavia the “lowest point” in relations between the two countries. (Ibid., 768.13/10–1262) His purpose was to express GOY reaction to denial MFN to Yugoslavia by new trade act. His statement was more restrained and measured in tone than editorials of morning press but not less disturbing in content. Following is summary his remarks. He could well believe administration had not wished to see this action taken. But action had been taken; it was there. Yugoslavs could not be asked to base their reactions on subtle distinctions between various branches of our government. So far as they were concerned this was action of USG and had to be treated as such. During recent period, as he thought I would agree, they had shown great restraint and had avoided any action that could possibly exacerbate developing situation in Washington (I agreed). There was now no further point in remaining silent. They could see only two calculations on basis of which this action could have been justified in minds of its authors: (A) That Yugoslavs were in so miserable position that this could be done to them with impunity, or (B) that they were not ever really independent at all. Both had profoundly offensive connotations. In their view this was a political action taken for purely political reasons. It was no comfort to them to know that at their expense certain other things might have happened which had positive significance. For all of this and its consequences they were not only disappointed but profoundly concerned. It was idle to suppose that effects of this action were limited to the prospective rises in duties, that they would not be felt until the duties were changed, or that they would be limited to this immediate injury. Already, things were happening on every hand, injurious to Yugoslavia which were reflections of congressional action. In matters of their relationship to GATT and EEC, in international financial matters, et cetera, they were already encountering difficulties traceable directly to this cause. A chain reaction had set in. He gave me examples: A 5,000 ton order for soybeans from the US which could not be fulfilled; reluctance of EXIM Bank to pursue discussions with their representatives; cancellation in New York, for avowed political reasons, of large order for Slovenian furniture, et cetera. Even in best of circumstances there was setting in a negative inertia from which Yugoslav interests were bound to suffer widely. Yugoslavs were simply flabbergasted to receive such an injury from us at this time. They were obliged to think back to years immediately after the war. There had been extremely unpleasant moments in our relationship then and even instances where they had seen themselves obliged to fire on our planes. Yet even at that time nothing of this nature had ever been undertaken against them. He realized statements had been made from time to time which annoyed us, but no such overt action, designed to injure us, had been taken on their side. We could understand their bewilderment and consternation at being faced with such action today. They felt there was nothing more they could hold onto in US-Yugoslav relations. He had been obliged to report to President Tito that he was unable to assure him of stability of our arrangements for surplus food. He could never tell now when something would come up that would vitiate this entire program. He had been obliged to advise the President to look around for alternatives, as matter of common prudence. This situation had already damaged our relations. He saw no possibility of returning to normal basis so long as the action remained in force. Even if it were repaired at early date it would be some time before all the damage, material and psychological, could be repaired. In some respects, repair might never be wholly possible for time would be marching on and even when reversal came, conditions might no longer be what they once were. On other hand, if no correction of this situation could be made, and if it were to continue indefinitely, he wanted me to understand that all the positions of our government in this country would then be seriously jeopardized. I said I would report his statement to my government promptly and in detail. Observed I had as yet seen nothing that led me to believe that PL 480 shipments were jeopardized. Said I was persuaded administration intended to try to bring about a reversal of action on MFN when new Congress met and I thought it possible this would be made clear publicly in coming period. Pointed out that while no one expected this action would go wholly without reaction from Yugoslav side, they would doubtless have many occasions to choose whether to conduct themselves in manner that would facilitate reversal Congress decision or in manner that would further exacerbate congressional opinion, and voiced conviction former would be in their own interests. My own analysis is that Popovic’s remarks were accurate statement of Foreign Office position but did not fully reflect extent of hurt pride and anger now prevailing on part of senior leaders, effects of which we may be made to feel at any time. Statement suggests no decision yet taken to retaliate sharply against our “positions” in Yugoslavia, which I take to mean libraries, cultural exchange arrangements, AID mission, Consulates, but such decision would have to be expected if PL480 were to be terminated or drastically curtailed in present circumstances. (To me personally, Popovic was cordial and pleasant throughout. He insisted on producing refreshments, which is Yugoslav way of stressing that unpleasant statements are not to be taken personally.) Kennan 139. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Mudd and approved in S on November 7. Washington, October 23, 1962, noon. SUBJECT US-Yugoslav Relations PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Mr. Veljko Micunovic, the Yugoslav Ambassador Dr. Josip Presburger, Counselor of the Yugoslav Embassy Mr. Robert C. Mudd, EE During his call on the Secretary on October 23 Yugoslav Ambassador Veljko Micunovic brought the conversation around to US-Yugoslav relations which he said he was under instructions from the Foreign Office to discuss. He spoke along the following lines: He wished to underline Yugoslavia’s sense of bewilderment and consternation at Congressional action denying Most Favored Nation treatment to Yugoslavia. It is useless to go into all of the reasons why Yugoslavia feels this way because these are well understood in the State Department. Yugo-slavia’s principal concern was that a new element had been inserted into otherwise very profitable US-Yugoslav relations. There was a clear understanding in Belgrade of the attitude of the Kennedy Administration towards the Congressional action and it was recognized that the Administration had striven manfully to prevent what turned out to be the final result. Great political damage had been done to Yugoslavia’s international reputation and prestige. The Yugoslav Government was most upset over this fact and regarded itself as totally blameless in the result-ant deterioration in US-Yugoslav relations. The Yugoslav Government hopes for normalization of relations and trusts that the Administration will take some steps to rectify a situation which, from the Yugoslav standpoint, is unwarranted. Yugoslavia sets great store by its relations with the United States and would like to see these relations expand to the profit of both parties. Yugoslavia continues to value highly friendly relations with the United States and is just as determined as ever to maintain an independent policy in international affairs. Feeling was extremely high in Yugoslavia because of the recent Congressional action, particularly since the timing was so bad. Yugoslavia’s foreign economic relations are being expanded in the direction of Western Europe and the United States and away from the Soviet Bloc. The Congressional action was clearly against this trend and Yugoslav efforts to associate itself more closely with GATT, OECD, and the Common Market countries. Three years of bad harvest and “certain other difficulties” had made the impact of the action by Congress much greater. The Secretary remarked that as he had said to Valdimir Popovic in New York a short time ago both the President and he regretted exceedingly the action of the Congress denying MFN treatment to Yugoslavia. The Ambassador was quite correct in his statement that the Administration had made strenuous efforts to prevent the Congressional action. He went on to say that we would be in no hurry to implement the provisions of the new law and that certain steps were under consideration to correct the situation. He said that we are working on the problem and that we would do our utmost to prevent serious trade complications for Yugoslavia. We also would make an effort to see to it that a positive attitude was adopted toward Yugoslavia’s request for provisional accession to GATT. Ambassador Micunovic thanked the Secretary for his statement of the US attitude and said he would inform Belgrade immediately. He repeated that Yugoslavia seeks a return to normal relations with the US as soon as possible since it values these relations highly. He intimated that it would be possible to restore these relations to normalcy only if MFN status were restored to Yugoslavia. The Secretary said he understood and observed that Yugoslavia had been caught in the whirlwind of reaction to recent developments involving Soviet actions in Cuba. Yugoslavia could not prevent what happened; neither he nor the President could prevent it either. Yugoslavia had no connection with developments in Cuba but as long as tension stemming from Soviet actions in Cuba remains in this country, there were going to be problems for Yugoslavia in the United States. Ambassador Micunovic replied that Yugo-slavia’s only interest at the moment was to see a relaxation in the presently very taut international situation. In the process of bidding the Secretary farewell Ambassador Micunovic mentioned the long delay in presenting his credentials to the President. He said he hoped to do this as soon as possible and expressed the hope that the present crisis over Cuba would not unduly delay the presentation of his credentials. The Secretary replied that the President was extremely occupied at the moment but that we would do what we could to arrange his call on the President as soon as possible.Micunovic presented his credentials to President Kennedy on November 2. A memorandum of their conversation is ibid., Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Former Ambassador Marko Nikezic had left the United States on August 15. 140. Airgram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/11–2862. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Kennan. Belgrade, November 28, 1962. A–543. Subject: Current Situation with Respect to U.S. Policy Toward Yugoslavia. Pass White House, AID, USIA, Department of Defense. The following is an attempt to summarize the situation that now prevails with respect to U.S. policy towards Yugoslavia and to note certain of its more important implications. It is written in the hope that it may serve as a basis for a thoroughgoing review of this policy. 1. What U.S. policy has been since 1948. Since Tito’s break with Moscow in 1948, the Executive Branch of the United States Government has pursued a policy designed (a) to encourage the maintenance and strengthening of the independence of Yugoslavia, particularly with relation to Moscow; and (b) to encourage evolution of the institutions and practices of the present Yugoslav regime away from the Soviet pattern on the basis of which they were originally founded and in the direction of greater liberality and greater affinity to those of the West. The original rationale for such a policy was clear and persuasive. Up to 1948, a monolithic unity had existed in the Communist movement. The thesis had been well-established in communist circles and beyond that without this unity there could be no successful adherence to Marxist-Leninist principles. This thesis was useful to Stalin and his followers. It contributed importantly to the discipline of their movement. It left millions of sincere Marxists with the feeling that there was no real alternative between the total abandonment of their cause or complete submission to Moscow. By 1948, this impression, closely connected as it was with the myth of the Kremlin’s infallibility, had come in fact to constitute an essential part of the magic of the appeal of the communist movement to millions of people. The Yugoslav defection shattered this magic. For this reason, it was obviously important to the West that Tito should succeed in his effort to establish an independent position. Whether he could do this would of course depend largely on whether Yugoslavia proved capable of surviving and flourishing economically outside the Soviet system. The achievement of a reasonable degree of economic prosperity was almost essential to the establishment and maintenance of independence. But more than this was at stake in Yugoslavia’s economic future. If Yugoslavia, as a nominally Marxist-socialist state operating outside the framework of the Soviet system, were to show better results in the way of economic development than did those of the Eastern European satellites which remained within the system, this would be bound to excite jealousy and a demand for greater independence of policy vis-à-vis Moscow among the peoples and regimes of the remainder of the erstwhile satellite area. To the extent this economic success could be associated with, and supported by, Western practices, or at least ones differing from those of Moscow, Yugoslavia would provide an example which could only serve, in the long run, to shake confidence, throughout the communist orbit and among the non-committed peoples, in the infallibility of the Kremlin and the correctness of its ideas and approaches. There was, therefore, every reason for the U.S. to adopt, as it did, a policy aimed at the strengthening of Yugoslavia’s independence, at the support of her economic advance, and at the evolution of her institutions and practices away from the Moscow patterns. 2. What U.S. policy has not been. At the time this policy was devised, American policymakers knew well that Tito was himself an old-school Marxist-Leninist communist, and that as such he was not, and was not likely to become, our friend. Nevertheless, the policy then adopted ruled out any effort to overthrow him. For this, there were good reasons. First, even had it been feasible for us to promote Tito’s overthrow, it would have been a dreadful political mistake. It would have served as clear evidence to other satellite leaders that survival was possible for them only in complete submission to Moscow—that any attempt to follow Tito’s example would only leave them vulnerable to destruction at the hands of embittered and implacable capitalists. It would, in this way, have sacrificed at the outset one of the main advantages the Western world might hope to derive from the Soviet-Yugoslav break, namely: the introduction into the minds of the satellite communist leaders of the element of doubt as to whether slavish adherence to Moscow discipline and example was the only feasible political course open to them. Secondly, to overthrow Tito was unnecessary. It was clear that a Yugoslav socialist regime which had sacrificed the tie with Moscow and had struck out on the perilous and difficult path of trying to find a satisfactory independent existence somewhere between the two worlds would have no stomach for further efforts at subversion in the U.S. and other Western countries. To pursue such efforts in association with Moscow was now no longer possible; to pursue them alone would have been quixotic. The U.S. had nothing to fear then, and has had nothing to fear since, from the standpoint of its internal security, from an independent socialist Yugoslavia. Finally, to overthrow the Yugoslav regime was simply not politically feasible. There was no visible alternative to it that would have been preferable. The “partisan” movement, with Tito at its head, represented the only serious unifying force in the country. Without it, at any time in the postwar period, the country would have fallen to pieces. The major non-socialist political parties which had opposed the communists in the wartime period were ones expressing the political will, in each case, of only one of the national components of the Yugoslav state—primarily the Croats or the Serbs. The most active political force among the Croats was outspokenly fascist in inspiration and was wholly aligned with the Nazi cause during the war. The Serbian monarchists had deeply estranged the other nationalities in the prewar period; it is out of the question that they should have constituted the basis for a restoration of the Yugoslav state after the war, even had Mikhailovic retained Allied support and won out over the partisans. The painful fact is that in the postwar period the Tito regime was Yugoslavia, and it still is. There have been varying phases and forms of popular discontent with it—some quite widespread. But there has been no serious national-Yugoslav opposition, as opposed to separatist opposition or opposition expressing the aspirations only of one or the other of the national components of the present state. Whoever talks about overthrowing the present regime talks in reality about breaking up the Yugoslav state. The appalling instability this would at once introduce into Balkan affairs is obvious. Nothing could be less realistic than to suppose that a number of fragment-entities, none of them prepared for independence and some of them not even potentially qualified for it, could provide a more effective resistance to Soviet communism in the Balkan area than the extraordinarily firm and experienced national regime that now governs twenty million people in this area and controls one of the two largest ground force establishments in the non-Soviet part of Europe. For these reasons, the Department of State, with the approval of the respective administrations, rejected throughout the period from 1948 to 1961 the idea of making the overthrow of the Tito regime an objective of U.S. policy. 3. Means used to implement the policy adopted. The means by which U.S. policy towards Yugoslavia was pursued in the period from 1948 to 1961 are well-known, and need only the briefest capitulation. They included: (a) encouragement of close economic relationships between Yugoslavia and the West, based on the extension to Yugoslavia of favorable trading and credit facilities; (b) extensive shipments of surplus food, to make up the deficit in Yugoslav grain production; (c) the extension of long-term credit and technical support for new industrial development; (d) a broad program of technical assistance, designed particularly to promote travel and contact by Yugoslavs in the West; (e) a highly developed informational program, including operation of libraries and reading rooms in leading Yugoslav cities; (f) intensive promotion of cultural exchanges between Yugoslavia and the West; (g) operation of governmental programs of exchange of persons, and encouragement to private ones; and (h) encouragement to the Yugoslavs—up to 1957 through a military aid program, thereafter through extension of facilities for normal military purchasing in the U.S.—to orient their military establishment towards ourselves and to render it independent of Soviet sources of supply. 4. Results of this policy, to 1961. The results of this policy, as of the beginning of 1961, were generally favorable and encouraging. Extensive changes, all in Western interests, had by that time taken place in Yugoslav institutions and practices. Economic life had been extensively reoriented towards the West. Foreign trade now ran predominantly to Western countries. With respect to contacts with foreigners, travel by Yugoslavs abroad, access to foreign media of information, and cultural and intellectual exchanges with Western countries, a regime was being applied which was far more lenient than that of any of the countries remaining within the bloc. Extensive changes in the direction of greater liberalization had occurred in both the social and the political system. Tastes and interests of the people were now running overwhelmingly to the West. It is not an exaggeration to say that by 1961 Yugoslavia had come more than half the distance from Soviet outlooks, institutions and practices to ones which, while not identical with those of the West, were such as to permit a generally normal, profitable, and cordial relationship with Western countries. And the trend was continuing. Not all of this was the effect of our effort alone; but without our effort it would assuredly not have occurred. The success was not uniform or complete. We were not successful in changing the political personality of the Yugoslav President himself. Nothing that we did served to produce any great change in Tito’s view of himself as a communist; in his concern for the opinions of other communist leaders; in his determination—as a supreme political goal—to win respect and acceptance from the communist world by which he had been rejected. His views on world problems continued to be colored by ideological prejudice. He could be brought to like individual Americans, but not America as such. He persisted in viewing American aid cynically and without gratitude, as something extended for selfish imperialistic reasons which placed no claim on his appreciation. He avoided, where he could, being put in the position of asking for our aid or expressing public appreciation for it; he did his best to avoid bringing to public attention its nature and its extent. Under his personal influence, Yugoslav attitudes towards the broader cold war issues continued to show a partiality to the communist side (though in their own bilateral relationships with the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. the Yugoslavs remained correct and impartial). Similarly, the intensive relations which Tito cultivated with the new African and Asian countries, particularly in the period 1959–1961, were pursued in a spirit which was distinctly anti-Western. All of this was irritating. It was not a situation we could ignore. It called (as did, by that time, other developments as well) for certain adjustments in our treatment of Yugoslavia, including certain curtailments and changes in the aid programs. But it did not invalidate—and this is the vital point—the basic concepts of policy on which we had been operating since 1948. Movement in the direction we desired was no doubt slower than it would otherwise have been, as a result of Tito’s personal attitude; but it was never wholly halted, nor was its pace so slow as to constitute grounds for serious discouragement. Only in one field—that of official Yugoslav attitudes towards world problems—did all progress appear to have stopped by 1961. But even here there was no ground for despair. The root of the problem lay in the aspirations and attitudes of the Yugoslav President himself. But Tito was no longer young; he was increasingly inactive; the little group of senior officials who supported him in these anti-Western policies was becoming narrower and more isolated; counter-pressures were building up; awareness that Yugoslavia stood to gain from a further development of relations with the West, even at some sacrifice of the old ideological stance, had penetrated into Tito’s immediate entourage and had affected persons whose authority could reasonably be expected to become greater, and possibly decisive, as his powers declined. There was an excellent prospect that if our cards were played with reasonable dexterity, the pressures for a more forthcoming policy towards us would soon begin to show real effect. All that was required of us, in these circumstances, was a bit more patience, coupled with a somewhat greater effort than had been made in the past to bring the Yugoslavs to realize that the price of our aid and collaboration, over the long run, was a reasonable degree of fairness and objectivity in the approach to ourselves and our problems. There was no reason for despairing of the efficacy of the basic concepts on which our policy had been founded. There was no reason to jettison at this point a long-term approach into which much substance and effort had already been invested, and which had yielded, and was continuing to yield, favorable and promising results. On the contrary, with the growing seriousness of the Russian-Chinese conflict, with the increasing importance of Yugoslavia as a factor in that conflict, and with the sharpness of the financial and economic pressures now coming to bear on the Yugoslav Government, there was, as of 1961, less reason than ever to relax the sort of effort to which we had been committed throughout the previous thirteen years. 5. The collapse of established policy. The above represented, in rough outline, the situation which prevailed in 1961, as the present Administration took over in Washington. Yet in the brief intervening period of less than two years, events have occurred in American policy which have not only largely shattered this background of concept and destroyed its present effectiveness but have even begun to jeopardize the important results achieved in the past. With the exception of surplus food (where the Yugoslavs are well aware that internal considerations play a prominent role in our willingness to continue the shipments), existing programs of economic assist-ance have now either come to an end or are approaching their termination; and the Executive Branch has been deprived of almost all discretion and flexibility with respect to the negotiation of new ones. No further developmental financing has been extended to the Yugoslavs since March 1961. They have been virtually cut off from purchasing of new items of military equipment in the U.S., even in instances where the items in question are obsolescent to our own use and unclassified, and even when they are willing to pay cash. They have been abruptly faced with legislation calling for denial to them of most-favored-nation customs treatment for Yugoslav goods, which they had enjoyed for more than seventy years. In this way they have been threatened with curtailment of their possibilities for earning their own way in economic relations with our country. By consequence of, and in connection with, these events, Yugoslav trade and credit have already been materially damaged. The Yugoslavs find themselves faced with a whole series of spontaneous harassments at the hands of private circles in our country: boycotts and withdrawals of existing orders for their goods; public burning of Yugoslav products at American supermarkets; impairment of their facilities for obtaining commercial credit; refusal to their vessels of facilities for loading and unloading at American ports. Even the intellectual exchange program of the University of Texas had to be abandoned at that university and transferred to another region of the country, in deference to the prevailing mood of anti-Yugoslavism. A further blow, directly connected with the MFN decision, is the inclusion of Yugoslavia among the countries affected by the Cunningham Amendment in PL 87–793. For all of this drastic deterioration in their treatment at our hands, going in many instances beyond anything they suffered when they were a Soviet satellite, no official reason has to my knowledge yet been tendered to the Yugoslavs by any responsible quarter in our country. No one has troubled himself to inform them what the Congressional grievance against them is, for what they are being punished, and just what they could be expected by us to do if they wished to avoid these manifestations of our disfavor. People have told them that the Executive Branch disapproves of certain of the legislative measures that have been taken; but no one has told them what it is, specifically, that Congress has taken exception to in their behavior, or what sort of concessions on their part would again entitle them even to the normal trade treatment accorded to other non-aligned countries. The Yugoslavs can of course deduce, from the terms of the legislation as well as from the nature of the domestic discussion in our country, that they are being penalized because they are nominally “communist.” This is a point at which they themselves, as will be seen below, contribute to their own difficulties by insisting on retaining this term in the name of the ruling party. They are well aware, as are all foreign observers who have seen anything of Yugoslavia, that neither in point of domestic institutions nor of foreign policy does their position correspond to that of the real “communist” countries. Their entire effort, furthermore, over 13 years, has been to prove by the tenor of their behavior in relations with Western countries that cordial and mutually profitable relations can exist between a country which calls itself “socialist”—or even “communist,” if you will—and non-communist countries, provided there is good will on both sides. To be told in effect (and this is the clear inference of the Congressional action) that we do not accept this principle, that they must suffer at our hands simply because they call themselves “socialist” or “communist,” and that their actual behavior towards us in bilateral relations is neither here nor there: this is one of the most devastating blows they could receive, for it shatters the entire basis on which they have tried to construct their relationship with Western countries over recent years. It means that the price of a good relationship with our country is the one thing they cannot possibly do without denying their own political past and placing in question the legitimacy of their own regime: namely to renounce publicly and completely their belief in the principles of socialism. This situation is not greatly ameliorated by the fact that the most serious and conspicuous of these various anti-Yugoslav measures have been taken over the stated disapproval of the Executive Branch of our government. The Yugoslavs are obliged, after all, to deal with the end-product of our governmental action. They must look at our government as a whole. They are not greatly comforted by the fact that initiatives of which they are the victims were ineffectively opposed here and there within our own governmental counsels. They are aware that the Executive Branch of the Government has on occasions stated its opposition to these measures. They are also aware that it has not done this very emphatically, nor has it made a serious effort to correct the moods and misunderstandings of public opinion out of which these measures arose. They are further aware that in certain instances the Executive Branch has even deferred to these same moods and misunderstandings in the shaping of measures which lay within its own discretion—particularly in the field of military affairs and of matters lying within the purview of departments and agencies other than the Department of State. It is not possible to estimate how much damage has already been done by this state of affairs. The Yugoslavs have repeatedly stated that U.S.-Yugoslav relations have already been adversely affected. They have warned us that this effect will be much more adverse still, and will probably affect our “positions” in this country (primarily, we must assume, the USIS establishment) if the MFN provision is not soon reversed by the new Congress. It is certain, in any case, that much bitterness has been created on the Yugoslav side. People who were once inclined to argue for a closer relationship with us, and with the West generally, no longer feel that they have grounds for doing so; those who have never liked the Western orientation are triumphing; calculations are being arrived at, plans made, positions and steps taken in foreign policy, all under the impression that American policy has turned decisively, for the moment, at least, against good relations with Yugoslavia—that important, and thus far decisive, forces in American society are determined that the doors of economic collaboration and even normal trade shall remain closed to Yugoslavia—and that the Executive Branch, while not sharing this view, is not prepared to undertake vigorous public opposition to it. By the same token, those of us who have tried in recent years to persuade the Yugoslavs that a close and fruitful association with our country lays open to them any time they wished to take advantage of it, are now effectively silenced. All of this, let us note, is occurring at a time of greatest delicacy and cruciality in world events, when relationships within the communist bloc are shaken and unstable as never before; when the Yugoslavs are in particular need of outside economic and financial support; when Soviet policy has changed in such a way as to offer to Yugoslavia much more inviting prospects for fruitful collaboration than at any time in recent years. Looked at in its entirety, this all spells, as I see it, the virtual collapse, at a singularly unfortunate moment, of a policy which has been pursued over a long series of years, which had yielded good results and promised to continue to yield them, and which there was no objective reason to abandon. 6. What has produced this collapse? While this is a question, parts of which could be better answered in Washington than here, the following observations may not be wholly irrelevant. We must recognize first that the policy pursued towards Yugoslavia throughout the 1950s never commanded full public understanding or support at home. There was always opposition to it—not wide popular opposition, but an opposition composed, as I see it, primarily of two very vigorous and vocal special interests. The first of these was made up of the Yugoslav refugee elements, supported by allies among various other groups of refugees from Eastern Europe, and by such members of Congress and other participants in political life as were either sincerely moved to sympathy or anxious to cultivate their favor and to appear as their spokesmen. These refugee elements in question were, and continue to be, powerful groups. They have enjoyed important support in American religious circles. Their aims and calculations seem often to have little to do with U.S. interests. In many instances, their main concern appears to have been to produce as rapidly as possible a state of war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, in the hope, presumably, that this will facilitate their own return to residence and power in their homelands. To these people, any suggestion that the U.S. should recognize distinctions between one “communist” government and another is of course anathema. To admit that a “communist” or “socialist” regime could be worthy of toleration at our hands just because it broke its ties to Moscow, ceased efforts at the subversion of our country, and permitted its internal institutions to develop along Western patterns, would be to accept the frustration of their own political ambitions. To admit even the possibility of a gradual evolution of communist countries in the direction of greater liberality would weaken the credibility of their view that war is the only answer. The fact that this is so, and that the aims of these people are often unconnected with American interests, has unfortunately not prevented many prominent American figures from espousing their interpretations of world events and repeating their propagandistic slogans. The second of the two elements to whom I refer is made up of those extreme right-wing American groups who feel themselves under the necessity of demonstrating that all elements in American political life except themselves are the agents, conscious or unconscious, of a communist conspiracy in our midst. To these people, a policy of friendly collaboration and assistance addressed to “communist” Yugoslavia has naturally provided an attractive target for criticism. The less U.S. policy towards the Soviet Union and the bloc countries has shown itself vulnerable to attack on point of “softness,” the more Yugoslavia has loomed as the last example on which an American policy inspired by direct communist influences or by fatuous naivete towards “communism” in the Department of State could be plausibly argued. These elements, like the refugees, not only have no desire to take account of the peculiarities that distinguish Yugoslavia from the remaining bloc countries but react with particular violence, for obvious reasons, to any suggestion that these peculiarities exist or deserve consideration. The influence of these two groups over broader sections of the public has been strengthened in recent years by the growing general impatience with the cold war and by the prevailing popular mood of exasperation towards those nations which call themselves neutral. To the extent one persuades one’s self that whoever is not with us is against us, the rationale of a policy towards Yugoslavia different from policy towards the communist bloc in general becomes unsubstantial. Both refugees and right-wingers have of course been happy to exploit the semantic confusion presented by the term “communist.” In this respect, they are only taking advantage of a tool obligingly placed at their disposal by the Yugoslav leaders themselves. It is characteristic of Tito’s psychology that although his regime no longer corresponds to general Western concept of the term “communist” any more than it corresponds to the general Eastern concept of the term “capitalist,” he prefers it to be called “communist,” hoping this will render it more respectable in Eastern eyes, than to abandon this inaccurate term with a view to making it more respectable in Western ones. He wants, in truth, to have his cake and eat it, too: to see his regime respected and well-treated in the East because it calls itself “communist,” and to see it respected and well-treated in the West because it is not really so. In this sense, Yugoslavs have an appreciable share of the blame for the misunderstanding of their position which has become so widespread in our country and elsewhere in the West. I am increasingly impressed with the difficulty of the problem this presents. Any effort on our part to clear away this semantic confusion not only involves us at once in the tangled question of “what is communism?” but creates difficulties with the Yugoslavs themselves. To tell the world that Yugoslavia is not really communist is to deprive Tito of his fondest pretense, to proclaim his ideological nakedness, and to do him what he conceives to be a great political disservice. He insists, in effect, on the right of making it semantically difficult for us to help him. His defense would be that we should not be misled by semantic symbols—that there is no reason why we should not be prepared to have a normal relationship with a “communist” country, if it is prepared to be correct and collaborative in its approach to us. All of this, again, is irritating. But I do not see that it absolves us of the obligation to try to see things as they are and to teach our people to do likewise. There is nothing in our book that says we have to be permanently the victims of other people’s deliberately perpetrated semantic confusion. These reflections lead directly to another important cause of the situation we have before us. This is the shocking failure of the American press to give the American public in recent years anything like an adequate picture of the situation in Yugoslavia and of the basis on which American policy has rested. It is clear that wide and influential sections of the American public have only the dimmest idea, if any, of the distinctions between Yugoslavia and the countries of the Soviet bloc, of the stake the West has in the preservation of Yugoslavia’s independence, and of the real nature of our policy and approaches. At the present moment, there is no full-fledged American, or indeed Western, correspondent in Belgrade. The news agencies are represented only by local stringers who are not in position to give any frank interpretive picture of conditions here. It is characteristic that even the sophisticated American reading public has to this day been given no idea of the gravity of the effect of recent Congressional actions on Yugoslav-American relations. For this state of affairs, too, responsibility is widely divided. The Yugoslav Government bears a considerable share of the blame by virtue of the negativism and neglect it has shown towards Western press representatives in recent years. The American press, in its turn, has lent itself extensively to pressures brought to bear by the refugee and right-wing groups. Its own professional distortions, involving a love for generalizing concepts under simple catchy adjectives (“communist Yugoslavia,” “red Yugoslavia,” “Yugoslavia’s communist dictator,” etc.) have caused it to collaborate in multiplying the semantic confusion caused by the use of the term “communist.” Added to this has been the failure of the Executive Branch of the Government to convey in any adequate way to the public its own ideas and approaches with regard to Yugoslavia. This last has been the reflection, again, of a situation within our Government which I have no choice but to mention. I trust the Department will not take umbrage if I treat this subject frankly, for it lies at the heart of many of our difficulties. The fact is that in recent years the conceptual impulses and the enthusiasm for the policies we have ostensibly followed toward Yugoslavia have come primarily from a very narrow group of persons in the Department of State who have had the stimulus of daily confrontation with the realities of U.S.-Yugoslav relations at the working level, and have labored with great patience and devotion to try to get sound concepts of policy established and implemented. These people have often been permitted to initiate action of one sort or another; but due to the present far-flung quality of our governmental apparatus, to the lack of intimacy among its various sections, and to the ulterior preoccupations of senior officials, they have had only inadequate facilities for gaining understanding elsewhere for what they were doing. The policies they have recommended have usually been formally approved; but approval has come too often from harried, overworked, and distracted superiors, whose own initiative and personal interest was not greatly engaged, who were willing to let the ideas in question ride as far as they could on their own steam along the road of governmental implementation, but who felt no great sense of personal commitment or conviction, and were not prepared to support these policies very vigorously if they ran into serious opposition either in Congress or in other agencies of the Executive Branch. The result was that few people, even in the Executive Branch, understood fully what it was that we were trying to do, and there were fewer still who could explain it to people outside. The people who knew something about U.S.-Yugoslav relations and understood fully the rationale of policy were not the people who had the facilities for talking to the public, and vice versa. All this has led not only to a serious failure of communication between Department and the public, but to an equally serious failure within the Executive family itself. It is clear that what was recorded on paper as policy towards Yugoslavia has never commanded complete confidence or understanding even in important echelons of the Executive Branch, particularly those that enjoy a special intimacy with Congressional committees. We have seen repeated examples of ignorance or disbelief, sometimes even within the Department of State itself, for the proposition that Yugoslavia is not a member of the Soviet bloc. I have yet to see evidence that this proposition has been fully accepted by the F.B.I., by the security authorities of the Department of State, or by those internal authorities which deal with such matters as visas, re-entry permits, and export controls, not to mention wide echelons of the military establishment. In all of these places we encounter not only persistent disbelief for State Department concepts and interpretations with relation to Yugoslavia but often direct resistance to the logical implementation of established policy in fields of action under their control. It is clear that even if public misunderstanding could be corrected, there would still have to be a greater discipline and coordination of policy within the Executive Branch itself if a constructive policy towards Yugoslavia were to be consistently pursued. As a result of this, it is not surprising that our present position with relation to Yugoslavia is contradictory, unproductive, and unsatisfactory. It consists, for the most part, of a series of heroic struggles with ourselves. We try, with the one hand, to strengthen the Yugoslav economy; with the other, we move to damage it. With one hand, we lend them money; with the other, we make it difficult for them to earn the money with which to repay us. We maintain in Belgrade a high-powered team of talented and experienced people whose task it is to try to make Yugoslavs think well of us and have confidence in us; at the same time, we commit, or allow to be privately committed, act after act designed to give offense to the feelings of all Yugoslavs, communist or non-communist, private or official. After spending years encouraging the Yugoslavs to render themselves militarily independent of Moscow, we then take measures which oblige them, after an interruption of more than a decade, to turn once more to Moscow for new purchases of military equipment. We claim that we wish to encourage greater independence from Moscow on the part of communist countries; yet when one of them genuinely establishes its independence, we treat it in some respects worse than we did before its independence was achieved. We spend years trying to persuade Yugoslav leaders and others that there is no reason why a socialist country should not have a mutually profitable relationship with the West; yet we take restrictive action against them for which we are unwilling to assign any specific reason and which they must assume to have been taken precisely and only because they are socialist. I could continue with the list. I am sure I do not need to do so. It is amply clear that no really effective policy can be conducted against such a background. 7. What is to be done? The present situation confronts us with two requirements. The first is to recover sufficient freedom of action on the part of the Executive Branch to enable it once again to formulate policy toward Yugoslavia with reasonable hope of being able to implement it in a sustained and persuasive manner. This means, of course, the repeal of the legislative provisions requiring denial of MFN treatment to Yugoslavia and restricting the ability of the Executive Branch to include Yugoslavia among the normal recipients of American aid. If and when these objectives have been accomplished, we will still be confronted with the task of reconstructing an effective policy toward Yugoslavia on the basis of the experience we have gathered in the past and in the face of what will, certainly, be a somewhat altered international situation. For both of these tasks—the negative one of removing existing restrictions and the positive one of charting a new and sound policy—we will require a climate of public opinion, and a background of understanding throughout our own official establishment, wholly different from that with which we are now confronted. Without a far-reaching change for the better in this respect, it is unlikely that we will get very far with the correction of the present situation. All this seems to me to bespeak the necessity of a major educational effort, designed to gain understanding among the public, among members of Congress and their various staffs, and among the far-flung echelons of the Executive Branch, for a number of fairly basic and simple propositions concerning conditions in Yugoslavia and the bases of our policy. I cannot undertake here to give an exhaustive listing of these propositions; but the following would be examples of what I have in mind. An understanding of these alone would go very far towards putting us in the clear: (a) Yugoslavia is not a member of the Soviet bloc. (b) The term “communist” when applied to Yugoslavia is inadequate, misleading and not conducive to clarity of discussion. It would be better not to generalize, and not to approach problems of policy towards Yugoslavia by attempting to relate this country to categories of countries. (c) Yugoslav internal institutions, and Yugoslav practices in relations with Western countries, differ drastically and—from our standpoint—favorably from those which are still to be found in the countries of the bloc. (d) In their bilateral relations with us, the Yugoslavs have shown themselves generally correct and restrained. We have few complaints against their conduct in this respect. (e) We have no evidence or reason to believe that the Yugoslavs are engaged, either alone or in association with anyone else, in efforts at subversion within our country; they are not, accordingly, part of the “communist conspiracy.” (f) It is true that there are serious differences of outlook, as between ourselves and the Yugoslavs, on important world problems. We cannot ignore these differences; they constitute an important part of our problem. They do not mean, however, that Yugoslavia is necessarily against us even when she is not for us; nor do they mean that her independence is not useful to us on balance. (g) What happens to Yugoslavia is important to us, both for its effect on the Soviet and Chinese blocs and for its effect on other non-aligned nations. (h) Yugoslavia, despite the socialist principles of her leaders and their sympathy for many Soviet positions, is an independent state. (i) There is a great difference between Yugoslavia’s present independent position and what we would be faced with if she would return to full membership within the bloc. This last would mean a deterioration of the gravest sort of the entire strategic situation of the NATO alliance. (j) What our government most requires in dealing with a complicated “grey area” as Yugoslavia is first and foremost great flexibility of action. It is the possibility of extending or denying favors, as the situation may require, which is vital to any successful policy. (k) The task, with respect to Yugoslavia, is not to try to “buy” friendship by fatuous and unrequited gestures of good will, nor to punish people blindly just because they call themselves “socialist,” but rather to exert the type of discipline on the Yugoslav government which will encourage it to move in a useful direction and discourage it from serving forces hostile to world peace and stability. The above will serve as examples of the sort of thing that has to be gotten across in all three of the directions I have mentioned: the public, Congress, and the various echelons of the Executive Branch most immediately concerned. This requires, as I see it, a concerted effort, laid out on a large scale and given the impetus of vigorous high-level support. I would not attempt to suggest what all the elements of such a campaign would be; but I might offer the following comments. A. The Public. The approach to the public must, as I see it, involve at some point a Presidential statement of more than casual nature. It should involve several public statements or speeches by other high officials. An effort should be made to find qualified younger men who can go around the country, to foreign affairs study groups, universities, etc., with a view to explaining both the objective facts and the bases of our policy. In addition to this, there will have to be high-level approaches to key figures in the press: and not just to two or three of them, but to all who are important in this connection. Particular importance should be attached to publishers of the weekly news magazines. Governmental specialists will know best what use should be made of radio and television. I would emphasize, however, that what is involved here is not just a one-time statement but a persistent, prolonged effort, in which full advantage is taken of the factor of repetition. The moods and misunderstandings we are trying to counter were not created in a day, and they will not be destroyed by one-time impacts. The Washington columnists would be of great help in this, if they would; and I can see no reason why any of them should not be talked to. B. Congress. A successful approach to the press would itself be probably the most important single factor in gaining Congressional understanding for what we are trying to do. The misunderstandings I personally encountered just during my own peregrinations around Capitol Hill last summer were appalling. But there is also need for thorough and leisurely consultation with Congressional leaders—something in the way of seminars, designed not to wheedle them into supporting a policy they do not understand but rather to enlisting their responsibility as co-architects of a policy that will hold water. It ought, as I see it, to be borne in upon them that they cannot remain without responsibility in this respect, and that if they insist on confining themselves to purely negative and destructive strictures on the freedom of the Executive, with a view to preventing it from pursuing any policy at all, the whole case will have to be taken before the public and there will have to be something in the nature of an Executive disclaimer of responsibility for the consequences. I believe that consultations with Congressional leaders could well be supplemented by similar consultations with the leaders of religious groups which have supported negative approaches to the problem of policy toward Yugoslavia. C. The Executive Branch. I am not sufficiently familiar with current procedures for devising and implementing policy to make recommendations as to how we should proceed to assure a better coordination of concept and policy within the Executive Branch of the Government. I should think that a new White House-level paper, summing up the bases and nature of our policy towards Yugoslavia, and designed to have validity with all departments and agencies, would be very useful. I would hope there would be some procedure by which we could bring into the preparation of such a paper the representatives of those sections of the Executive Branch of the Government which have shown to date the greatest skepticism about the soundness of established policy and the least willingness to collaborate in its implementation. I think it particularly important that an effort be made to straighten out our armed services on the subject of policy toward Yugoslavia, and not just the staff of the Department of Defense in Washington but also the various staff colleges and above all the commanders in the field. There have been indications that understanding for the situation in Yugoslavia and for our policy toward this country in many outlying headquarters and commands is substantially nil. This, as I see it, is what the situation calls for. I have refrained here from going into the specifics of what our future policy towards Yugoslavia ought to be. The course I have suggested is designed merely to enable us to regain the flexibility of action, on the part of the Executive Branch, without which any attempt to chart out policy is an empty exercise. Obviously, to be effective, the sort of campaign I have suggested will take high-level interest and authority; and it will mean that a great many people will have to trouble themselves seriously, and in a coordinated way, about this problem. I see no satisfactory alternative. In the absence of a major effort of this sort, the tendency will unquestionably be to continue to do as we have done in the past: to hatch out what we would like to see as policy in the form of papers written in one narrow compartment of the State Department; to try by various private pleas and tactical devices to gain the collaboration, in the implementation of this policy, of a host of people who have no understanding for its conceptual basis and rationale; and finally, when confronted not only with frustration but with injunctions to proceed along contrary lines in certain fields, then to go ahead with this contradictory conduct, being careful at no point to draw any difficult public issues. It is, of course, this procedure of attempting to solve the problem by tactical devices while avoiding the great issues of intellectual understanding underlying it, which has brought us to our present embarrassments. I have no hesitation in saying that if we can see nothing better than this to do in the future, we would do just as well to confess ourselves subjectively incapable of coping with a foreign affairs problem such as that presented to us by Yugoslavia, and then to fold up our tents, before the Yugoslavs fold them up for us, and figuratively to steal away. Such a confession of inadequacy would, however, be so far from our tradition, and its implications would be so devastating for the future of our diplomacy vis-à-vis not just Yugoslavia but many other areas as well, that one simply cannot contemplate it. There is no reason at all to despair of the progress that could yet be made through the consistent pursuit of liberal and flexible policies toward Yugoslavia. If the price of the privilege of conducting such a policy is a major effort to straighten out American opinion and to obtain better understanding for what is admittedly a baffling and complicated problem of international affairs, I am sure this price is still small compared to the implications of an inability or unwillingness to pay it. Kennan Addendum: After completion of the above, it has been called to my attention that in the description in the initial passages of the paper on U.S. policy from 1948 to 1961, no mention was made of the effort to assure Yugo-slavia’s military defense against attack from the East in the early years after the break with Moscow, nor was mention made later on of the fact that the absence of such an attack could be listed among the achievements of U.S. policy. How great the danger of military attack really was, and to what extent our military aid served as an effective deterrent, will never be fully known. Certainly this was one of the purposes which our military aid was originally conceived as serving, and to the extent the danger was real this aid must be considered to have been useful and effective. GFK 141. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President KennedySource: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, NSF. Secret. Washington, December 13, 1962. SUBJECT Our Policy toward Yugoslavia George Kennan has written an excellent airgram (Belgrade’s A–543,Document 140. attached) on our policy toward Yugoslavia which raises critical questions about our present course and makes important and comprehensive recommendations on what we might do. In essence, he charges that our policy toward Yugoslavia has been basically revised not by design intention but rather by a series of separate steps, unrelated to foreign policy consideration, and, in his view, the end result has been that our present stance is “contradictory, unproductive and unsatisfactory.” He feels (and in this he is generally supported by the Executive Departments most directly concerned) that U.S. interests would be served better by reverting to the policy lines first formulated during the Truman Administration than by adhering to the present course brought about by recent Congressional action. It is with this general problem in mind that this afternoon’s (5:30) meeting with State, Defense and AID (Mr. David Bell) has been arranged.According to the President’s appointment book, an off-the-record meeting was held between 5:35 and 6:15 p.m. (Kennedy Library) See Document 143. Actions being sought this afternoon are: a. A decision to have an amendment of the MFN provision of the Trade Expansion Act formally included in the President’s legislative program, and discussed (even if only briefly) either in the State of the Union, or Budget Messages, or both. b. A directive to the Departments of State and Defense to formulate for Presidential consideration, recommendations for military sales program to Yugoslavia. c. A directive to the Departments of State, Defense and AID to study Ambassador Kennan’s recommendations and prepare a program—subject to Presidential approval—for implementing them. McG. B. 142. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/12–1362. Confidential. Also sent to Bucharest and repeated to Bonn, Rome, Moscow, Vienna, Warsaw, Prague, Budapest, Sofia, Hong Kong, Zagreb, and Sarajevo. Belgrade, December 13, 1962, 2 p.m. 743. Following are some personal interpretive comments on pres-ent Yugoslav situation in light of Tito visit to RussiaTito visited the Soviet Union December 2–21. and other developments. These comments were drafted prior receipt news of Khrushchev speech on Soviet-Yugoslav relationsIn his December 12 speech to the Supreme Soviet, Khrushchev placed the majority of the blame for the Yugoslav-Soviet split on Stalin, indicated that Yugoslavia was following its own road to socialism, and stated that Yugoslavia was a socialist country. but they may be useful as comment on same. 1. Experience Tito is now undergoing in Russia no doubt represents for him personal triumph of his life. Without compromising a single point of course he has adopted in domestic affairs, once so bitterly challenged by bloc, and with undiminished insistence on right to conduct an independent foreign policy free of bloc discipline, he has now won recognition for his movement, by Soviet Premier at least, as respectable independent socialist force, and as honored guest in USSR is being treated with deference greater than he could possibly have earned by servile submissiveness. 2. Tito’s triumph will be heightened to extent bloc countries show tendency not only to respect Yugoslav version of socialism but in some respects to imitate it. I can of course be wrong, but proposal for establishment of factory production committees, as proposed in Khrushchev’s speech of November 19, seems closely related to example of Yugoslav system workers councils to which Brezhnev so recently exposed; and certain surprising statements by members Soviet Embassy here suggest Russians are scrutinizing Yugoslav institutions with more than detached interest. People have long speculated whether Yugoslav practices and institutions could be brought sufficiently into conformity with those of bloc to permit Yugoslavia’s reintegration. That such reconciliation should be effected, in part at least, by bringing bloc practices and institutions into greater conformity with those of Yugoslavia presents new and interesting possibility. 3. Central purpose of Tito, in these discussions in Russia, must be to achieve elimination from binding resolutions of Russian Party Congress and of international body of communist parties of postulate that dogmatism and revisionism are both dangers but revisionism is greater of two. He surely desires to see revisionist portion of this formula junked entirely and to have it formally acknowledged that Yugoslav socialism represents neither revisionism nor any other sort of deviation but merely a respectable variant of Marxist-socialist practice, properly tailored to specific needs and possibilities of Yugoslav people. Presumably, such doctrinal readjustment could be formally effected only by new international gathering of communist parties and by new Russian Party Congress. So far as Russian Party concerned I assume that in light recent events prospects for elimination of offensive formula at a new congress would be more favorable today than they were last year, though there would still be bitter opposition. Such change in Russian Party doctrine would in any case be neither fitting nor effective unless it occurred in harmony with and pursuant to, similar readjustments of doctrine on part of bloc as whole. However, to convene new gathering of parties with view to eliminating this formula would, as things stand today, surely be to invite open and final split with Chinese over this issue. To convene a rump meeting without Chinese group would be to acknowledge and formalize split before Congress ever convened. And if formula should be altered or removed, further question would at once arise as to relationship of Yugoslavs, now formally recognized as respectable, to future international communist gatherings. Yugoslavs would be unlikely to resubmit themselves to bloc discipline and to bind themselves in advance to respect and implement collective decisions sight unseen. Yet if revisionism were no longer “greater danger,” would there be adequate rationale for their exclusion from regular gatherings to which dogmatist Chinese were being admitted? Role Yugoslavs were permitted to play at recent Italian Party Congress,At the December 2–8 Italian Party Congress, the Yugoslav delegate was invited to address the meeting and received prolonged applause. where concept of “observers” was apparently stretched quite far, illustrates urgency this problem. In short, Khrushchev’s action in trying to patent socialist respectability to a state which insists on independence of policy strikes at heart of present ambiguities in intra-bloc relationships and may operate to heighten still further present divisive tendencies. 4. Yugoslav desires do not necessarily run to producing a split between China and remainder of bloc. One should not be misled by anguished Yugoslav reactions to Chinese attacks. Tito admires Chinese Communists and would like, for his part, to have had good relations with them. His response to Chinese hostility has not been lasting embitterment or even appreciation for imperialistic and misanthropic nature of Chinese Communist regime, but something more like the disappointment of unrequited love. In his eyes cruelest and most Marxist-Communist regime remains more attractive than most liberal non-Communist government. Were Chinese to turn around and treat him well, as Russians are doing, he would glow with satisfaction; and it would cost him no more to forget their previous insults than it does to forget, as he speaks today in Volgograd of wartime Soviet-Yugoslavia collaboration, the countless slights and atrocities suffered by Yugoslavs at hands of Red Army Forces on Yugoslav soil in 1945. 5. While Tito is enjoying red-carpet treatment and applause of multitudes in Russia, Yugoslavia’s relations with the West, marked by effects of US Congressional actions, renewed strain on relations with Germany resulting from attack on Yugoslav mission in Godesberg, cold shoulder presented by Common Market, and growing indifference of that portion of Western public opinion which is not actively hostile, are at lowest ebb in years. Obviously, one could conceive of no situation better designed to facilitate reconciliation of Yugoslavia with bloc. It is clear that burden of maintenance of Yugoslav independence vis-à-vis Moscow has now come to rest primarily on sense of self-interest of Yugoslavs themselves, in sense that for first time since 1948 it is scarcely supported by any counter-attractions in field of Yugoslav relations with the West. It has been proven that Yugoslav independence can be maintained in face of reasonable balance in potential advantages of friendship with the two sides. Whether it can be maintained when scales are sharply tipped in favor of East, when West has little to offer and Russians much, is now being tested. Perhaps it can. Tito will of course see no reason to make concessions at expense of his independence where he has won so much without them. But situation is still precarious. If in these circumstances present clarification of Yugoslav relations with bloc ends in manner not detrimental to Western interests, Western powers will deserve credit for luck rather than for effort. 6. Seriousness this situation is heightened by fact that effect of recent events, as I see it, can only be to cause further deterioration in climate of Western opinion concerning Yugoslavia. In light of Cuba and Indo-Chinese conflict, Yugoslavia’s claim to be simultaneously non-aligned and socialist, non-aligned for benefit of West and socialist for benefit of East, is wearing dangerously thin. Yugoslav position was revealed in each of these cases as distinctly more socialist than unaligned. At same time, these same conflicts tended to spotlight certain major elements of fraudulence in Marxist-Leninist socialist doctrine: Among others, theses that true socialist country cannot be author of aggression, that socialism is interested only in peace, and that triumph of socialist cause is inevitable and inexorable. All this is bound to stimulate increased impatience even in liberal circles abroad for professed Yugoslav adherence to these principles and skepticism as to its sincerity—a skepticism which will be misplaced primarily only in case of Tito himself and a few ossified followers and I see therefore a further widening of gap between Tito’s outmoded attachment to Marxism-Leninism and needs of Yugo-slavia’s relationship to West. With Tito now being veritably bathed in type of ideological cant and personal flattery to which he is most susceptible, with Belgrade still smarting under effects of various anti-Yugoslav actions and attitudes in West, and with growing impatience in Western circles with all Marxian socialism but particularly that which masquerades as neutralism, I have gloomy thoughts these days re future our efforts to keep Yugoslav-Western relations on even keel. Kennan 143. National Security Action Memorandum No. 212Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 212. Secret. A copy was sent to the Director of Central Intelligence. Washington, December 14, 1962. TO The Secretary of State The Secretary of Defense The Administrator, Agency for International Development SUBJECT U.S. Policy toward Yugoslavia Following a discussion of U.S. policy toward Yugoslavia, the President: 1. Indicated that he was prepared to seek an amendment to the Trade Expansion Act to restore most-favored-nation treatment for Yugoslav goods. The Department of State will prepare a memorandum justifying this course of action. This memorandum should be designed to indicate the advantages of securing most-favored-nation treatment as against the possible alternative course of extending additional aid to Yugoslavia. 2. Authorized the Departments of Defense and State to arrange for the sale of spare parts to Yugoslavia to maintain U.S. military equipment already delivered to the Yugoslav Government. The timing of an announcement of such sales should be coordinated with the White House in connection with the effort to restore most-favored-nation treatment. 3. Directed the Departments of State, Defense and AID to study the proposals and recommendations made by Ambassador Kennan in Belgrade’s airgram A–543Document 140. and prepare for the President’s consideration possible courses of action. McGeorge Bundy 144. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/1–363. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Moscow, Zagreb, and Sarajevo. Belgrade, January 3, 1963, 3 p.m. 847. Part Two being sent as separate message for Department only as Belgrade’s 848.Document 145. Part One of Two. Tito’s speech of December 29 and New Year’s message (my telegrams [garble—833], 841, 843, 844Telegram 833, December 30, 1962, reported on and anaylzed Tito’s December 29 speech. (Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/12–3062) Telegram 841, December 31, provided further analysis of the December 29 address. (Ibid., 768.11/12–3162) In telegram 843, January 1, 1963, the Embassy supplied the highlights of Tito’s New Year’s Day address. (Ibid., 768.11/1–163) Telegram 844, January 1, provided the Embassy analysis of the speech. (Ibid.) round out picture of views and intentions with which he returned from Moscow. After careful study his various statements, we are forced to conclusion that what is implied does indeed represent in several respects an essential change in Yugo relationship to bloc. This is first time we see evidence of intention to make important changes in internal Yugo practices (crackdown on Western cultural influences, increased pressure for collectivization, et cetera) with view to aligning them with those of bloc and thus narrowing ideological differences. This is first time we hear it suggested that Soviet armed forces have role in defense of Yugo socialism. This is first time we note disposition, at least on part of Tito personally, to back off from use of term “nonaligned” with reference to Yugo itself. We cannot ignore fact failure to join bloc formally now publicly motivated not by alleged iniquity of Soviet bloc politics, as in previous Kardelj thesis, or by concern for maintenance acceptable relations with West, but by tactical considerations pertaining to relations with Afro-Asian states, which considerations Tito indicates also serve Soviet interests. Cracks against West are not new, but failure throughout series of statements to balance them with even most perfunctory phrases of reassurance re future course Western-Yugo relations contrasts sharply with Tito’s behavior when he returned from Moscow in 1956 and is flagrant and provocative, especially when taken with his contemptuous repudiation of Western sympathies for Yugo system. It is clear Tito does not have in mind any normal reassociation with bloc at this stage. What he does contemplate is heightened moral and political support for USSR in international arena, farreaching effort to narrow ideological gap between the two systems, and gradual shifting Yugo position from that of nonaligned country cooperating closely with nonaligned group. These changes, if followed, would leave Yugo’s independent status drained of a good portion its previous value for us, and would oblige us, in my opinion, to revise assessment of Yugo’s position on which our policy has rested to date. Department will please bear in mind that in absence any effective US press reporting from Yugo facts on which this judgment based are wholly unknown to US and large parts of world public, but they are familiar to all thoughtful observers here. In deciding on this turn of policy, Tito must have been guided by any or all three of following considerations: (A) That US aid and friendship no longer vital to his regime, (B) that our motives in giving aid are so subjective and our fear of Yugo’s formal return to bloc so great that we will continue to extend certain programs and favors (notably PL 480) regardless of his stance, (C) that value of collaboration with US has been greatly reduced any way by virtue its unreliability in light of US Congressional and public opinion. Probably all three considerations play a part, but I suspect (A) would be valid for him personally, even if others did not apply. This would not be true of many in his entourage, who are well aware of vital importance of continuation of PL 480. Tito’s new line has been sprung unexpectedly on country. No evidence prior consultation or discussions in senior party XV [or?] governmental bodies. Obviously no preparation public opinion. Press and Foreign Office apparently left flatfooted. No evidence that story [effort?] has even been made at working out coherent rationale on various informational fronts. Until this process undertaken and completed situation in policy making echelons will continue be one of considerable uncertainty and disarray. We cannot tell at this stage to what extent Tito’s line will be actually implemented. It will arouse much discontent and opposition within hierarchy. In past, there has been tendency to let him talk but to go on with business as usual in absence specific instructions. It is significant that since his return from Russia Yugo press has treated his statements and whole subject Soviet-Yugo relations with stony editorial silence. Obviously, recent statements were intended for Russian ears, not ours. Tanyug agency, in putting out English text of New Year’s message, has already made significant change involving flat mistranslation, designed to conceal from unaligned and Western public full sharpness his original remarks. Possible much of his intent may be sabotaged, compromised, or glossed over in practice. However, previous experience suggests that some will stick. In any case, he is Premier, President, and Party leader and mere utterance by him of such sentiments represents political act of high importance. End Part I. Kennan 145. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/1–363. Confidential; Priority. Also sent to Zagreb and Sarajevo. Belgrade, January 3, 1963, 6 p.m. 848. Part II. 1. We have it within our power to affect degree of strain on unity of regime which will be produced by any effort to implement Tito’s new line. If we fail to react now or react only in words, Tito will point to this as proof correctness his assessment of what he could get away with, and his hand will accordingly be strengthened. If we make it plain that he is no longer to be permitted to have best of both possible worlds, saying nice things to Russia in public and giving us perfunctory reassurances in private, opposition to his new course will be greatly strengthened. 2. To date I have tried to work here only through Tito, appealing to his own sense of self-interest and making it apparent he could have our friendship if he wanted it and was prepared to reciprocate. So deep is now his commitment against us that I feel we have no choice, while not making personal issue of it, but to strive for intensification of forces which oppose his new line. We now have little to lose. Danger of pushing him back into bloc no longer has same significance as before. His reasons for not formally sacrificing his independence at this time have much less to do with us and our aid than was previously the case. On other hand, he proposes, if undeterred, to take his country on path which would in any case cause that independence to lose much of its value for us. For example important liberalizing and divisive influence Yugo has hitherto exercised on satellites will be forfeited to extent Yugo practices are brought into accord with those of bloc. 3. In weighing our course of action in light Tito’s present posture, two things are quite clear to me: (A) in absence any further and reassuring statement by him making plain his determination to keep country genuinely nonaligned and to cultivate his relationship with West, we cannot proceed to full implementation of program set forth in my A–543.Document 140. Some parts this paper would still stand in light recent events. Others would have to be written differently today. Urge again all this be placed in abeyance pending clarification present Yugo position. (B) We should not attempt to use MFN issue as means of pressure on Yugos. This was senseless and inappropriate measure from start. I think President should fight this as straight issue of principle in connection his Constitutional responsibility for conduct foreign policy, and should not encourage view that suitability of such measure stands or falls with political climate of our relationship with Yugoslavia. 4. Fact is that at present juncture our only effective means of pressure on Yugos is PL-480 agreement, which we have legal right to suspend or cancel at any time. No evidence Yugos care about other aid programs. They have no prospect getting new ones anyway in present circumstances. Continuation PL-480 over coming winter they desperately need. Whether or not we are to react actively in case Tito persists in pres-ent course is therefore mainly question of whether we are prepared to play PL-480 card. We would be mistaken to think he would be impressed, or his opponents strengthened, by empty pleas or protests that stop short suspension of wheat shipments. 5. Should we be disposed to play this card in last resort, our procedure should be as follows: I should go to Tito on instructions. I should point out our policy of recent years has been based on premise Yugoslavia was truly unaligned nation in substance as well as in form, but his recent statements arouse doubt whether this is still case. President Kennedy has instructed me, I should say, to voice hope that if these doubts are unjustified, he, Tito, would make early public statement to this effect, making it clear Yugoslavia is not morally or politically aligned with any outside bloc or political force. I should insist we can not be satisfied with private and unpublished assurances. Carefully refrain from giving any indication what we would do if he fails to make such statement. Simultaneous and similar statement would be made to Micunovic. If after proper interval (perhaps one to two weeks) there has been no satisfactory response (and it is unlikely there will be one), President would draw attention publicly to unsatisfactory implications of Tito’s recent statements, would explain that we had waited some time for some more reassuring word from him but none had been heard, and would say that he had therefore ordered thorough re-examination of premises our policy toward Yugoslavia in light recent events. He would add that pending completion this re-examination he had ordered suspension PL-480 program. All this would be strongly plugged to Yugoslavia on VOA. 6. This course would give following implications: (A) It would infuriate Tito and would place our USIS libraries and other facilities here in some jeopardy. However, pro-Soviet course Tito intends to steer would, if he gets away with it, imply gradual freezing out of these facilities anyway at some point. We are all agreed it would be better to throw them into balance now, while they still have some weight, than to lose them by erosion and get nothing in return. (B) Effect on our own domestic opinion would be such that aid to Yugoslavia would presumably be not for long time to come. [sic] But finding in question would be objectively justified, and frank admission of it might serve to regain Congressional confidence in objectivity and integrity of Executive in approach to Yugoslav problem and thus facilitate resumption programs at later date if circumstances were to warrant. (C) Effect on Yugoslav policy-makers would be dual. Some would use it as instrument for closer relationship with bloc. But since reasons for Yugoslav’s abstention from formal association with bloc no longer derive mainly from considerations of relations with us, I doubt this factor would be decisive. Effect this action would be to heighten greatly distrust here of Tito’s good judgment and discontent with his intended course. It might well bring other leaders to insist more vigorously on his early retirement into honorary Presidential position, which could only be in our interests. (D) For other neutrals this would be striking demonstration US unwillingness to be blackmailed by threats of intimacy with bloc and unwillingness to concede non-aligned status when certain limits are passed in pursuit pro-Soviet and anti-Western course. 7. If we are not prepared to play PL-480 card, then we should keep quiet, make no approaches, let aid programs now under implementation run their course, and reply to any and all requests for new favors by saying Tito had, through his recent statements, deprived us of earlier possibility of being helpful. What we should not do, and what I implore Department to spare me, is to go to Yugoslavia making pious noises of unhappiness and threats of displeasure which we have no intention of backing up in practice. Kennan 146. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 212. Official Use Only. Drafted by Katz. Attached to a memorandum from Brubeck to Bundy, January 3. Washington, January 3, 1963. EFFECTS OF DENIAL OF MFN BENEFITS TO YUGOSLAVIA AND POLAND Section 231 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962,For text of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, P.L. 87–794, approved October 11, 1962, see 76 Stat. 872. See Document 130. requiring the denial of most-favored-nation tariff treatment to Yugoslavia and Poland, strikes at the heart of United States policy maintained for over 14 years with productive results for the furtherance of United States national interests. United States policy during the last three Administrations has been based on the conviction that more active relations in economic, cultural, and political fields with the regimes and with the peoples of Eastern Europe can be exploited to increase the presence and influence of the United States within the communist world and, therefore, to support, stimulate and exert some directing force on courses of action more favorable to us. Section 231 repudiates this long-standing policy and leaves as the alternative a policy of isolating Eastern Europe and withdrawal by the United States from the area, abandoning the field to whatever forces may be at work there. Such a policy would be the antithesis of our current policy and the opposite of our national need. A policy of isolation and withdrawal might be appropriate if the United States were faced with a violent solution to the problems between East and West; one in which hostilities were inevitable if not imminent. In any situation where the United States stake must be protected over the long run, however, in circumstances which more closely resemble peace than war, a policy of withdrawal which attempts to isolate the communist world as a whole would be defensive, barren and destined to fail. This judgment is supported by the developments in Eastern Europe over the past decade and a half, as well as by the increasingly apparent opportunities for Western influence in the communist world. Yugoslavia’s defection from international communism in 1948 was a landmark in post-war history. This event was a severe blow to the myth of the monolithic unity of communism and demonstrated that despite Marxist theories and Soviet repression, the Soviet Empire was highly vulnerable to nationalistic forces among the countries under its domination. The effects of Yugoslavia’s defection were immediate. From a strategic viewpoint, the Soviet salient to the Adriatic was pushed back, Soviet pressure on Italy and Greece was relieved and the threat to NATO’s Southeastern flank removed. Politically, Yugoslavia’s defection produced a profound effect within the communist world, the repercussions of which are continuing at the present time. The ability of the Soviet Union to hold together its Empire was called into question, and nationalistic forces within the Soviet bloc were given courage and strengthened. Freed from the necessity to imitate the Soviet system, and exposed to the contagion of Western influences, Yugoslavia has substantially and significantly altered its own economic and political practices. Its unique internal system as well as its position of international independence is at the root of the unbridgeable ideological differences between Yugoslavia and the Sino-Soviet bloc. There is no evidence arising from the latest attempt at a Yugoslav-Soviet rapprochement to indicate that these basic differences can be resolved. On the contrary, the consequences of these differences continue to operate as a divisive influence in the Sino-Soviet bloc. The events of 1956 in Poland and Hungary, Albania’s present defiance of the USSR, and the current Sino-Soviet dispute are all directly traceable in significant measure to Yugoslavia’s independent course since 1948. After the Yugoslav break in 1948, the United States in concert with its Western allies moved quickly to exploit the windfall to Western interests represented by Yugoslavia’s defection from the Soviet bloc. Yugoslavia was given material and psychological support which assisted it in establishing firmly its national independence. Similarly, when in 1956 Poland embarked on a more independent, albeit circumscribed, course of action, the United States and other Western countries demonstrated by their support that there was a clear alternative to complete dependence upon, and consequent domination by, the USSR. It is the essence of our policy toward Eastern Europe that those countries which have a will and a capacity to assert and defend their independence can have normal and fruitful relations with the United States. A major instrument of our policy toward such countries has been the provision of assistance, principally in surplus agricultural commodities. Our policy looks forward to the early replacement of such assistance by normal trade and financial relations. It is clear, in any event, that aid is not an acceptable alternative to trade over the long term, either to the United States or to Yugoslavia or Poland. If the past gains of our policy are to be maintained, then we will have to build significant and lasting trade relations with these countries. This, however, will be impossible without authority to extend most-favored-nation benefits. The denial of most-favored-nation benefits will have a serious effect on Yugoslav and Polish trade and economic relations with the United States. Analysis of trade statistics with Yugoslavia indicates that more than 90 percent of its exports to the United States would be subject to significantly higher duties. Poland has enjoyed MFN benefits since the end of 1960 and thus has only recently begun to develop a market here. The loss of trade with the United States, taken in conjunction with the likely adverse effects of the Common Market on their trade with Western Europe, will leave Yugoslavia and Poland with little confidence in the possibility of relying on fruitful economic relations with the West. We will thus have narrowed their possible courses so that they will be driven back toward economic dependence upon or close association with the Soviet bloc. We will thus have contributed to a goal neither Stalin nor Khrushchev has been able to achieve, the unity of the communist world. Additionally, by denying Yugoslavia and Poland the ability to earn dollar currency, we will make it impossible for them to service their substantial financial obligations to this country. Yugoslavia’s dollar obligations will increase to $13 million annually beginning in 1964. Poland’s obligations over the next several years are in excess of $10 million annually, including $2 million to be paid to American nationals for claims compensation. In this latter connection, it should be noted that MFN benefits were restored to Poland late in 1960 following its agreement to pay $40 million over a twenty-year period to American nationals whose property was nationalized in Poland. Termination of MFN benefits should call into question the continuation of these payments. We have every reason to be greatly encouraged by events in Eastern Europe which are unquestionably running in our favor. There are innumerable evidences that in each of the countries of the European Soviet bloc there are mounting pressures for liberalization, for more nationalistic courses, and for better relations with the West. International communism is being subjected to major centrifugal forces which invite our efforts to increase our presence and influence in Eastern Europe. This is not the time for us to write off our extensive investment in Eastern Europe and to ignore thereby our vital national security interests there. Only Moscow could profit from such action. 147. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in YugoslaviaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/1–363. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Mudd; cleared in RSB, P, and SOV; and approved by Tyler. Repeated to Moscow. Washington, January 4, 1963, 6:06 p.m. 575. Embtels 841, 844, 847.Telegram 847 is printed as Document 144. Regarding telegrams 841 and 844, see footnote 2 thereto. Following conclusions represent consensus Dept and Intelligence community re present state of Yugoslav-Soviet relations in light recent developments surrounding Tito’s visit to USSR: 1) Yugoslavs are not prepared to surrender any part of their sovereignty or independence on bloc’s behalf; 2) Yugoslavia still considers itself member nonaligned group, and does not seem to be preparing to drop its policy of opposing all blocs; 3) Tito’s remarks on “decadence” in art, irresponsibility certain intellectuals, and necessity to expand “socialist agriculture” at expense private sector are not sufficiently clear or different from similar past statements to justify definite conclusion that an appreciable hardening of UCY line in internal affairs is in offing; 4) Increasing sharpness of Sino-Soviet dispute is a major factor in improvement Soviet-Yugoslav relations. Soviet-Yugoslav ideological conflict has not been resolved. Measured against backdrop acute Sino-Soviet dispute, it appears to have been reduced to secondary importance in the interests of common anti-Chinese attitude. Such compromise likely to last as long as both sides find it convenient. In contrast to 1956, no agreement on inter-Party affairs announced, nor has there been any claim to agreement beyond field of general foreign policy where Yugoslavs previously admitted substantial identity or similarity of views with USSR. Neither Khrushchev nor Tito have made any effort to conceal existence of differences although in larger interest common anti-Chinese stance, both seemed to have agreed it serves interest both countries not to make these differences obstacles to increased cooperation. Contrary to Yugoslav hopes, neither Soviet credits nor associate status CEMA obtained; however, these subjects may still be under discussion by economic delegation apparently still in Moscow. In our analysis, from information gathered here from Intelligence and other sources, we see no clear-cut indication at this time that Tito–Khrushchev discussions have deflected Yugoslavia from its now long-established internal and foreign policies. Belgrade still appears to have high aspirations to a prominent role among non-aligned nations, and does not appear to have altered its hitherto staunch determination to preserve its independence and to refuse subordinate Yugoslav national interests to foreign alliances or other demands. We tend to view Tito’s recent statements and actions within broader framework Sino-Soviet dispute. We believe that, for the time being at least, Soviet and Yugoslav leaders find their state interests better served by common anti-Chinese attitude. There seems little doubt that Soviet-Yugoslav relations have improved measurably, but this appears to have been largely at Soviet initiative. Khrushchev’s apparent acceptance Titoist theory all countries free to find own road to socialism represents important concession and one which could cause Moscow serious future trouble. Tito’s visit has undoubtedly accelerated already existing trend toward closer relations with the Communist states of Eastern Europe, including USSR. Warmth of Soviet reception, Tito’s inordinate ego, and his well-known desire for vindication among Eastern European bloc countries and communist parties elsewhere have led him to be more expansive and more imprecise in his public utterances than usual. Tito’s past bitter experiences with the Soviets, Yugoslav difficulties in 1955–1956 and again in 1957 in reaching accommodation with bloc raise possibility present warmer Soviet-Yugoslav relationship may not endure indefinitely. We do not take too seriously Tito’s sputtering attacks on internal obstructions and recalcitrance. He has made similar threats on almost every important public occasion past decade and without visible after-effects. His recent remarks on this score did not depart substantially from lines of action proposed in Split last May and reiterated at UCY plenum in July. We look forward to discussing this subject with you more in detail during your consultation period here next week.In telegram 864, January 5, Kennan responded that while his actions would be guided by the Department’s views, he continued to doubt the wisdom of the policy line. (Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/1–563) Ball 148. Memorandum From the Ambassador to Yugoslavia (Kennan) to Secretary of State RuskSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/1–1063. Confidential. Drafted by Kennan who was in the United States for consultations. Washington, January 10, 1963. SUBJECT Relations with Yugoslavia Mr. Secretary: 1. I have given careful thought to the discussion we had yesterday evening,No record of this conversation has been found. According to a memorandum by Vedeler, January 10, this memorandum by Kennan was a result of Kennan’s meeting with Rusk “in which the question of postponement of MFN action until after Khrushchev’s visit to Belgrade was raised by the Secretary.” (Memorandum by Vedeler, January 10; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Yugoslavia) and especially to the suggestion that the m.f.n. matter might be allowed to lie over until after Khrushchev’s visit to Belgrade. I should like to make my position on this clear. 2. I consider that the m.f.n. issue should not be linked in any way to the ups and downs of Yugoslav policy and of Tito’s statements. The denial of m.f.n. to Yugoslavia was a senseless, destructive action. It was justified neither by the circumstances of the moment at which it was decided by Congress, nor by the circumstances of the present moment. It poisons our entire relationship with the Yugoslavs; no effective constructive action can be taken by either side so long as this restriction remains on the books. It is up to us to get it removed at the earliest possible moment. I hope that the President will see fit to make it known publicly in the very near future that he is asking the Congress to remove it, and I urge that he do so. In so doing, he should make it clear that this has nothing to do with Yugoslav actions or statements of the moment; that the denial of m.f.n. was itself not in the national interest; and that he cannot take responsibility for handling effectively our relations with this country, which plays so crucial a role in relationships within the communist bloc, unless he can have free hand to guide our economic policy in essential respects as the situation may require. He should emphasize that it is essential to him to have this freedom not just in the present situation but in any conceivable situation. 3. Should the President be disinclined to ask at this time for the removal of the m.f.n. restriction, then I should like it understood that I am firmly opposed to our undertaking any active diplomatic steps vis-à-vis the Yugoslavs—both now and so long as this situation prevails. This applies to the effort to put pressure on Tito recommended in my recent telegrams. It applies to any other variants of the idea of attempting to communicate with the Yugoslavs in the coming period concerning the state of our mutual relations. So long as the President has not called, clearly and publicly, for a removal of the m.f.n. restriction, any initiative of this sort would be bound to be misunderstood. It would also be quite inappropriate, in this case, to attempt to implement the ideas of the long airgram I submitted at the beginning of December. 4. This is a very late and crucial moment in our relations with the Yugoslavs. If no initiative is taken by us in the m.f.n. matter, we must expect early retaliatory action by the Yugoslavs, which will inflame tempers here and will probably cause the situation to become wholly out of hand. I should not expect, in this case, for example, to see our USIS libraries last the winter; and I am sure this would not be the only means found to harass us. 5. Should the President at this time make the request for removal of m.f.n., and in such way that it would be clear to the Yugoslav leaders that he is doing all in his power to achieve the elimination of this restriction, then I continue to favor the use of whatever other cards we have in our hands with a view to putting pressure on Tito and embarrassing him in his effort to lead his country along an anti-Western, anti-liberal, and exclusively pro-Soviet course. But I do not consider that the decision whether or not the President should take this action, or when, should be permitted to become a matter of discussion, or bargaining, with the Yugoslavs. We made the mistake, it is up to us to correct it. 6. I can see no more suitable way for the President to ask for the removal of the m.f.n. restriction than in the State of the Union message. Should he wish to broaden this into a request for authority to dispose of his own discretion over m.f.n. matters in the case of all bloc countries, avoiding a specific mention of Yugoslavia, I would consider this wholly justifiable from standpoint of the national interest, and no less acceptable from the standpoint of our relations with Yugoslavia.A memorandum attached to the source text from Swank to Tyler noted: “As you know, the Secretary saw Ambassador Kennan Wednesday evening, and we think it likely that the subject of the attached memorandum was discussed by them. Since the recommendation in paragraph 6 is now overtaken, we are returning the memorandum to you in the thought that you may wish to raise with the Secretary in another manner any unresolved points concerning our future course of action with respect to the MFN issue.” (Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/1–1063) George F. Kennan 149. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Kennan on January 17 and approved in the White House on January 28. Washington, January 16, 1963, 5 p.m. SUBJECT Yugoslavia PARTICIPANTS The President Ambassador George F. Kennan Yesterday, on January 16, I spoke with the President on the subject of our relations with Yugoslavia, and particularly the question of the denial of most-favored-nation treatment to Yugoslavia. I explained to him that so long as this latter issue remained unresolved, the effect of the Congress’ action was to paralyze our policy towards Yugoslavia and to make it impossible for us to undertake useful initiatives. The following is my understanding of the President’s views as expressed in this conversation: (a) There has been suggested to him some sort of a scheme whereby action to achieve the removal of the m.f.n. denial would be initiated not in connection with the Trade Bill but rather in connection with the new Aid legislation. This proposal was not explained to me in detail, but I gained the impression that the initiative was to be taken by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. The President, as I understand it, is favorably disposed towards this suggestion, and means to pursue it. (b) With a view to facilitating this procedure, he wished me to see Senators Fulbright and Mansfield and to present to them my views on the effects of the m.f.n. denial. (c) The President considered that if this procedure were successful, action could scarcely be expected in less than 5 to 6 months. (d) The President was prepared to consider making a public statement about the m.f.n. problem in reply to a question at his press conference. He desired that I should submit to him a suggestion for wording he might use in this connection. The President said he thought he had been told he had sixteen months’ grace in denouncing our Treaty with Yugoslavia on the basis of which m.f.n. treatment is extended, and he was not sure what this meant. I told him my impression was that the wording of the Trade Act made it incumbent upon him only to give notice “as soon as practicable” of our intention to terminate operation of the Treaty, and that one year would have to elapse, after such notice was given, before the Treaty would cease to be in effect. He asked me to see to it that he was put right about it in case my understanding was not correct. I gave it to him as my opinion that if the new Congress was in any way seized of the question of revoking the m.f.n. denial, or if this was the subject of active consideration by any Congressional committee, he would be justified in finding that this was not a “practicable” moment for giving notice of the termination of the Treaty. I believe the President understood, and concurred in, my view that while a statement by him in press conference would, of course, be helpful in steadying the reaction of the Yugoslavs, the latter cannot be expected to be fully reassured until it becomes clear that favorable action is to be taken by the Congress; and that in the meantime no major initiative by us, designed either to deflect the Yugoslav President from his present political course or to achieve a better understanding in American public opinion of the Yugoslav situation and the requirements of a constructive American policy there, could be expected to be useful. 150. Memorandum From the Ambassador to Yugoslavia (Kennan) to Secretary of State RuskSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/1–1863. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Kennan. Washington, January 18, 1963. SUBJECT Yugoslavia You will have seen the memorandum of my conversation with the President.Document 149. I am taking this means to give you my views as to what this means from the standpoint of our relations with Yugoslavia. It is clear that the President, for reasons we must all respect, is not disposed to make a major head-on issue with the Congress of m.f.n. for Yugoslavia. A reply to a press question will be helpful, but there is no reason to hope that this alone will serve to deflect Tito in any appreciable degree from the line of independent alignment with Moscow, on which he is embarked. At the best, we face five or six months of uncertainty as to whether the m.f.n. denial will or will not be rescinded. During this period, we can undertake no major initiatives. We cannot undertake a wide domestic program to improve U.S. opinion with regard to Yugoslavia, for Tito is apt to trip us up at any time with new unfriendly gestures or statements which appear to belie our thesis. We cannot, on the other hand, take a hard line towards Tito to any good effect; for its impact on the Yugoslav public would be confused by the m.f.n. issue, and it could easily come to be regarded here as inconsistent with the effort to get the m.f.n. denial rescinded. This spells, as I see it, a further period of enforced inactivity on our part. It is very likely that in the course of this period our relations with Yugoslavia—and indeed the latter’s relations with the West in general—will continue to deteriorate. Tito’s public support of Soviet positions may now be expected to be intensified, and this will continue to give offense here insofar as it becomes known to our public. There may very well also be increased pressures against our personal contacts in Belgrade, harassment of our reading-rooms and other USIS facilities, and a general effort to break up the positions and the influence we have won over the course of the years in Yugoslavia. I hope it is understood here that there will be very little we can do, in the present circumstances, to resist these attacks. What has been at stake in our relations with Yugoslavia in recent years has been the question whether a socialist country which had rendered itself independent of Moscow’s control might be persuaded that it could have, on the basis of nonalignment, a relation with the West which offered possibilities greater than those of a renewed association with the bloc. It was important for us to document the positive answer to this question, not only for its meaning to Yugoslavia itself, but also for the lesson it would carry to other countries of the communist bloc, or to countries which might contemplate joining it. Up to 1960, we were doing quite well in this effort. The overwhelming majority of the Yugoslav people, and I think the preponderant portion even of the party and governmental leaders, were persuaded of the desirability of maintaining a relationship with the West at least as good as that with the East. We were, in fact, close to complete success except in the case of Tito himself and a few of his associates; and there was reason to hope that it would be only a short time before Tito would be obliged, by age and infirmity, to yield to younger people who had a more realistic concept of Yugoslavia’s true interest. These trends of Yugoslav opinion notwithstanding, Tito has been making a determined effort, ever since mid-1960, to lead his country back to a position which would be one not of disciplinary subordination to Moscow, but of such close intimacy and partnership with it that the implications would be scarcely more favorable from our standpoint. The immediate impulse to this effort came, no doubt, from the growing rift between Moscow, on the one hand, and Communist China and Albania on the other, which appeared to Tito to offer favorable possibilities for accommodation with Moscow on his own terms. Ideological prejudice, and a decline in the need for Western aid also played a part. More recently, the tendency has been greatly stimulated by the advanced stage of the Soviet-Chinese conflict, by Tito’s embitterment over the m.f.n. action and other developments in Western policies, and by Khrushchev’s clever and receptive treatment of him personally. We do not know how successful Tito will be in this effort. It is widely unpopular in his entourage, as well as with the Yugoslav public at large. Liberal practices and approaches have now taken such root in Yugoslavia that it will not be easy to do away with them. The effort to find a place for Yugoslavia as an independent entity within the moral and political framework of the bloc will raise, furthermore, difficult problems of precedence for Khrushchev. For these reasons, Tito’s undertaking will no doubt encounter many difficulties. It may even have serious repercussions on the unity of the Yugoslav state. In any case, what emerges from the effort is not apt to be entirely what Tito would like to see. I am not, therefore, predicting certain disaster, in the sense of a total and final return of Yugoslavia to the bloc. But there are three points about which we ought all to be clear at this stage: (a) This tendency is adverse to Western interests in the cold war. It holds, in fact, real dangers for us. Yugoslavia’s geographic position is a highly strategic one. Any return of Soviet military influence or activity to this area would represent a basic deterioration of the strategic situation of the NATO powers, and could easily affect Yugoslavia’s relations with Italy, Greece and Austria. If Yugoslavia, furthermore, after fifteen years of experimentation with liberalization and free association with the West, decides nevertheless to sacrifice her Western ties in favor of a close and, in the political sense exclusive, association with the bloc, this is bound to have an important effect on other bloc countries, discouraging any tendencies there towards greater independence, lending strength to Moscow’s position that there is no acceptable place for a socialist country between the Western and Eastern political worlds. (b) However successful Tito may be in his effort to carry Yugoslavia to a position of independent association with the bloc, the very effort is bound to take place at the expense of Yugoslavia’s relations with the West, generally, and particularly with us. This represents for us a loss in itself. We have a stake in our relations with that country measured by the investment of more than two billion dollars in the various aid programs and—more important still—the effective effort, over the course of the years, of a great many able and devoted people. Whether Tito succeeds or does not succeed with what he is undertaking, the fruits of this investment—the reading-rooms, the exchange programs, the entire progress made in opening up Yugoslavia to Western influences—are apt to become a casualty to the very effort he is conducting. (c) The inactive stance to which we are condemned means in effect that we are resigning our power, over the coming months, to influence the outcome of Tito’s undertaking. The combination of our m.f.n. denial and of the attitudes of the West Germans and the Common Market deprives the Yugoslavs of any favorable prospects in the development of their economic and political relations with the West. This predetermines, in a manner highly unfavorable to the West, the background situation in the face of which the differences of policy as between Tito and much of the hierarchy have to be resolved and Yugoslavia’s choices arrived at. It can only be said that if, in present circumstances, the Yugoslavs stop short of a complete realignment with the bloc, this will be due almost solely to internal forces of resistance within Yugoslav society (greatly stimulated and strengthened to be sure by our efforts in previous years) and not to any favorable immediate prospects in Western-Yugoslav relations. If Yugoslavia remains nonaligned in these present circumstances, I am afraid it will be largely in spite of, rather than because of, the positions taken at this juncture by our own Government, the West Germans and the Common Market. I would make these observations because to remain inactive in these circumstances represents a certain historic responsibility. I do not mean to plead here for the alteration of our stance; I have made my recommendations from Belgrade and, as far as I am concerned, they stand. I do wish to make sure, before returning for this further period of service as Ambassador in Yugoslavia, that there is a full awareness on your part and that of the President of the implications of the m.f.n. denial and the course we are proposing to follow in the coming months. George F. Kennan 151. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in YugoslaviaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.0041/1–2663. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Vedeler, cleared by Davis and Thompson, and approved by Rusk. Washington, January 26, 1963, 5:58 p.m. 650. For Ambassador from the Secretary. Yugoslav Embassy very pleased with President’s press statement on MFN January 24For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, p. 94. and Embassy official informed Davis Embassy has recommended to Belgrade meeting at this time between you and President Tito. Without exaggerating importance of occasion or results of such meeting I believe that it would be desirable. There is need to keep open line of communication with Tito and this appears to be opportune time for such effort in view of your return to Belgrade after consultations here and your meetings with President and myself, President’s press statement on MFN and Tito’s speech January 23.In his January 23 speech, Tito affirmed his desire for good relations with the United States. Suggest therefore you request meeting with Tito at which you would seek Tito’s views on present state and future development of our bilateral relations, after introducing the subject with following points: 1. US Government has noted expression of intention in his last speech to maintain and promote good relations with US and other Western countries as well as with all other countries regardless of different social systems. 2. President Tito’s Government has doubtless noted President Kennedy’s statement of intention January 24 about seeking change in MFN provision of Trade law. 3. US Government is of the view that these two actions occurring almost at the same time help to clarify a situation in our mutual relations that has tended to develop recently in a negative direction and make for better understanding which US Government constantly desires to improve and foster. I think that your main purpose after making these points should be to try to draw Tito out in expressing his views. In course conversation it would be useful at appropriate time to suggest to Tito US does not consider that in order for Yugoslavia to have good relations with US it must have bad relations with the Soviet bloc but we hope that development of good relations with latter would not be at expense of relations with US. Rusk 152. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.0041/1–3063. Confidential. Also sent to Bucharest and repeated to Moscow, Paris, Warsaw, Prague, Budapest, Sofia, Bonn, Sarajevo, and Zagreb. Belgrade, January 30, 1963, 7 p.m. 989. Called this morning on President Tito, made introductory remarks as outlined in Secretary’s 650,Document 151. then had lengthy discussion of problems Yugoslav policy and our relations. This was exceptionally frank talk, and I would very much hope we can avoid leaks. Tito appeared nervous, uncertain, defensive, and at times almost confused. I had strong impression this condition flowed less from my particular presence than from arguments he had been having with members of his senior entourage over line taken in recent speeches. So much was this so that on several occasions, apparently forgetting nature of my interest, he embarked on extensive defense of positions he had taken on internal matters which I had not even mentioned and which were not our concern but were obviously on his mind. Following are highlights his statements: 1. While insisting throughout that Yugoslavia had no reason for or intention of abandoning her independence, Tito said term “uncommitted” (Russian term he used means literally “unengaged”) no longer was accurate as description of Yugoslav position; Yugoslavia was “committed” to support peace-loving forces everywhere; it was inaccurate to say she was not committed. 2. The word “bloc” he thought was also losing its relevance to prevailing conditions and hence inappropriate. (Department will recall Khrushchev’s lengthy argument, in recent Berlin speech, against identification of Warsaw Pact with various free world pacts, by “leaders of certain countries which call themselves unengaged,” and against similar use of word “bloc” with relation to Warsaw grouping.) 3. Tito spoke disparagingly of the Warsaw Pact as no longer fitted to modern conditions. He expressed hope that it would be soon possible to dispense with it and with military alliances generally. 4. When I emphasized importance to US of Yugoslavia’s not belonging to Warsaw Pact and preservation of her independence vis-à-vis Moscow, he replied by voicing opinion that satellite countries were themselves rapidly losing quality of dependence on Moscow and were beginning to show real independence of policy in many respects (please note my 743,Document 142. paragraph two). Implication was that issue of independence from Moscow was losing its meaning in case of a socialist country, and would soon no longer be important distinction between Yugoslavia and other East European states. 5. Tito spoke at length about US aid. He said (as in Skoplje speech last year) that Yugoslavs had felt themselves entitled to material aid on a major scale from other allies as consequence of their great material and human losses in the war; that they had been greatly disappointed in what they got out of Germany by way of reparations; that they had therefore regarded our aid as something they were really entitled to; and that they were weary of constant reproaches of ingratitude on our part. They were anxious to dispense with our aid. He himself had given orders two years ago that they were to free themselves from it as rapidly as possible. He hoped they would not have to ask for any further wheat under PL 480; from now on they expected to buy it in normal fashion. Once they were no longer taking aid from us, there could be no further pretext for the sort of abuse to which they had so often been subjected in certain congressional circles. 6. He entered into usual “plaidoyer” about Khrushchev’s love of peace and objected violently when I pointed out that Khrushchev was not our friend and wished our people no good. Stressing overriding importance of supporting Khrushchev’s side in intra-Bloc differences, Tito stated outright what we have long suspected was his position, namely: that he did not feel, in view of importance of what was at stake, that they could afford to be unduly influenced by reactions of Western opinion in rendering such support. 7. He went over usual list of grievances against Western policy: Notably MFN, unprohibited Ustashi activities, coldness of Germans and Common Market to Yugoslav trade requirements (characteristically, he even included our unwillingness to give further aid, although a moment later he was saying they did not want it). He said Yugoslavs were obliged to strengthen economic relations with the East because we were undependable. He never knew at what point they would get hit by some whim of the Congress. In addition to going over usual explanations about MFN, I told him that in other circumstances by Government might have felt itself in a position to make major effort to correct misunderstandings and prejudices about Yugoslavia in American opinion but that in light of uncertainty concerning Yugoslavia’s future relations with Soviet Union it was difficult for us to take such responsibility. Mentioned particularly in this connection Khrushchev’s forthcoming visit. He reacted strongly to this last, denying we had anything to fear; but when I reiterated that we could not afford to encourage our public to believe things which might be changed in near future, he replied, significantly, with suggestion we might limit ourselves to trying to give them a true picture of situation as of today. Kennan 153. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in YugoslaviaSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL W Ger-Yugo. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Katz and Barnsdale; cleared by Vedeler, Tyler, Ger, RPE, and S/S; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to Bonn, Moscow, Paris, and London. Washington, February 21, 1963, 7:11 p.m. 728. Embtel 1098.Telegram 1098, February 19, reported that the Yugoslav Government had decided on a “retaliatory policy” toward the Federal Republic of Germany over its handling of the two states’ bilateral relationship. (Ibid., POL 7 W Ger-Yugo) Department considers implementation Yugoslav decision described reftel will produce most serious consequences for Yugoslavia and for West. Believe Yugoslavs should be left with no doubt our views. Embassy should present through same channel in Foreign Office Department’s considered views along following lines making clear that presentation is on instructions. In November 1962, a group of Croatian nationalists attacked the Yugoslav Trade Mission office in Bad Godesberg, firebombing the office suite. Yugoslavia, although without diplomatic representation in the Federal Republic, launched a strong protest of German handling of the incident. On March 12, 1963, the Federal Republic dissolved the Croat organization “Brotherhood of the Cross” as the agency responsible for the attack. Twenty-five Croats were tried and convicted for roles in the attack in June 1964. Department appreciated Yugoslav consideration informing this Government in advance Yugoslav action. Yugoslav foreign policy, including policy toward Germany, is of course for Yugos to determine. Decisions, however, of such great importance and fraught with such dangers that we feel obliged as friend Yugoslavia most earnestly to urge reconsideration. We recognize that Yugoslavia acting out of disappointment and frustration that its complaints against Germany have not yet been answered. Would hope however Yugoslavs would weigh carefully whether a policy of retaliation would contribute better results and whether Yugoslav interests in long term served by such policy. We feel certain Yugoslav interests would not be so served. On contrary, retaliatory policy regardless of true motives would be widely interpreted abroad as related primarily to Yugo-Soviet rapprochement and calculated serve Soviet objectives. Yugoslav position in US, in West and indeed in non-aligned world would suffer. And the greatest danger of all is that Yugoslav retaliatory policy can only serve to set in motion a series of actions and counteractions from which retreat may be difficult or impossible. US has been sympathetic Yugoslavia’s problems and has worked actively in behalf of Yugoslavia both on bilateral basis and in various multilateral forums. US for example took lead in organizing financial support package in connection Yugo exchange reform. US was instrumental in facilitating Yugo presence in OECD and has urged EEC sit down with Yugoslavs to discuss problems in concrete terms. EEC has agreed do so. US has argued with FedRep on behalf Yugoslavia and not without results. We have taken these measures despite our awareness not only of Yugoslav complaints against Germany but also of German dissatisfaction certain Yugoslav policies. We are prepared to continue our efforts to facilitate and improve Yugoslavia’s relations with FedRep as well as with OECD and EEC. Yugoslavia cannot suppose however that the US could continue its efforts in the face of a new Yugoslav policy which certain to be interpreted in West not so much the result of aggrieved Yugoslav feelings toward Germany but directed against interests West. It is our hope therefore that in common interests Yugoslavia and the US and in interest constructive Yugo relations with West generally that Yugos will reconsider carefully course of action. US for its part desires make further effort with FedRep and would appreciate being informed if Yugoslav decision is such as to make this appropriate. Rusk 154. Telegram From Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Yugo. Confidential. Repeated to Moscow, Hong Kong, and Zagreb. Belgrade, March 15, 1963, 9 p.m. 1244. Completed March 14 visit to Croatia and Slovenia during which had informal discussion not only with number of prominent cultural figures but also with President Bakaric of Croatia, Vice President Vilfan of Slovenia, and at Brioni, political secretary to President Tito Crnobrnja, and finally Tito himself. Will submit my much more detailed accounts discussions with political leaders.The more detailed accounts have not been found. Following are certain general impressions gathered from all these encounters: 1. Yugo ComParty is seriously wracked at this moment by internal differences primarily over problem of decentralization. While most acute aspect of this problem is question as to whether new investment should be directed to highly developed or to underdeveloped republics, it also raises basic political issue of dictatorial centralization versus liberal decentralization in political sense, and thus produces growing bitterness and divergence between hard-line Communists on one side and liberal Marxists on other. This conflict is probably intensified by everyone’s awareness of importance of personnel problems about to be raised by entry into effect of new constitution, with attendant implications for entire question of eventual succession to Tito’s position of leadership. 2. In close connection with internal party struggle, partly as cause and partly as result, there has been serious aggravation of nationality problem, particularly in Slovenia, where tendencies toward economic centralization are especially strongly feared and where local national feeling is now running higher than at any point since World War II. So acute is this situation that Slovene ComParty finds itself faced which choice between identifying with Slovene national feeling or losing most of such moral influence as it still possesses. 3. In these internal differences, Tito’s position has been ambivalent. He does not seem to be leader of hard-line centralized element. In some ways, he favors old-fashioned Communist approaches, but on vital issue of investment policy, his mind appears to be moving towards concept which would give communes and enterprises wide freedom to invest surplus funds in other regions and in other branches activity, thus creating some freedom of movement on investment capital within country. This would, if realized, constitute important shift of Yugo economy in Western direction. 4. Unable to ascertain what connection if any exists between these internal issues and foreign policy, presumably, hard-line element generally more favorable to development relations with USSR, but here, in contrast to internal centralization, lead seems clearly to have been taken by Tito personally. It is noteworthy that in course much discussion of development Yugo economic and social system, nowhere did I find faintest trace of intention to be guided by Soviet patterns or even to take account of Soviet views in charting future course. 5. Tito pleaded strongly with me for understanding of his position vis-à-vis Chinese-Soviet conflict. He stressed tremendous importance in his eyes of assuring that international Communist movement should not come under influence of Chinese, whose position on problem of war and coexistence he described as literally insane. Yugoslavia, he said, could not as socialist country show itself indifferent to outcome such dispute within socialist camp. Hence his support for Khrushchev. In general he professed inability to understand our underestimation of momentous importance Chinese-Russian rift as compared with various points of conflict in our relations with Russia. 6. It is clear from this and other discussions that Yugoslavs believe change in Soviet outlook has been real and significant; that strong anti-Western tone taken by Khrushchev is designed only to protect his flank against Stalinist critics and conceals far-reaching readiness to compose differences with West. Impressions gained by Tito and others in Moscow appear to have changed nothing in their conviction that Khrushchev is faced with a “Stalinist majority” within Presidium on certain key issues of policy and ideology. This impression has intensified Tito’s feeling that he must at all cost vigorously support Khrushchev. 7. Tito declined to be drawn out beyond a point on my question as to how far rapprochement with Russia could be expected to carry. He assured me that Yugoslavia will not enter into any military pacts with anyone. (Whether this would preclude less formal arrangements of military collaboration, is another question. His silence on this point did not reassure me.) He professed himself well aware of dangers implicit for Yugoslavia in any composition of Chinese-Soviet differences. He did not know what would happen in such an event; Yugoslavia would in any case not allow herself “to be put into circulation like a coin.” 8. Tito was fully prepared to agree that certain balance of relations as between East and West was vital necessity for Yugoslavia. He has no intention of sacrificing present good relations with Italy and other Western neighbors to his relations with Russia. 9. On US-Yugoslav relations, it is clear that for Yugoslavs MFN problem is basic. (I think it likely my visit was helpful in stalling off any early reactions of impatience; but clearly this cannot be strung out indefinitely.) In addition to this, Tito has unquestionably been stung personally by anti-Yugoslav outbursts in our public discussion, by what he considers our government’s general complacency in face of boycott movements and Yugoslav emigre activities, and by reluctance our government to contemplate high level exchanges of visits. On other hand, he volunteered expression of understanding for President Kennedy’s position vis-à-vis public opinion. He knew, he said, that there were things President was not in position to say, and that President could not give guarantees to US public for Yugoslav behavior. He only wished that President would also show understanding of his own problems as a statesman. (He had in mind, I am sure, problem presented for him by Chinese-Soviet conflict.) He reaffirmed his disinclination to see Yugoslavia accept any further aid from US, except possibly dollar loans for industrial development and occasional long-term credit for wheat purchases. Anything else, he said, they felt as humiliating. 10. Tito will never free himself from his ingrained Marxist views, his preoccupation with Communist bloc affairs, and his tendency to tailor his words to Eastern ears with little comprehension or concern for effect in West. As such he will always be problem to us. However, he is determined to maintain Yugoslavia’s independence; he seems to appreciate vital importance of preserving some balance in his policy; and he is not by nature unapproachable. If MFN could be straightened out, if numerous self-appointed architects and critics of policy toward Yugoslavia in our country would subside and give appointed authority a chance, and if we could hold out some prospects of Tito’s cordial reception as official visitor in US at proper time, I would not despair of influencing him usefully in limited but not wholly unimportant ways. I have impression, however, that behind him there are certain other highly placed figures who are even more hostile to good relations with us and are doubly dangerous because they act anonymously, are hard to identify, and cannot be led into open and responsible discussion on government-to-government level. Kennan 155. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Dutton) to the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Tyler)Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Yugoslavia. Secret. Copies were sent to Kaysen and AID. Washington, April 18, 1963. I urge that before finally acting on the proposed determination permitting military sales to Yugoslavia under section 620 (f),For text of Section 620 (f) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, P.L. 87–565, approved August 1, 1962, see 76 Stat. 261. that steps should be related more fully and explicitly in our own thinking to the potential effect on the foreign aid legislation now before Congress and to the request of the President for restoration of the MFN clause to Poland and Yugoslavia. I recognize that the pending military sale to Yugoslavia is only for spare parts in connection with previous sales to that country, and the precedent is well established in both a legal and political sense. At the same time, the action could trigger serious Congressional repercussions. The point will almost certainly be made by Congressional critics that if the Administration is not willing to make the necessary finding under the 1962 authorization bill that the extension of foreign aid to Yugoslavia is in our national interest, how can we nevertheless justify the delivery of additional military supplies at this time to the Yugoslavs? The military sale, of course, is not subject to the provision requiring the finding necessary before aid can be extended—but most members of Congress will consider that this fact is an idle legalism, and that if we are not ready to provide the necessary finding to justify “soft” aid, we can hardly justify, as a matter of policy, further military assistance. As a political matter, it seems to me to be dubious to refuse to take the political heat of making a finding on foreign assistance while being willing to take the much greater heat likely in connection with the military sale. The mere fact of extending more military hardware for Yugoslavia will be used by opponents of foreign aid as an added excuse to urge that aid of any kind to communist countries be prohibited in the aid bill this year. The attendant stir will also be used to oppose restoration of MFN to Yugoslavia. I urge that if all possible the pending military sale be delayed until next October after Congress has adjourned. More fundamentally, I believe that the Administration needs to pull together a more coherent aid policy towards Yugoslavia. We apparently are going to provide military assistance but not make the finding necessary to make “soft” assistance. I would think that underlying political and economic objectives toward that country would require more consistency and coherence as among these various types of aid. Certainly our critics in Congress will club us over these contributions. Frederick G. DuttonPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 156. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Barnsdale and approved in the White House on April 23. Washington, April 18, 1963, 5 p.m. SUBJECT Call of Yugoslav Ambassador on the President, April 18, 1963, 5:00 p.m. PARTICIPANTS The President Mr. Richard H. Davis, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Department of State Mr. William J. Barnsdale, Officer in Charge Yugoslav Affairs, Department of State Mr. Veljko Micunovic, Yugoslav Ambassador Dr. Josip Presburger, Counselor, Yugoslav Embassy Ambassador Micunovic thanked the President for the early appointment. He reported to the President that during his consultation in Belgrade from March 13 to April 14 he had met with President Tito and other leaders of the Yugoslav Government, and had brought with him to Washington a personal message from Tito to the President. The Ambassador pointed out that the Serbo-Croatian text of the letter was the original and that the English translation accompanying it should be considered an unofficial translation. The President read the message from Tito, thanked the Ambassador and said he would respond to the letter. He expressed his appreciation for Tito’s remarks. The President said we are going ahead with our efforts to amend the most-favored-nation legislation [Section 231 of the Trade Expansion Act]All brackets in the source text. but noted that the Ambassador was aware of the legislative difficulties. Our efforts to amend the legislation offers an opportunity for some members of Congress to be unhelpful. We will know later what our legislative chances are. The President also said he was gratified that on the basis of Tito’s trip to the Soviet Union the Yugoslav President feels that the Soviet leadership wants peace. The President pointed out that we want peace too. We are moving ahead on these matters. We are working hard on the non-diffusion of atomic weapons, for example, and the situation is more normal in the Caribbean. The President then asked Ambassador Micunovic for his opinion on the possibilities for a resolution of the Sino-Soviet dispute. How would such a resolution affect Yugoslavia? The Ambassador replied that it is difficult to see what realistic possibilities there are for a resolution of Sino-Soviet difficulties. Efforts have been made to ease Sino-Soviet tension and some alleviation is possible, but the basic differences will remain. The Ambassador also agreed with the President that it was difficult to see how good relations could exist on all sides of the Sino-Soviet-Yugoslav triangle. The President asked if Tito would visit Mexico and the Ambassador replied in the affirmative. The Ambassador said invitations had been received also from Brazil, Bolivia, and Chile and that it is expected that Tito will visit all of these countries in the autumn. The Ambassador noted that in the Yugoslav view the visit of the Mexican President was very successful. The Yugoslavs were very pleased. The President asked the Ambassador for his assessment of current difficulties within the USSR, noting that although Tito had been there, his visit was several months ago. The Ambassador replied by noting that for quite a number of years the Yugoslavs had attempted to improve their relations with the USSR on the basis of the Yugoslav policy of independence and non-alignment. The Ambassador had tried to further these Yugoslav efforts when several years ago he was his country’s ambassador in Moscow, but he had not been successful. However, significant changes have taken place in the USSR. There is evolution everywhere, and the evolutionary developments in the Soviet Union made it possible for Tito’s recent visit to be successful. But as a result of these changes in the Soviet Union the Sino-Soviet conflict has grown as well. Yugoslavia as a socialist country is vitally interested in these developments and wishes to support progressive evolutionary tendencies everywhere—the Yugoslavs support negotiated settlements on the basis of mutual concessions and peace. In that respect Chairman Khrushchev’s speech of 12 December, delivered in the presence of President Tito, went as far as the Soviets had ever gone before in advocating these progressive evolutionary tendencies. The Ambassador expressed his understanding, therefore, of President Tito’s sincere belief that Khrushchev is interested in peace and negotiated settlements. At the moment Khrushchev’s words have become “harder”, but his intent remains the same as during Tito’s visit. The President asked the Ambassador for his view on the pressures on Khrushchev from Stalinists and others within the Kremlin. The Ambassador saw the pressures on Khrushchev as falling into two categories. First, there is Khrushchev’s lack of success in achieving significant accomplishments vis-à-vis the West. Second, Communist Chinese positions have been strengthened as a result of the cold war. In the absence of success on either of these fronts the pressure on Khrushchev is great. There was great hope in Yugoslavia that when Khrushchev accepted the principle of on-site inspection that an agreement between the Soviets and the US would follow. There had been hope also that after the Soviet [rocket] withdrawal from Cuba there would be some lessening of Cuban problems in and outside the US. The Yugoslavs had hoped that some gains for Khrushchev on the second front [vis-à-vis the Chinese] would occur. There had been some disappointment in Yugoslavia that these positive developments had not produced more significant results. The President concurred that there had been no spectacular agreements. On the other hand we have a situation which is not war, which is less tense, and which is not as dangerous as last fall or during the fall of 1961. The very lack of greater danger is a form of success. Agreements themselves are not always so satisfactory. We have an agreement on Laos but we do not have a satisfactory situation there. The President assured the Ambassador again that he would respond to Tito, and he expressed a desire to see good relations with Yugoslavia. The President said good relations between the US and Yugoslavia contribute to stability in that area, and he hoped that Yugoslav influence in other areas such as Africa and the Middle East will be in the right direction. The President expressed the hope that our bilateral problems, in particular MFN and sales of military spare parts, will be resolved. He said he appreciated President Tito’s letter, and also the courtesies the Yugoslavs have extended to our Ambassador in Belgrade. Ambassador Micunovic associated himself with the President’s hope for a solution to our particular problems, and said that beyond this goal, the Yugoslavs also hoped to build a firm basis for a continued expansion of good relations with the US. He wished to assure the President, in closing the discussion, that Yugoslav policies would remain non-aligned and independent, as stressed in President Tito’s letter. The Ambassador then informed the President that he had been instructed to invite Secretary Rusk to visit Yugoslavia and hoped that it was not inappropriate to so inform the President before he saw the Secretary tomorrow. The President expressed his confidence that the Secretary of State would be pleased to receive an invitation and a visit would be a good thing. There follows an unofficial English translation of the letter dated April 7, 1963, from President Tito as provided by Ambassador Micunovic on April 18, 1963, and a copy of the original Serbo-Croatian text. AttachmentLimited Official Use. The source text is labeled “Unofficial Translation.” The Serbo-Croatian text is not printed. Belgrade, April 7, 1963. Letter From President Tito to President Kennedy Dear Mr. President: I avail myself of the opportunity offered to me by the return of our Ambassador, Mr. Veljko Micunovic, to Washington, in order to address you this message and to set forth my views on certain current aspects of our mutual relations, in the belief that this can be beneficial to future relations between our two countries. Certain difficulties have arisen in our relations in the past year and have caused concern to the Yugoslav Government. All the more so as the relations between Yugoslavia and the United States were acquiring the character of an even more positive tradition and, within this context, were also providing an encouraging example of successful co-existence and friendly co-operation among countries with different social and political systems. In our view, this positive tradition was built by mutual efforts and in the mutual interest over a number of years and it successfully weathered the periods when the general pattern of international relations was not always the most propitious. We are convinced, for our part, that there exist both a need and conditions for a further successful development of such relations. This view of ours is based on the principles by which the foreign policy of Yugoslavia is guided. The post-war period and the experiences gained by the peoples and the Government of Yugoslavia during this time have strengthened our belief that the policy best suited to our country is that of co-operation with all States on the basis of independence, equal rights and non-interference in internal affairs and mutual respect. We are convinced that our independent and non-aligned policy has proved to be not only the best suited to our national interests but Yugoslavia has thus also done its utmost to promote general international cooperation, peace and progress in the world. If we glance today at the rather long and arduous road that we have traversed during this period and at the results we have achieved, we have sufficient reason for remaining firmly convinced as to the correctness of such a policy. Last year’s new Trade Act, which deprived Yugoslavia of the most-favoured-nation treatment, existing between our two countries for almost a century, has in our view opened the way, in the United States, to the aforementioned difficulties. This has been also followed by other negative manifestations resulting, in one way or another, in a further narrowing of the framework of mutual co-operation. At certain moments, in the past, uncertainty concerning Yugoslavia’s future policy has been expressed by the American side. Here in Yugoslavia, too, a similar feeling of uncertainty has appeared as to the future policy of the United States towards us. My associates and I, departing from the belief that occurrences harmful to the interests of the two countries and contrary to the intentions of both Governments were involved, have endeavoured not to allow matters to be dramatised as often happens under similar circumstances. I am certain, Mr. President, that it is in the interest of Yugoslavia and, I believe, also in the interest of the United States that the Governments of our countries should do all that is indispensable in order to check this process of weakening and deterioration of our relations, to prevent the further weakening of what has been achieved by our common efforts in the course of the past years. The peoples and the Government of Yugoslavia have appreciated every effort exerted by your Government to that end. I have learnt with particular pleasure the news of the step that you personally undertook recently in the United States Congress with a view to restoring normal terms of trade between Yugoslavia and the United States. We believe that the results of your positive initiative will not only favourably affect further relations between our countries in the field of trade but also that the whole matter has a broader political significance. I feel, as I have already told your Ambassador Mr. George F. Kennan on several occasions, that it is possible to further expand our economic relations on a commercial and business basis and that these relations will be placed, in this way, on more realistic and stable foundations. In my opinion a great part of difficulties in co-operation among States, especially among those holding different views on major international problems, is also due to insufficient mutual acquaintance and understanding. Thus, for instance, we are under the impression that Yugoslavia’s policy concerning some current issues is not always correctly understood in your country and that some people interpret it sometimes as being directed against the United States. I do not wish to exclude that in our country, too, there is sometimes a similar lack of sufficient understanding. I wish to point out that our views of principle on these and similar questions proceed from the assumption that our relations with individual countries should not develop to the detriment of relations with third countries, as this would directly undermine the foundations on which the general principles of international co-operation should be based. On the contrary, we are convinced that the improvement of our relations with an ever broader circle of countries can only contribute to the strengthening of international understanding and co-operation in general. We feel that the improvement of our relations with the USSR and the majority of socialist countries, which has taken place recently, serves the same end. I can tell you, Mr. President, that I have convinced myself, on the occasion of my last visit to the Soviet Union also, that the Soviet leadership and the Prime Minister N.S. Khrushchev are profoundly interested in the preservation of world peace and that they wish to pursue a policy of negotiations and peaceful co-existence. In our opinion all this deserves special attention, especially at a time when various efforts—which are being exerted in the world with a view to easing international tensions and in which the activities and relations between your and the Soviet Government play such an important role—are, it seems to me, nevertheless producing some initial positive results. In conclusion, Mr. President, I wish to emphasise our belief that the obstacles which have made their appearance in the relations between our two countries will be overcome by our mutual endeavours and that our relations, placed on a sound and realistic basis, can and will develop to the mutual benefit and to the benefit of international co-operation and world peace. Wishing you, Mr. President, and the people of the United States all the best, I beg you to accept the assurances of my high consideration. Josip Broz TitoPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 157. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 212. Secret. Drafted by Katz. Washington, April 20, 1963. SUBJECT Comment on Proposal to Delay Presidential Findings to Permit Sales of Military Spare Parts to Yugoslavia We have considered the proposal to delay the making of findings under Section 620 (f) and a determination under Section 614 (a) of the Foreign Assistance Act to permit sales of military spare parts to Yugoslavia. If a delay is considered necessary for Congressional reasons, we believe that its impact on our relations with Yugoslavia can be minimized by the following course of action: 1. The President should decide now to make the necessary findings and determination at such time as it will not jeopardize consideration of the MFN amendment in the Congress. 2. In the meantime, so as to minimize any further subsequent delay, the President should authorize the Defense Department to receive additional purchase orders from the Yugoslav Purchasing Mission and to process these orders for execution when the President has made necessary findings and determination. 3. The Yugoslav Ambassador should be called in and informed of the President’s decisions above. It should be explained to the Ambassador that the law requires that the findings must be reported promptly to the Congress, and that we wish to defer bringing the issue of military sales before the Congress until we are assured that the MFN amendment is secure.A memorandum from Brubeck to Tyler, April 25, reported: “Mr. Kaysen has informed me that the President has approved paragraphs 1 and 3 of the memorandum of April 20 on the subject of Presidential findings respecting Yugoslavia. The President does not believe that we should proceed with recommendation 2 until after you have testified on the MFN amendment on May 10.” (Ibid.) William H. BrubeckPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. W. Slaten signed for Brubeck. 158. National Security Action Memorandum No. 236Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 236. Secret. Washington, April 29, 1963. TO The Secretary of State The Secretary of Defense The Administrator, Agency for International Development The Director, Bureau of the Budget SUBJECT Sales of Military Spare Parts to Yugoslavia On the basis of recommendations of the Departments and Agencies concerned, the President has decided: 1. The Departments of State and Defense will notify appropriate members of Congress concerned with foreign affairs, defense, and appropriations, of the Government’s intention to permit the sale of spare parts and supplies to Yugoslavia for servicing equipment of United States origin already on hand. 2. The necessary findings and determinations to permit such sales will be made after such notification. 3. The Department of State, in its discretion, will inform appropriate Yugoslav officials of the action being taken. McGeorge Bundy 159. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at New DelhiSource: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 476. Confidential; Priority; Eyes Only; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Barnsdale and approved by Vedeler. Repeated to Belgrade for Ambassador Kennan as telegram 943. Secretary Rusk was in New Delhi attending the CENTO Ministerial Meeting. Washington, May 1, 1963, 8:59 p.m. Tosec 58. There follows verbatim text of signed letter from President to Tito. Original being hand carried by Davis to Belgrade for Secretary delivery to President Tito. April 30, 1963 Dear Mr. President: I was very pleased to have your message of April 7 from Ambassador Micunovic.Attachment to Document 156. I too have been concerned by the difficulties which have arisen over the past year and a half, and particularly by the fact that these problems were sharpened to some extent by a lack of understanding on both sides. It is true that in addition to misunderstandings there have been some real concerns among my countrymen that the legitimate security interests and the deeply peaceful purposes of the United States might not be fully recognized in Yugoslavia. We think that mutual recognition of such interests and purposes is of high importance in our relations. One thing which has been most helpful in improving the levels of understanding has been the work of the very able representatives of your country here in Washington. We greatly appreciate the efforts you and they have made to remove some of the misunderstandings. For our part, I know that Ambassador Kennan and his staff have consistently and constantly pursued these same goals in Belgrade. I share your belief that through efforts on both sides, we can and will succeed in removing many of the difficulties that have arisen. It remains my objective to maintain and improve our relations. My recent request to the Congress to amend the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, so that the United States will be able to continue to extend MFN benefits to Yugoslavia, reflects my confidence in our ability to eliminate many of the problems that have arisen and to strengthen the friendship and cooperation between our two countries. I carefully noted your comment to the effect that the Soviet leadership is profoundly interested in peace and the policy of negotiated understandings. I am sure you are aware that the United States has consistently sought peaceful solutions of international problems through negotiation. However, where the security of the nation and the peace of the world are at stake, it is important that good will and peaceful intentions be reinforced with workable agreements on basic outstanding issues, equitably arrived at. Let me emphasize again that the goals of this Government in our relations with Yugoslavia remain constant. We want to cooperate in every appropriate way. We respect Yugoslavia’s unaligned role and your belief in the importance of maintaining national independence and sovereignty. It is my desire and hope that in our unflagging effort toward international cooperation and the achievement of world peace, we may have the full support of Yugoslavia and that our relations may be maintained on the sound and realistic footing which has generally served our countries well. Sincerely, (Signed) John F. KennedyBall 160. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 S. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Zagreb. Secretary Rusk visited Yugoslavia May 4–5 on his return from a trip to South Asia. Belgrade, May 5, 1963, 9 a.m. Secto 44. At 1700 Secretary met Foreign Minister Popovic. Also present were Under Secretary Nikezic, Assistant Secretary Lekic and Director Petric. Meeting lasted one hour and half. After agreement discuss bilateral and then broader international issues, Secretary began by stating US Government had serious desire steadily improve our relations with Yugoslav Government. While recognizing there are and will continue to be differences in points of view some questions, it was our hope that each side would work toward resolving them. Immediate problem of MFN was before Congress and it was our hope that discussion there would help clarify our relations. Secretary said he could not give any clear assurances at this time what Congress would do but President and he had talked with congressional leaders and there was reason to expect that some who had been unhelpful in past might be silent this year. He pointed out we had not carried out the provision in the Trade Act Law withdrawing MFN and would not as long as Congress has the matter under consideration. Secretary said it would assist us in handling matter on Washington scene if matter of public statements and exchanges between governments could be avoided. Popovic replied he did not have much comment now; history of matter well known; Yugoslavs regarded it as an important problem not because of economic substance but because it was a political problem which until solved threatens the whole fabric of our relations. He knew it was not an act by US Government and recognized difficulties in correcting matter. Yugoslavs were encouraged by information they had received that difficulties might be less than before, which they attributed to efforts of most authoritative members US Government. Expressed optimism that matter was on way to be solved. Pointed out that Yugoslavs had refrained from too negatively presenting matter before Yugoslav public opinion. They had congressional problem much in mind and would continue to show restraint in hope problem can be solved. Popovic then raised question of Yugoslav emigre activities in US noting that US had already taken some measure to ameliorate situation. Yugoslavs were not asking for an unreal maximum and recognized that under American law the US restricted as to what could be done. However, Yugoslavs hope that most extreme actions can be discouraged in order that relations not be affected in a negative manner. Solution of this problem could only help both sides. Secretary commented he aware of incidents in past for which we had expressed regrets. We would continue carefully follow this matter but there was limit to what we can do not only because of constitutional provisions but because US was nation of emigres. Within range of free speech and freedom of press, we will take action to prevent anything harmful to Yugoslav officials or property or which could injure relations between two countries. Popovic then raised question sales military spare parts. Pointed out there had already been failure to meet certain contractual obligations and this created difficulty for normal function Yugoslav Army. Secretary replied he was familiar with this problem and hoped a solution can be found. Pointed out that this solution for US has two points: the technical legal point under the law of certain findings which the President must make but it was also a political matter as we must consult with congressional leaders and thus it has some political connection with problem MFN. Promised to take up question when he returned Washington. Discussion then turned to international issue with Secretary remarking that we were trying to reach agreement on one of two points with Soviet Union though we don’t see any possibility of a broad detente. Secretary cited outer space, recent message to Khrushchev from Macmillan and President on nuclear test ban, non proliferation and Berlin.Dated April 15; for text, see vol. VI, Document 93. With regard to nuclear test ban expressed belief that number of inspections should not be allowed to stand in way of achieving agreement. Until we could obtain agreement on character of inspections it relatively meaningless to discuss number. Believed this could be worked out so that espionage would not come into question. Described dangers of armaments race and thought agreement on ban still in national interest of three countries. Secretary stated we had been disappointed that temperature of Khrushchev’s interest in nuclear test ban seemed to have fallen since last December. Popovic noted Yugoslavs were not so well qualified to talk about this question. Said they were not enough acquainted with latest proposal to have definite opinion. Yugoslavs appreciated dangers in sense Secretary spoke about arms race and danger of other nations arming themselves with nuclear weapons. Yugoslavs had impression that Western side insisted too much on inspection and USSR too much on espionage. They were hopeful two sides could find basis for agreement but had impression both sides seemed to be more rigid than warranted. Yugoslavs unable judge Secretary’s estimate Soviets had cooled off on test ban treaty. After brief general discussion disarmament Secretary brought up question of Cuba pointing out potential dangers as long as Soviet forces present on island. Observed there were two non-negotiable points, i.e., military and political connection of Cuba with Moscow, and illegal intrusion of Cuba into affairs of other LA countries. Reviewed history of Castro movement and commented Castro appeared to have abandoned his original commitments and turned revolution into something else. We did not oppose Castro just for historical reasons but problem related to present security needs. So long as Soviet troops are there Cuba will continue to be a difficult question. Popovic expressed recognition importance US attached to Cuban question and as unresolved question it constituted threat to peace not only in that region but to world. Yugoslavs considered real social revolution had taken place in Cuba and that the regime there represents basic aspirations of Cuban people. Recognized this viewpoint different from Secretary’s. Pointed out that even before Soviet troops or arms were introduced into Cuba differences between US and Cuba were great. Asked if modus vivendi could not be found which might then eventually lead to a solution. Secretary replied though we did not know too much about attitude and thinking present Cuban regime, we knew that there were those who believed Cuba should have close ties with Soviet Union while others believed that ties should be with Peiping. What US did not find were those who want reconciliation with the other LA countries. Hence the Secretary was not hopeful of a solution particularly in the light of two non-negotiable points he had mentioned. Ambassador Kennan pointed out US had never made an issue of nationalized properties in Cuba and that it was not question of social revolution but rather a question of Cuban attitude toward the US and toward their responsibilities to other countries in Western hemisphere. Secretary noted 1959 Castro visit to US and our attempt to establish good relations. However, by May 1960 it was evident Castro rejected all overtures and a great many of Castro’s old associates in revolutionary movement had abandoned him. Cuba was a highly exposed nerve to the American people and the Yugoslavs should know that last October was a unique moment on two counts, i.e., for the first time US and Soviet forces confronted each other and for the first time their leaders faced the possibility of general nuclear war. Emphasized this could not help but affect all our relationships until problem was solved. Popovic said Yugos properly appraised dangers in this situation. Noted that US making efforts calm situation which had not been accepted by “certain circles” in US. Secretary replied it was true President was trying to keep country calm and realistic on these matters but this was not easy on issue which struck so deep in American opinion. Emphasized that Yugoslavs should understand depth of feeling in US on Cuban question. Discussion ended with the brief description at request of Popovic of Secretary’s impressions his visit to Pakistan and India in particular in regard to Kashmir problem. Rusk 161. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Yugo. Confidential. Repeated to Hong Kong, Moscow, Paris, Bonn, Cairo, and Zagreb. Belgrade, May 14, 1963, 5 p.m. 1583. Paris for USRO. We believe that dominant mood of Tito and leading advisors in confrontation with problems of Yugoslavia’s international position must today be one of much uncertainty, sensitivity, and indecision. Tito’s Moscow visit last December, and reflection it found in his subsequent statements, caused some consternation and alarm within party and population, where it was feared he had been swept by Khrushchev’s charm, by deference of Soviet officialdom, and by his own strong desire to influence outcome of bloc differences, into sacrificing relations with unaligned group and with West and thus forfeiting what had become traditional balance of Yugoslavia’s position. When, in January and February, Russians showed signs of raising price for continued support of Yugoslavia in face of Chinese opposition, this alarm was not only heightened but came, we suspect, to be shared in some degree by Tito himself. We view obvious Yugoslav eagerness for Rusk and Nasser visitsNasser visited Yugoslavia May 12–16. as evidence primarily of Tito’s desire not only to reassure his own followers but actually to give some reassurance both to unaligned group and to West that he had not sacrificed balance of Yugoslavia’s position. Today, great and disturbing uncertainties are still visible here on eastern horizon. Yugoslavs probably know little more than we do concerning Khrushchev’s personal position. They will have noted in recent weeks, and particularly in last few days, evidence that attitude toward Yugoslavia is coming more and more to constitute touchstone of Chinese-Russian differences, with Chinese showing every sign of regarding rejection of Yugoslavia as sine qua non of any reconciliation. Yugoslavs will note with interest and some apprehension that Russians are plainly reluctant to hold Central Committee meeting and to redefine their ideological line before they have talked with Chinese. In all, Yugoslavs are well aware events could easily take a turn which could put them back in position not dissimilar to that which they occupied after 1958 differences. Faced with these uncertainties they are obviously trying to hold all lines open and to reserve to themselves widest possible latitude of choice in reshaping their international position if this becomes necessary. Question of course presents itself as to how Western circles can exert most useful influence in this highly fluid situation. They cannot hope to change in any brief space of time ideological convictions of Yugoslav leaders or their insistence on clinging to their image of themselves as important contributors to international socialist cause and to “struggle” of developing nations against colonialist and neo-colonialist pressures. What Western governments can do in these circumstances is to shape their policies in such way as to demonstrate daily to Yugoslav regime and people that Yugoslavia always has option of economically fruitful relationship with West, on terms not dangerous to stability of regime, if it wishes to make reasonable effort in this direction. I must reiterate, at cost of repetition, that unless such prospect of open Western door is maintained, friends of Western orientation, and even those among Yugoslavs who fear closer relationship with East, have no effective arguments. This means that if there was ever a time when it was folly for Western countries to confront Yugoslavs with attitude of emotional rejection or indifference, and above all with seemingly impenetrable economic restrictions and barriers, concerning which there appears to be no possibility of useful discussion, it is this present moment. So long as and to extent that this situation endures, Western countries can expect, in development of Yugoslav policy, almost any eventuality except those most favorable to Western interests. I must again emphasize heavy responsibility now being taken upon themselves by those congressional figures who insist on confronting Yugoslavia through this present period not only with MFN denial specifically but with angry and vindictive posture generally. Yugoslavia’s problem is a complex one. Outlook and behavior present governmental leaders will never be such as to permit wholly untroubled and satisfactory US-Yugoslav relationship. On contrary, we must expect that so long as present uncertainties endure, Tito will continue to accompany his efforts at reassurance of West and nonaligned with other efforts designed to emphasize to Eastern eyes Yugoslavia’s socialist quality and thus to help Khrushchev defend Yugoslav tie against Chinese attacks. This will inevitably continue to place restrictions on conceivable intimacy of Yugoslav relationship with West. Nevertheless, even within these narrow limits there are possibilities of variations in Yugoslav conduct in coming period which are of considerable importance not only to us but to Western security in general, particularly in view of Yugo-slavia’s status as a strong and independent military factor in this area. To ignore these possibilities, or to play fast and loose with them, and thus to leave to the Russians exclusive privilege of trying to influence and manipulate them (and this is implication of certain of attitudes we have recently encountered in congressional and public opinion) strikes me as clearly indefensible, particularly from standpoint of advancement of Western interests in face of international communism. I would deeply hope that one more effort could be made to explain, where explanation is due, need for sober and considered approach to Yugoslav problem coupled with greatest possible flexibility of action for executive branch in handling relevant problems, and that as consequence these explanations something more encouraging than anything yet visible could be caused to appear for Yugoslavs on Western segment of their complex horizon. Kennan 162. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Secret. Drafted by Tyler and approved by the White House on October 22 and by M on October 25. The meeting was held at the White House. The source text is labeled “Part 5 of 5”; four separate memoranda of conversation dealing with the Algeria-Morocco conflict, Yemen, Cuba, and aid to underdeveloped nations are ibid. Washington, October 17, 1963, 4 p.m. SUBJECT US-Yugoslav Relations PARTICIPANTS United States The President Governor Harriman Mr. Tyler Mr. N. Andrews Yugoslavia President Tito Mr. Todorovic, Vice President of the Federal Assembly Mr. Popovic, Foreign Minister Ambassador Micunovic Dr. Presburger, Counselor Turning to bilateral matters, Tito referred to the long talks he had held with Ambassador Kennan, to whom he had explained extensively everything relating to Yugoslavia’s policies.Kennan had resigned his post and left Belgrade on July 27. Tito said he wanted to tell the President that the basis of Yugoslavia’s policy was to seek cooperation with others on the basis of no discrimination on either side. Tito referred to “even Stephen cooperation.” He said Yugoslavia wanted to increase her economic exchanges and to abandon old forms of economic relations such as those based on aid from other countries. He said Yugoslavia was growing industrially and agriculturally. In a few years’ time Yugoslavia would be able to satisfy all her needs. She was already doing so with regard to corn. Soon she would be able to switch from extensive to intensive agriculture. This year Yugoslavia would have one million tons more wheat than she had last year (4.4 million tons instead of 3.4 million tons). Corn had not done quite as well this year. He said that Yugoslavia wanted to trade as much as possible with the United States on a basis of nondiscrimination. There should be a new basis of relations. Yugoslavia was not asking for anything. He said that the United States had given Yugoslavia a great deal when she needed it. Now she wanted to stand on her own feet. He had explained all this to the Soviet Union which also saw it this way. He repeated that Yugoslavia was not asking for anything. He said that the Most Favored Nation clause amendment in US legislation posed difficulties. The President outlined the United States Government position against the MFN amendment. He said that the Trade Expansion Act was a very important measure, so it had to be signed although it included that particular amendment. The President hoped that perhaps in the next two weeks the Senate would restore MFN treatment to Presidential discretion. It was a sensitive matter because every member of Congress wanted to avoid being called pro-Communist. He said it was hard for Congressmen to distinguish among the Soviet Union, Communist China, Poland, Yugoslavia, and Albania. The President said he hoped that things would turn out all right.Congress was then considering legislation restoring MFN status to Yugoslavia. The legislation passed and was signed into law as Section 402 of P.L. 88–205 on December 16. Tito said Yugoslavia was having difficulties with the Common Market, and would like to work something out. There was great interest in finding some way of improving commercial relations with Western Europe. The President said he would like to clarify the United States position on certain other matters. There had been very difficult moments with the Soviet Union over Cuba last fall. This had been almost a disaster for the United States. The memory of those events had rendered passage of the Test Ban Treaty difficult, and had reduced the prospects of making progress or having any faith in the Soviet Union. He said that every effort Yugoslavia made to show that she wanted to live in peace with the United States, and to maintain her own independence, the easier it would be for the United States to cooperate with Yugoslavia. Tito said that the wheat sales to the Soviet Union showed that discrimination can be surmounted and gotten rid of. He said that economic exchanges were one of the most important factors for the promotion of political agreements. The elimination of discrimination made the solution of political issues much easier. He said he was glad to have had the chance to present some of his views to the President, and hoped that the President realized that he believed that US-Yugoslav relations could evolve positively. The President said that the experience of last fall with regard to Cuba had made us somewhat cautious “before we embrace the bear.” The President said he was interested in Tito’s statement that he has confidence in the peaceful objectives of the Soviet Union. Tito said he was confident that he was not wrong. He said he knew the whole situation. He had known it several years ago, two years ago, and today. Small steps should be taken and we could thus move forward. There had already been the UN resolution on prohibition of putting nuclear weapons in outer space. It also would be useful to make progress on disarmament. He had always been in favor of a gradual approach. With progress in these fields, tremendous resources could be made available for aid to the less developed countries. The President asked Tito what he thought of the political evolution with regard to Eastern Europe, and whether there was less of an iron grip on these countries. Tito said he thought that agreements with the Soviet Union would help this process. The Eastern European countries did think more of economic and less of political matters. He believed that the great question today was the polarization between those who want peace and those who want to continue the cold war. We are dealing today with criteria which are different from those of the past: today the question is not who is in the bloc and who isn’t, but rather who is for peace and who is against peace. More and more countries are interested in nonalignment. President Tito asked the President what he thought about Yugoslavia and the possibilities of better relations between us. He personally felt that there were great possibilities, and that we should have greater confidence in each other. The President agreed that relations had been improving. The low point had been reached at the time of the conference of nonaligned countries in 1961. Now relations had improved, and the US Congressmen who had recently attended the Interparliamentary Union Conference in BelgradeSeptember 12–20. had been able to see things for themselves and had received favorable impressions. He said he thought there had been a steady climb since the low point of September 1961. He said that the reception for Tito in the United States today was better than it would have been two years ago. It was important to take into account US history and experience. The President said he wanted relations between our two countries to improve. President Tito expressed his great thanks to the United States Government for the aid which it had given to Skopje following the earthquake disaster there.July 26. The President said that we wanted to do something more with regard to housing. He said we had some prefabricated housing units stocked in France, capable of housing up to 10,000 people, and we would be glad to make these available if this would be helpful. The President said he did not know how much time it would take to get them down to Yugoslavia but thought this could be within about a month or so. Tito expressed his warm thanks for the President’s offer, which he accepted. He stressed the great need for housing in Skopje and said that housing for 120,000 inhabitants was needed before December and that ultimately some 200,000 units of housing would be required. The President said he was glad to have been able to repay some of Yugoslavia’s hospitality to members of his family, to various government officials and to Congressmen. He hoped that more tourists would go to Yugoslavia. He told Tito that he might get a few pickets on his way around the United States but he wanted him to understand that the President himself gets picketed and that Governor Harriman is also used to this. Tito said he hoped the President would one day visit Yugoslavia where he would be warmly welcomed. The President said, “Thank you very much.” Mr. Harriman recalled that when he had visited him in 1951,See Foreign Relations, 1951, vol. IV, Part 2, pp. 1842–1843. Tito was gravely concerned that Stalin would unleash an attack on Yugoslavia, and he wanted Tito to know how gratified we were to see a change in his relations with Khrushchev. He said that President Kennedy had said last June that things would be much easier if each country were left to settle its own affairs by itself. He hoped that Tito would use his influence with Khrushchev in this direction. Tito said that things have changed very much since the time when Stalin had said that he wanted to make Yugoslavia one of the Soviet Socialist Republics, and that Yugoslavia firmly intended to maintain her independence. The President asked Tito how much of an influence he thought Yugoslavia’s policy had had on other countries in Eastern Europe to follow a more independent course, e.g., Bulgaria and Poland. Tito said he thought Yugoslavia’s influence had been quite considerable. He said that in spite of difficulties, Eastern Europe had prospered economically. The Yugoslav people were proud and courageous people and he wanted the President to know that they had great sympathy for the people of the United States. The meeting then broke up at about 5 o’clock. 163. National Security Action Memorandum No. 267Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 267. No classification marking. A copy was sent to the Secretary of State and Director of the Bureau of the Budget. Washington, October 18, 1963. TO The Secretary of Defense The Administrator, Agency for International Development SUBJECT Disaster Assistance for Skopje In view of the continuing emergency need of the displaced persons of Skopje, Yugoslavia, for temporary housing to aid them in recovering from the earthquake of July 26, 1963, the President wishes the Secretary of Defense to take such action as is necessary, using military resources as appropriate, to accomplish the shipment to and erection in Skopje or its environs of approximately 250 Butler-type buildings or similar structures to house persons temporarily. The President also desires the Administrator of the Agency for International Development to explore all possible means to permit eventual reimbursement to the Department of Defense for expenses incurred in carrying out this undertaking. McGeorge Bundy Austria 164. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by McBride and approved in S on March 8. Washington, February 14, 1961. SUBJECT US-Austrian Relations PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Ambassador Wilfried Platzer, Austrian Embassy Mr. Robert H. McBride, WE The Austrian Ambassador opened the conversation by saying that general US-Austrian relations were good and that there were no real problems remaining now that the Vienna MemorandumFor text of this memorandum, May 10, 1955, outlining protections afforded by the Austrian State Treaty with respect to the United States and the United Kingdom, see 7 UST 803. had been settled. He said that the Austrian Government did hope that the US would ratify the Austrian Assets Treaty but said he did not think his Government would press this claim under current circumstances because the Austrians were also delinquent in settling the Jewish claims matter. Ambassador Platzer then said that his Government hoped if the Geneva Nuclear Test Ban negotiations were to lead to the conclusion of an agreement, that the US Government would support Vienna as the location for the Nuclear Test Ban Control Agency. He noted that the British Government had agreed to Vienna, as had the previous US Administration. Therefore, he hoped that the new Administration would also agree on Vienna. The Secretary said that he saw no reason to oppose location of this institution in Vienna and said that the Austrian request seemed a reasonable one. The Secretary then inquired as to the members and status of Hungarian refugees in Austria. Ambassador Platzer said there were about 18,000 still there and that these were mostly integrated into Austrian life. It was thought that around 10,000 would remain permanently. He noted that in 1956 this had been a great problem when there had been 200,000 Hungarian refugees in Austria. The Secretary noted that he had been in Vienna at that time and had gone to Budapest with the International Red Cross. Ambassador Platzer then said that his Government hoped there could be a bilateral PL 480 loanFor text of P.L. 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act, enacted July 10, 1954, see 68 Stat. 454. to cover housing projects which the Austrians wished to undertake. He said that this was now in the process of being drafted and that we would be consulted further on this question. He said the Austrian proposal would be to use counterpart funds accruing from PL 480 corn. He thought the total cost was in the vicinity of $12 million, of which $1.6 million would be from US sources. The Secretary then noted that we had an extremely experienced and distinguished diplomat in Vienna and we expected him to stay on there. The Austrian Ambassador then reviewed the South Tyrol problem briefly. He noted that this had been raised in the United Nations General Assembly last fall because up until that time there had not been any progress achieved.The Special Political Committee of the General Assembly heard the issue at a special 10-day October 1960 session. On October 27, it adopted a resolution urging Austria and Italy to resolve their differences through direct negotiations. The General Assembly approved the resolution on October 31. For text, see U.N. Res. 1497 (XV). He noted, furthermore, that the Italian and Austrian Governments started from quite different premises in approaching the question. He said that the Italians spoke only of the implementation of the existing de Gasperi–Gruber agreementFor text of the de Gasperi–Gruber Agreement, signed on September 9, 1946, and appended to the Treaty of Peace with Italy, signed in Paris on February 10, 1947, see 61 Stat. 1245. whereas what the Austrians had in mind was local autonomy in the Province of Bolzano. He said the Austrians were continuing to undertake bilateral talks with the Italians because this was the sense of the UNGA resolution. He added, however, that the UN resolution spoke of seeking a settlement by other peaceful means if it were not possible through direct bilateral talks. The Secretary said he thought a solution of this problem would take patience and a long time. The Secretary inquired as to whether there were any contacts in Vienna with Eastern Europe through students, etc. Ambassador Platzer said there were not many Eastern European students in Austria but noted that some contacts did take place during the Vienna Trade Fair. He then referred to Austrian efforts in the cultural and other fields in underdeveloped countries. The Secretary said that the help of all the European countries to the underdeveloped countries is extremely useful and thought that countries such as Austria should supply experts and technicians which were even more in short supply than money. Ambassador Platzer then referred to the Common Market–EFTA problem which he said was a serious one for Austria. The Secretary said that we, of course, did not know what the outcome of this problem would be but that we hoped the OECD would be of assistance. He thought the presence of friendly outsiders such as ourselves in the OECD might be useful and that an ultimate solution depended on time, patience, and hard work. Ambassador Platzer said that Austria’s problems were made acute by the fact that fifty percent of her trade was with the Common Market countries whereas only twelve percent was with the other six EFTA countries. Italy and Germany were the main trading partners of Austria. He added that Austria also imported wheat, cotton, and corn in large quantities from the United States. The Secretary inquired if tourism was the main source of dollar income for Austria. Ambassador Platzer said that Austria’s principal exports were iron and steel products and other industrial products. He said that tourism did definitely assist in the balance of payments field. For example, Austria imported about $100 million a year in products from the United States while exporting only about $50 million to us. Tourism largely made up this difference so that the Austrian dollar position was not unfavorable. 165. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Knight and approved in S/S on October 25. Washington, October 2, 1961. SUBJECT South Tyrol PARTICIPANTS Dr. Ludwig Steiner, Austrian Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs Dr. Kurt Waldheim, Director of Western Political Affairs, Austrian Foreign Ministry Dr. Wilfried Platzer, Ambassador of Austria The Under Secretary WE—Mr. William E. Knight, II State Secretary Steiner and Ambassador Waldheim called on the Under Secretary in the course of a “get acquainted” trip to Washington. On the subject of the South Tyrol, Dr. Steiner said that the Austrian Government hoped that a final settlement acceptable to the people of the area of the South Tyrol would result from the work of the Italian study commission recently established under the aegis of the Italian Ministry of the Interior. However, the work of this commission could hardly be completed before next March at the earliest. In the meantime, the Austrian Government desired an agreement with the Italians on peaceful methods of settlement to be adopted should the commission fail to achieve a solution. Foreign Minister Kreisky had made two specific proposals in this regard to Foreign Minister Segni in New York:The Foreign Ministers met during the 16th session of the U.N. General Assembly. 1) that a mediator be chosen to make recommendations on a procedure for peaceful settlement; or 2) that a “conciliation and arbitration” committee be set up to deal with the substance of the dispute. He said there had been no response from the Italians as yet to this proposal but that the Austrian Government would be in further bilateral touch with the Italians before the October 23 deadline when the “truce” on the General Assembly debate would expire. 166. Airgram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 661.63/12–2261. Confidential; Noforn. Drafted by Matthews. Vienna, December 22, 1961. A–299. Subject: Kreisky on Austrian-Soviet Relations and Common Market. I had over an hour’s talk with Kreisky yesterday (partly reported in mytel noforn 1094)Telegram 1094, December 21, reported on Matthews’ discussion with Kreisky over the Soviet note on Austrian association with the EEC. (Ibid., 375.42/12–2161) devoted almost entirely to Austro-Soviet relations and Common Market negotiations. He said he would send me copies of the two speeches he had made in Finland during his recent visit. I said I had already read with considerable interest his first speech on Austrian neutrality transmitted by our Embassy in Helsinki. He said that he felt his second speech was “even more anti-Communist” than the first though the “young and inexperienced Austrian reporters” seemed to have misinterpreted some of his major points. It was much more important for him to make those speeches in Finland with Russians present than here in Austria. He then referred to his remarks concerning possible negotiations with ECE which have been “misunderstood” in some circles here.“After sending our note requesting negotiations with the Common Market weAustria applied for EEC associate status on December 15. must make some counter gesture to restore the balance with the Russians” he said. “The ECE is an organization to which the Russians belong but in which the West can outvote the Soviet bloc. The United States is likewise a full member. To talk about trade or other economic questions in that forum seems to me at least harmless even though it is mostly ‘bla bla’; it might even in the long run produce some results.” In talking to Avilov latter had complained that Austria only dealt with NATO or Western organizations, why not make some approach to CEMA. Kreisky replied that because of fact CEMA has many political provisions and implications with which Austria could not be associated and its whole system is based on state trading and controls with which Austria could not be associated, this was impossible. He, Kreisky, suggested ECE as a possible forum to which both United States and Soviet Union belonged and he saw no objection to discussing Soviet proposals in that forum. Avilov asked whether Austria would discuss all Soviet proposals. Kreisky replied not all but those which seem “reasonable”. Avilov, he said, seemed interested. In other words, Kreisky clearly considers his ECE gesture as a demonstration of Austrian neutrality between the two blocs which might lessen future Soviet pressure and cost Austria nothing tangible. He hoped we would understand his motivation and the need for some such gesture. He reiterated (my airgram A–272)Airgram A–272, December 7, reported Kreisky’s views on EEC association and Soviet pressures. (Department of State, Central Files, 374.52/12–761) the firmness of his insistence that Austrian negotiations with the Common Market must go on. This was not only against the strong opposition of Gorbach, Bock, etc. as well as Austrian industrialists who were opposed to taking any steps at this time in fear of offending the Soviets, but they had even sent some of his Socialist friends to try to persuade him to agree. He said he had made it quite clear that if the announced note were not sent he would resign and publicly explain the reasons. It would have been a fatal invitation to the Russians to step up their pressure. During his absence in Finland, he said, “they made two changes weakening the original text in our note to the EEC which I would not have agreed to had I been there, but they were very minor ones.” The Govt had also agreed to substitute the word “arrangements” for “association”, though he said the Russians of course “really understand the distinction between association and membership, whatever they may pretend to the contrary.” I inquired concerning a current rumor that the Chancellor and some others in government circles would now like to withdraw the note and he said this was not true. [1 paragraph (5 lines of source text) not declassified] Matthews 167. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 763.56/3–3062. Confidential. Drafted by Sulser. Washington, March 30, 1962. SUBJECT Possible Credits for Austrian Arms Purchases in the United States PARTICIPANTS Austria Defense Minister Karl Schleinzer State Secretary Otto Roesch Dr. Wilfried Platzer, Ambassador, Austrian Embassy United States Mr. George Newman—G/PM Mr. William Robinson—G/PM Mr. Philip Barringer—Department of Defense Mr. Samuel Cross—Treasury Department Mr. Jack A. Sulser—WE After opening the meeting, Mr. Newman called on Mr. Cross to comment on the practicability of the Export-Import Bank as a source of credit for foreign arms purchases in the United States. Mr. Cross said the EXIM Bank is a possibility which should be explored, but he said the Bank does not usually operate in the military field. Therefore, there is little past history which would be useful in the present consideration. Ordinarily the Bank extends credit for a maximum of five years, but somewhat longer terms may be possible. The Minister said the Austrian Government had agreed on an increase in the military budget, but the rate and extent of the increase would not be adequate for the quick buildup which is necessary. He stated that it was his hope to obtain credit under the terms of the Mutual Security Military Sales Program although it would be necessary to give it another appearance. Mr. Newman said we would do our best to meet the Austrian need. It is, however, a problem which requires further study. He assured the Minister that we will seek to come as close as we can to the requested solution. The Minister repeated that it is his aim to acquire the equipment over a three-year period, with payment stretched over a ten-year period. In addition to ammunition, the Minister intends to acquire modern tanks, communications equipment, and spare parts. Mr. Newman inquired what the difference in interest rates might be from the various sources. Mr. Cross stated that, since there is no precedent, it would be impossible to state what the EXIM Bank rate might be. The recent rate for export promotion credits, which would be the most comparable, was 5–3/4 per cent. However, the terms would, of course, depend upon further negotiations. The Minister interjected that such an interest rate would be unacceptable to the Austrian Government as a basis for negotiations. He stated frankly that he had hoped for no-interest credit under MSMS. Mr. Barringer responded that the current MSMS credit rate was 3–1/2 per cent. Non-interest terms applied only to so-called cash sales, for which payment could be made in installments up to a maximum of three years. Mr. Newman said these were questions which could be studied further and negotiated later. The Minister inquired whether, as a minimum, the way could be indicated by which a solution to the problem might be achieved. Mr. Barringer replied that, following the meetings in the Pentagon this morning, Defense Department attorneys had been in touch with both the Treasury and the EXIM Bank. He had been assured that, if terms could be negotiated with the Austrian Government, the problem of processing all documents and other formalities through the EXIM Bank could be managed. Mr. Newman commented that the Pentagon had obviously lost no time in exploring the matter. He assured the Minister that we understood and appreciated the Austrian position. The Minister expressed his thanks. It was suggested that representatives of the interested offices meet in the near future with Dr. Edgar Plan, Financial Counselor of the Austrian Embassy, to continue the discussion. The Defense Minister and Ambassador concurred in this proposal. 168. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 763.56/4–562. Confidential. Drafted by Sulser. Washington, April 5, 1962. SUBJECT Austrian Request for Arms Credit PARTICIPANTS Dr. Wilfried Platzer, Ambassador, Austrian Embassy Dr. Robert Ladner, Counselor, Austrian Embassy WE—Mr. Knight WE—Mr. Sulser The Ambassador inquired about the prospects for approval of Minister Schleinzer’s request for a $50 million credit to purchase US military equipment. Mr. Sulser replied that a further meeting of representatives of interested offices had taken place on April 3, and we were proceeding to clarify some of the problems involved. We hoped to be in a position to meet with Dr. Plan and Colonel Rainer soon. We were somewhat concerned that the Minister might have gotten the impression from the sympathy and encouragement which he encountered on all of his calls that the matter was simpler than in fact it would be. The discussion on April 3 had revealed that there were several substantial problems to be solved. The Export-Import Bank appeared to be willing in principle to act as a “front” or go-between to give the transaction a commercial appearance. This might be relatively uncomplicated as far as items such as new tanks and communications equipment, which could be procured directly from the manufacturers. Certain items, however, such as ammunition, which could probably be procured only from the Defense Department, would present a problem of documentation. The Export-Import Bank would probably be unable to accept title to any of the items involved in the transaction. Therefore, if Ex-Im is to serve as the channel, some means of “commercial” documentation will have to be found for items procured directly from the Defense Department. The problem of financing, of course, is the major hurdle. If Ex-Im and/or private sources are to be used, the total cost, including guarantee charges, would probably not be much under 6%. Military assistance funds which would bear lower interest rates are extremely scarce. Therefore, it seems likely that the transaction could not be realized in one piece with a single source of financing and a single agreement. Particularly because of the financing problem, it might even be necessary to space the various pieces of a “package deal” over a period of time. Provided that the total cost could be held to a reasonable figure and the commercial appearance maintained only through several apparently separate transactions, the Ambassador said he thought this would be acceptable to the Austrian Government. Furthermore, since delivery of the equipment was desired only over a three-year period, he also thought it would be acceptable to have the various agreements spread over a similar period of time. He said the Austrian Government sincerely appreciated the obvious desire of the U.S. Government to meet the Austrian request. 169. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 763.13/4–2662. Confidential. Repeated to Bern, Brussels, Paris, Stockholm, The Hague, Bonn, Copenhagen, Lisbon, Helsinki, London, Luxembourg, Olso, and Rome. Vienna, April 26, 1962, 5 p.m. 1765. Paris for Embassy and USRO. Brussels for Embassy and USEC. During call on Secretary General Bielka today, I remarked I hoped Chancellor is being well briefed for US visit on American views on neutral association with Common Market. He said papers had been prepared and Austrians welcomed opportunity to present their own views and seek answers to certain questions. He had seen press reports of Hallstein’s talks with Under Secretary BallPresident of the EEC Commission Walter Hallstein visited Washington April 9–12 for talks with senior U.S. officials. A memorandum of an April 9 conversation among Rusk, Ball, and Hallstein is ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Other documentation on the Hallstein visit is ibid., Central File 375.800. for example and found it difficult to see even if “typical Austrian products which are just magnesite and petit point” of very little importance are granted tariff concessions by CM, why important competitive products like steel and machinery would be given CM concessions if these are to be generalized to all GATT countries. He also felt there is still American misunderstanding as to Austrian preparedness to participate fully in non-trade economic aspects of Rome treaty, for example freedom of labor or capital movements and social welfare standardization, and he welcomed opportunity for Austrian personal presentation to Ball. Bielka said general agreement had been reached at the expert level during harmonious Geneva talks on definition of limitations imposed by neutrality on Common Market participation, and he expected paper thereon would be approved by Ministers at Stockholm. Agreement was likewise reached on very general paper setting forth objectives of three neutrals and contributions they expected to make in Common Market arrangements. This will likewise come before Ministers at Stockholm. There have been suggestions from Brussels that the CM commission could meet with representatives of three neutrals in May for exploratory talks. Bielka feels strongly that this should be preceded by opportunity for Ministers of three neutrals to present their general “statement of intent” to Common Market Ministers. Statement will be designed reassure Soviet bloc re maintenance neutral status but at same time assure West of neutrals desire participate maximum possible degree in all economic aspects Rome treaty. Austrians had approached both Schroeder and Fayat during their recent visits here and found them both receptive to this idea. Similar approaches are now being made to Italians, Dutch and French. He sensed certain embarrassment on part of CM members that nearly six months have passed without any gesture toward neutrals by CM other than acknowledgment of December note. Austria recognizes it cannot expect real negotiations until conclusion of British talks but does feel it important to make such an approach before summer holidays. It fears also that any exploratory talks by experts not preceded by Ministerial presentation would arouse further Russian suspicions and opposition where Ministerial presentation would confirm and clarify December approach. Matthews 170. Editorial Note In January 1962, Foreign Minister Kreisky sounded out Ambassador Matthews regarding the possibility of a visit by Prime Minister Gorbach to Washington for a meeting with President Kennedy. (Airgram A–351 from Vienna, January 23; Department of State, Central Files, 033.6311/1–2362) Initially, the United States sought to postpone a visit until 1963 because of President Kennedy’s extremely full schedule. However, in an April 2 memorandum to the President, Secretary of State Rusk recommended inviting Gorbach to Washington May 2–4 for a private visit in order to clarify U.S. views on neutral states’ participation in the Common Market. (Ibid.) The White House approved this recommendation on April 17. Gorbach met with Under Secretary Ball and with President Kennedy on May 3 on Austria’s relationship with the EEC. He also held discussions with Kennedy regarding the Berlin crisis. The memoranda of these conversations relating to the EEC are ibid., 763.00/5–362. The memorandum of conversation covering the Berlin issue is ibid., Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. For text of the joint communique issued at the end of the Kennedy–Gorbach talks, see Department of State Bulletin, May 21, 1962, page 832. For a summary of the visit, see volume XIII, pages 88–89. 171. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 763.56/5–1462. Confidential. Vienna, May 14, 1962, 7 p.m. 1889. Reference recent US visit DefMin Schleinzer concerning possible credits arms purchases. As reported separately by military attache, Schleinzer feels follow-up to Washington discussions not sufficiently energetic. We get impression he feels this due at least partly to some foot-dragging by Aust Embassy which of course reports to Ministry headed by member Socialist Party. Under pressure from DefMin to do something, Aust G–4 General Mitlacher wishes depart for States soon as possible and in any case before end of month and has requested MA accompany him. We feel present urgency for action has basis in Schleinzer’s desire obtain political credit for concluding favorable deal with US, in time to be of value November elections. Cabinet approval for foreign credit must be secured, in face as yet unpredictable Socialist reaction. In view long summer recess, Schleinzer’s inability make firm proposals to Cabinet next few weeks would necessitate delay until late fall, nullifying possible election value for him and People’s Party and forcing consideration at worst possible time—during perennial fall budget crisis. Schleinzer considering requesting credit approx $50 million. Ideally would prefer arrangement whereby MSMS interest rates and terms could be extended under cover of a commercial financial institution. Comparable rates and terms under EXIM Bank auspices might be acceptable, although politically less desirable. Direct granting of credits by US Govt would, as Dept aware, not be acceptable. GOA has already taken decision not accept govt-to-govt arrangement because of fear of Sov reaction during period Austrian negotiation with Common Market. Schleinzer insists minimal interest rates necessary to give supporters of plan reasonable chance secure approval of an undertaking involving possibly strong political opposition by Socialists. Emb strongly urges definite US offer be made soon, even if impossible comply fully with conditions Austrians have set. Meanwhile Mitlacher informed that US visit seems pointless at this time, until specific US proposals received. Would appreciate progress report on recent talks in Washington. We still hold view, however, that Washington should continue be locus for continued negotiations, despite Schleinzer’s suspicions re possible foot-dragging by Aust Emb and FonMin.In telegram 2121, May 16, the Department of State responded that the Export-Import Bank had made an opening offer. Delay in getting the talks started had been due to the technical problems of putting together a loan package. The Department also cautioned: “Although interested agencies at highest levels sincerely desire satisfy Aus request, outcome negotiations cannot be anticipated.” (Ibid., 763.56/5–1462) Matthews 172. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 763.56/5–1862. Confidential. Vienna, May 18, 1962, 1 p.m. 1933. Proposed Austrian defense credit. Kreisky indicated to me May 17 his personal endorsement proposed US credit for strengthening Austrian defense force. Said he felt it essential Austrian military be of strength to serve as credible deterrent against threats or military probing adventures on part Austria’s Communist satellite neighbors, though he had no illusions re resistance to any major Soviet attack. He urged extension US credits on favorable terms since it was politically impossible increase defense budget enough to allow procurement on pay-as-go basis. Budget would be increased in future by gradual increments which would be adequate repay credits plus maintaining current defense expenditures. He said loans being requested in Sweden and perhaps other Western countries as well as US. I urged reconsideration Austrian coalition decision not to request US credits under MSMS. I referred to published exchange of notes of August 9, 1957 between US and Austria concerning purchase of military equipment.For text of these notes, exchanged August 9, 1957, see 8 UST 1241. Since it must be assumed Russians already well aware this exchange of notes, as well previous role US as principal supplier Austrian military, perhaps direct procurement by Austria through MSMS procedures would not create problems which GOA had anticipated (Embtel 1479).Dated March 14. (Department of State, Central Files, 398.1901–IAEA/3–1561) Kreisky was not aware or did not recall note exchange. I have sent him copies and pointed out Austrians are already receiving some Austrian schilling 300 million of military equipment under this exchange of notes and he has promised take another look at matter. We have also advised Schleinzer of above conversation and emphasized administrative difficulties of trying to get credits outside MSMS. Schleinzer was approached prior Washington trip with suggestion that note exchange might be basis for extension proposed credit, but was not then willing reopen question in face adverse coalition decision even though latter was made in ignorance of notes. ARMA saw Schleinzer this morning and received assurances that Schleinzer would meet with Kreisky morning Monday, May 21 to explore possibility getting GOA agreement on requesting US credit on MSMS basis. ARMA, Mitlacher and Small accompanying group plan depart for US afternoon May 22 and will be in Washington remainder week. We will advise if possible prior their arrival results Kreisky–Schleinzer talks and change if any in Austrian position. Meantime, suggest appropriate Washington agencies continue plan talks around proposals outlined Deptel 2121.See footnote 1, Document 171. In telegram 1962, May 23, the Embassy reported that Austria had agreed to conduct negotiations on the basis of the exchange of notes of August 9, 1957. (Department of State, Central Files, 763.56/5–2362) On May 24, Ambassador Platz-er met with Sulser for discussions on the modalities of an Austrian military purchase agreement. (Ibid., 763.56/5–2462) Matthews 173. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 763.56/6–262. Confidential. Vienna, June 2, 1962, 2 p.m. 2043. Pass Defense. Schleinzer informed ARMA yesterday he concerned negotiations defense loan not proceeding well. ARMA explained that costs, delivery items and delivery dates all basically worked out and only outstanding problem is financing. ARMA stressed that world-wide US obligations and resultant effect on available appropriated funds required that basic Austrian approach be made through EXIM Bank. Referred meeting Harrer of Finance Ministry Washington with Linder 7 June. Schleinzer told ARMA of importance US credit to strengthening GOA defenses and of significance of political victory in securing GOA approval negotiate for loan in magnitude dols 50 million. He frankly stated his worries re future of defense forces if current attempts at securing credit fail. ARMA reminded Schleinzer of Secretary McNamara’s assurances to him and reiterated US Government doing everything possible assist Austria securing necessary US credits. Schleinzer stated that if it appears negotiations likely collapse he wishes make direct written appeal to Secretary McNamara. In meantime he requested ARMA send urgent telegram expressing his concern. It apparent in Schleinzer–ARMA talks, and later confirmed in Embassy talk with Harrer, that Schleinzer had not coordinated financial details with Finance Minister Klaus. Klaus apparently approved credit on assumption terms would be nominal or no interest with approximately 10-year repayment period. Schleinzer implied to ARMA that a credit approaching commercial terms had not been authorized by Finance Ministry. Harrer in later conversation with Embassy officer stated Finance Ministry due to secrecy surrounding matter was not informed details preliminary negotiations. Finance Minister had indeed operated on assumption loan would carry no interest. As things now stand Klaus had not approved accepting credits under terms provided proposed US package. Harrer had prepared report for Fin Min based on info just received by him from Defense Ministry confirming that about four percent interest involved and repayment of about seven years. Claimed that such terms could not be approved by Fin Min. Harrer’s report included certain recommendations for counterproposals which Fin Min had not as yet acted on. Harrer departing for US on assumption that counterproposals would be approved early next week and serve as basis negotiations. Implied he would have some sort of limited signing authority but could not at present be more specific about counterproposals. Embassy officer remarked that trip to US on assumption non-interest loan achievable would be waste of time. Harrer admitted this but reiterated suggested repayment period much too short and suggested interest rate considerably too high. Embassy has been in frequent touch with Harrer, and upon return ARMA from US, outlined to him on 28 May general nature US proposals, including lack MSMS funds. We had assumed Fin Min Klaus fully informed on details negotations to date. Much of present confusion here undoubtedly derives from Schleinzer’s failure keep his colleagues informed, as well as his ignorance financial matters. Understandably, Klaus wished secure most favorable terms possible, both for budgetary reasons and view potential controversial political aspects first Austrian defense loan since achievement sovereignty. Harrer departs Vienna today. He is knowledgeable Fin Min senior official who will provide financial expertise to Austrian negotiating team which has been lacking until now. Deptel 2248Telegram 2248 to Vienna, June 1, reported that a military credit would be easier under the MSMS program and outlined the probable difficulties of securing the Export-Import Bank loan desired by the Austrians. (Ibid., 763.56/5–2362) just received. Concur in views expressed FYI, but urge door be kept open for continued negotiations, since strongly doubt Harrer will be able accept present US proposals. With view anticipating GOA objections, suggest, if possible, consideration formula such as price cutting which might have some effect as offset against contemplated rate of interest. Porter 174. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 763.56/6–862. Confidential. Vienna, June 8, 1962, 4 p.m. 2093. Pass Defense. People’s Party official informed Embassy in confidence Defense Minister Schleinzer has received invitation visit Soviet Union but plans delay acceptance on grounds preoccupation with forthcoming elections. Embassy aware possibility such invitation since last fall when ARMA recommended US invitation to Schleinzer in order permit him avoid Soviet offer. In light fact proposed US-Austrian defense loan possibility rather accurately reported local Communist press, matter will no doubt be raised not only during Schleinzer visit but also during Gorbach visit Moscow end this month. Aside from equipment (now largely unusable) acquired from Soviets just after peace treaty, Austrians have since followed consistent policy making only token purchases from East bloc. At time visit several years ago, Soviet Defense Minister Malinovsky urged Austria request Soviet equipment. No action taken on this offer but it can be anticipated similar and perhaps more specific offer would now be made to Gorbach as countermeasure to present negotiations with US. Soviets will presumably make point Austrian reliance US as principal military supplier is not consistent neutrality, and will probably (perhaps mainly through Czechs or Poles) repeat attractive credit proposals we know have been made in past. Having gotten nowhere with Raab government on matter, they will now try hard test Gorbach’s vulnerabilities. We further confidentially informed by party official close to Gorbach that Chancellor uneasy about prompt utilization US defense credits if arranged, possibly because of forebodings about pressure Soviets will apply during Moscow visit. Perhaps source was simply forewarning us that our credit proposal would have to be sufficiently favorable to avoid easy rejection by Chancellor on purely financial grounds but in any case developments suggest some urgency in trying reach basic agreement with GOA soon as possible. On other hand, Schleinzer told me at reception June 6 he not unhappy about his reports from Washington on status negotiations, and he felt progress being made. Porter 175. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 763.56/6–1962. Confidential. Vienna, June 19, 1962, 4 p.m. 2169. Reference: Department’s telegram 2403.Telegram 2403, June 18, reported on the status of negotiations over the loan. (Ibid., 763.56/6–1862) Both Schleinzer and FinMin Klaus, whom I saw at reception last night, delighted with terms DOD offer embodied June 15 Nitze letter.Not found. Both expressed deep gratitude for US efforts and understanding for difficulties involved in working out proposals which Austria could accept. Klaus said without reservation that “he could afford” this proposal and would proceed immediately with internal implementation. GOA now intends send two-man team (one each from Finance and Defense Mins) to Washington in about ten days to complete details negotiations. It obvious great load lifted from Klaus’ mind by US offer. Embassy feels US defense credit to Austria will bring major long-range political benefit, and appreciates efforts all participating Departments. Porter 176. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 033.6361/7–662. Confidential. Repeated to Vienna, London, Paris, and Brussels. Moscow, July 6, 1962, 4 p.m. 36. Austrian Counselor (Karasek) who accompanied Gorbach throughout USSR visitGorbach visited the Soviet Union June 28–July 4. reports Chancellor’s party departed with final impression that (1) although USSR opposes Austrian membership in Common Market, it tacitly acquiesces in Austrian intention open negotiations with Common Market, but (2) reserves its position regarding whatever special arrangements Austria may be able to work out with Common Market. At Gromyko–Kreisky meeting on July 4, Kreisky read out several paragraphs of document Austria proposes to present to Common Market on July 28. Gromyko reportedly made no comment other than to say that Soviet position on Common Market already well known. In discussions with Khrushchev, Gorbach took line that Austria’s independence dependent upon its standard of living which in turn dependent upon export possibilities. Pointing out 55 per cent Austria’s trade with Common Market, Gorbach said USSR should have confidence that Austria’s relations with Common Market would be in strict conformity with its international obligations. Khrushchev acknowledged Austria’s need to trade, advised Gorbach to “get your friends in the West to understand your position,” but carefully refrained from committing USSR to any specific approval of Austrian approach to Common Market. Final Austrian-Soviet communique published today’s press was largely Austrian draft which Soviets accepted without making any suggestions for major changes or additions. Soviets privately expressed satisfaction with Gorbach’s constant emphasis on his determination to follow in footsteps of Raab. On basis public Soviet statements and detailed account from Karasek on private talks, appears USSR has retained freedom of action with regard to Austrian desire to develop relations with Common Market. McSweeney 177. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AustriaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 763.13/9–2762. Secret. Drafted by Stone, cleared by U and S/S, and approved by Tyler. Repeated to Brussels and USUN for the Secretary. Washington, September 27, 1962, 7:43 p.m. 854. Following based on uncleared memcon.A copy of the memorandum of the Ball–Kreisky conversation is ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Foreign Minister Kreisky called this morning on Acting Secretary Ball and held cordial and frank discussion question Austrian association with Common Market. Kreisky indicated Soviets appreciated need Austria work-out “arrangements” with Common Market but Khrushchev had politely indicated that for Austria to go too far in direction of membership would have serious consequences. Kreisky indicated language relating political aspects Austrian association which delivered at hearing before Six in July had in effect been cleared with Gromyko. Kreisky said he not pessimistic that solution re Austrian association could be found and was convinced that will existed on the part of Six to find solution. Formula to be worked out needed to be more than just trade agreement because that was not enough and yet less than customs union since that not achievable. Agreement would have to include provision for harmonization Austrian social policy and cover such matters as capital and labor markets. Kreisky stressed importance of Austrian people feeling that they participating to some extent in European integration. In reply Acting Secretary’s question re timing, Kreisky indicated that he thought exploratory talks could go on now for one to two months and then would be followed by formal negotiations lasting 8 to 9 months. To Acting Secretary’s observation that EEC running out of qualified people conduct negotiations, Kreisky replied that separate special group had been working on matter Austrian association and individuals involved (Seeliger) happy for chance to become involved in negotiations. Ball 178. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 661.63/10–1962. Secret. Repeated to Paris, London, Bern, Stockholm, Oslo, Moscow, Brussels, Lisbon, and Copenhagen. Vienna, October 19, 1962, 5 p.m. 774. Brussels for ECBUS; Paris also for USRO. Foreign Minister Kreisky told me October 18 he received Soviet Ambassador Avilov October 16. Avilov, speaking for his government, gave stern warning (but no ultimatum) about Soviet disapproval “negative attitude” of Austria on question EEC. Avilov brushed aside Kreisky’s familiar arguments that Austrian attempts associate EEC were for vital trade and economic reasons and would avoid political obligations Rome Treaty. He referred instead to Austrian “beitritt” (joining) and “anschluss.” Demarche was verbal, but Avilov implied formal note would follow. Soviets expressed astonishment at public Austrian statement optimism concerning “success” Gorbach’s Moscow trip in avoiding active Soviet opposition Austrian EEC participation. Avilov said Khrushchev made his position very clear. Austrian neutrality and state treaty prohibited formal ties with Common Market and Soviet relations with Austria would of necessity be significantly altered in case Austrian-EEC relationship established. Austrians should understand Soviets view Common Market as economic base for NATO, and attachment to such important arm Western military bloc incompatible Austrian neutrality. Soviets now beginning wonder what Austrian neutrality means, said Avilov. Should they believe Chancellor Gorbach, Vice Chancellor Pittermann (whose recent utterances have been inclined to soothe Russians) or Governor Krainer of Styria (past exponent of close Austrian ties with Common Market)? Kreisky’s response was Austrians under no illusion about implications Khrushchev’s statements at time Moscow trip, but they prepared associate with EEC under terms which will protect their neutrality, which only they must define. Kreisky had shown Gromyko in advance proposed Austrian EEC application statement which defined limits Austria-EEC association, and Gromyko had interposed no objection. Soviets should now wait and see how Austrian EEC negotiations progressed, and nature of measures Austrians took to uphold their neutrality. Kreisky told Avilov Soviets making mistake attempt read hidden meanings in campaign statements on neutrality. Austrian Government united on EEC policy and on neutrality issue and election would not affect these views. On NATO issue Kreisky repeated Austria intended engage in no commitments which would violate neutrality, and asserted Rome Treaty has no military clauses or secret protocols. He challenged Avilov explain if COMECON was any more or less economic base for Warsaw Pact countries than EEC and NATO. Kreisky alluded to Khru-shchev’s statement during Moscow visit that Soviets also want agreement with EEC and asked why neutral Austria should be denied same privilege. Avilov answered difference great. Soviets simply wanted trade with EEC whereas Austria wanted integration. When Kreisky pointed out Austria proceeding jointly with Swiss and Swedes, Avilov off-handedly replied Soviets no longer view Swiss and Swedes as true neutrals. (Kriesky put this down as impulsive personal response rather than official government position.) Avilov then berated Austrians for participating European Space Agency (ESRO), stating that this too was program serving Western military objectives and not consonant neutrality. Kreisky said anything, including telephone, can be instrument of war. Austrians cannot deny themselves right benefit from participating peaceful rocket research any more that they can on communications research. Otherwise country would be relegated backwater in keeping up with technological change. Kreisky cautious about assessing reasons for Soviet approach at this time. He thought it was part of basic campaign against EEC but also beginning of intensified bloc pressure on Austria. He repeated his views of Moscow’s proliferation of trouble spots during periods tension. In Embassy’s view, Soviets may also have been encouraged by Moscow trip Vice Chancellor Pittermann and his recent ill-timed and partially misinterpreted public statements on “economic neutrality”. Soviets also of course aware Austrian Government in midst heated political campaign and unable take strong coordinated government action until after November 18 elections. Also may hope renewed threats, combined with existing internal opposition to EEC affiliation, might cause new government reconsider Austrian position re EEC. Kreisky, however, foresees no shift in GOA plans start EEC negotiations soon as possible. He can be expected in meantime report this development Oslo EFTA ministerial meeting next week. Porter 179. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 763.56/12–762. Confidential. Repeated to Bern and Stockholm. Vienna, December 7, 1962, 7 p.m. 1027. There are increasing indications that speculative stories on US $50 million defense loan to Austria may begin appear local press. Defense Ministry request for bids for construction flatbed rail tank transporters has stimulated speculation in Austrian industrial circles. Friendly military attaches, Swiss in particular, have been querying US MA on subject. While it is GOA intent to keep matter confidential it will probably be most difficult do so. Should story break, Embassy plans refer inquiries to GOA, taking line that Austria has from time to time procured military equipment in US as well as from other countries. If GOA wishes, we will add that US would be pleased assist in any new procurement efforts she may wish initiate. Disclosure of loan arrangements at time when Austria target of persistent campaign by Soviets against Austria’s efforts associate with EEC would unquestionably intensify Soviet efforts prove Austria not really neutral but member NATO bloc. Department may wish to alert interested agencies of disclosure possibility to ensure coordinated replies to inquiries. Recommend no official US comment without prior approval GOA. Austrians are continuing their effort secure loans for purchase military equipment from Swedes and Swiss. Austria’s hope is that there would be no disclosure US loan prior to announcement successful completion Swiss and Swedish arrangements.In telegram 1369, December 12, the Department of State instructed the Embassy to inform the Austrian Government that it would have no objection to making the loan public. (Ibid.) In telegram 1383, December 13, the Department of State instructed the Embassy to avoid the use of the term “US defense loan” in any publicity, suggesting instead the phrase military procurement program extending over a period of years. (Ibid.) Riddleberger 180. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 763.56/12–2062. Confidential; Priority. Vienna, December 20, 1962, 6 p.m. 1100. Dept pass Defense. Embtel 1090.Telegram 1090, December 19, reported discussions with Austrian officials regarding the timing of release of information on the loan. (Ibid.) Emb off today met with Waldheim FonOff who furnished copy proposed Austrian press release on US loan transaction. FonMin requested earliest agreement on a press release since Vienna will be devoid of Cabinet officials over holiday and statement must be approved on Friday. GOA plans leave statement with senior DefMin officer on duty for release should story break. GOA hopeful that it won’t. Full text draft release which Emb believes basically acceptable being transmitted by separate message.Telegram 1101 from Vienna, December 20. (Ibid.) GOA anxious include ref EXIM Bank to emphasize “commercial” nature of transaction. Pertinent section their draft follows: “To accomplish the procurement of equipment for the Austrian army an agreement dating from 1957 was used as the basis for transacting a loan with the US Govt and the Export-Import Bank (Washington DC)”. Emb proposes but has not yet cleared with GOA, substitute for above sentence, as follows: “On the basis of an agreement dating from 1957, arrangements were concluded with the US Govt for the establishment of a line of credit to permit the procurement of the necessary equipment from various suppliers in the US.” GOA also wishes release fol genl info on procurement: “The basic items to be delivered are ammunition, tanks of the M–60 type and all types of communications equipment to a total value of about 1 billion Austrian schillings.” Emb recommends inclusion if Dept concurs. Comments required soonest.In telegram 1436 to Vienna, December 20, the Department of State reported inter-agency agreement on the release of information relating to the Austrian loan. (Ibid.) The final agreed text of a press release was forwarded to the Department in telegram 1110 from Vienna, December 31. (Ibid., 763.56/12–3162) Riddleberger 181. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Aus–E.Eur. Confidential. Drafted by Appling and approved in S on October 2. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission. The source text is labeled “Part 1 of 4.” A separate memorandum covering the conversation on East-West relations is ibid. Memoranda of conversation dealing with two other topics discussed are printed as Documents 182 and 183. New York, September 27, 1963, 4 p.m. SecDel/MC/54 SUBJECT Austrian Relations with Eastern Europe PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Ambassador Stevenson Mr. Tyler Mr. Appling Mr. Lissance—Interpreter Austria H.E. Bruno Kreisky, Foreign Minister Dr. Ludwig Steiner, Under-Secretary of State Dr. Franz Matsch, Representative to the United Nations H.E. Dr. Wilfried Platzer, Ambassador Ambassador Hans Thalberg, Foreign Office Kreisky said Austria had settled its differences and established good working relations with all of its neighbors. After working well with Bulgaria and Rumania, they were now taking up Hungary and perhaps ultimately would take on Czechoslovakia. He felt it Austria’s political task to keep the region calm, and felt that they were having reasonable success. They were also collaborating closely with the church and had been able to assist in its concerns in Hungary. In a way, they were achieving a certain “liberation” of the area and it was now possible for thousands of people from the Communist countries to come to Austria where they could see a free, prosperous and happy society where people were “free to complain”. Kreisky said there was a certain disintegration in process in the Bloc. For the present, it was largely economic. If Moscow could not put pressure on Albania, the satellites had to realize that Moscow certainly could also not push them around. The opportunity to choose either of two leaders gave satellites a certain freedom of action. For example, Rumania refused to take sides until it had what it wanted from the Soviet Union in economic questions. Khrushchev badly needed the support of all European Communist parties and in each of them there were nuclei of doctrinal opposition. The Secretary asked about the iron curtain on the Hungarian border and Kreisky said they were moving cautiously to weaken it. They were proposing a treaty with Hungary for a mixed commission which would deal with frontier incidents on the spot rather than involving the two governments at top levels. They were working out an exchange of farmlands on both sides of the frontier which had been troublesome. To a question from the Secretary, Kreisky replied that he saw no reduction of fear of Germany in Eastern Europe. It might not be so evident now, but it was always an important imponderable. Ambassador Stevenson asked about internal shifts in Czechoslovakia and said they had recently shown some interest in increased trade with us. Kreisky said Czechoslovakia was the most reactionary (in the Communist sense) of the satellites. They had left it to the Stalinists to liquidate Stalinism. This had not been possible and therefore, they were only now moving in that direction. He suggested it would be best to stand off for several weeks or months to see how things go. It seemed unwise to deal with people who might soon depart. Kreisky said that minorities from the satellite nations living in Austria were loyal to Austria and that no efforts were being made to use them to stir up trouble in Austria. Kreisky said Ulbricht was an arch Stalinist. He remained in power as a figurehead and as a matter of prestige. With Adenauer’s departure, perhaps this would change.Adenauer, who had announced his intention to step down in September 1962, resigned as German Chancellor on October 11. Ulbricht was known to be disagreeable and inflexible and had no political sense at all. The Communists needed a man more adequate to their present policies. 182. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Aus-E.Eur. Confidential. Drafted by Appling and approved in S on October 2. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission. The source text is labeled “Part 2 of 4”; see Documents 181 and 183. New York, September 27, 1963, 4 p.m. SecDel/MC/55 SUBJECT Cooperation in Europe and Trade Negotiations PARTICIPANTS [Here follows the same list as Document 181.] The Secretary said it was our earnest wish to have the closest cooperation with France. We greatly regretted French withdrawal, for example, from Geneva negotiations. General DeGaulle seemed to want to work with a group of 4 rather than a group of 18 and that problem was procedural rather than substantive. France’s cooperation in NATO and UN was similarly limited. Couve de Murville was coming in October and we hoped for some improvement. The Secretary said the question was how Europe is to be organized. Closer cooperation might have been possible if a directorium had been accepted in 1958, but Europe would not accept it. There was not now even a consensus as to how we should consult. Kreisky summarized by saying that in the past France had had a policy of presence; now they had a policy of absence. The Secretary turned to the prospects for the Kennedy Round. Kreisky said he thought there was a good chance for success if discussions were kept on purely economic grounds. Success was favored by the probability that by the time of the negotiations the position of “outsiders,” like Austria and the Scandinavians, would be improved. Austria, together with Denmark and to some extent Norway, wanted to stay out of political complications. He did not believe Erhardt would change the structure of German policy, but he was an economic man and talked in those terms. DeGaulle was always interested in economic matters—although for him agriculture was not an economic matter. Kreisky agreed with the Secretary that a political will for successful negotiations was essential but he considered that the discussions and the agreements themselves should be economic in nature. The Secretary said Hallstein’s views were similar. Kreisky said for DeGaulle it was absolute doctrine to prevent political influence of the Anglo-Saxons in European affairs. He was hard and inflexible and just would not change. DeGaulle saw the EEC as a delicate balance based on Germany and would not let it be disturbed. Nevertheless, we should always seek new approaches and new points of departure. For the U.K. this would be natural and easier after their elections. In the long run, the problems would be solved. 183. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Aus-E.Eur. Confidential. Drafted by Appling and approved in S on October 2. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission. The source text is labeled “Part 3 of 4”; see Documents 181 and 182. New York, September 27, 1963, 4 p.m. SecDel/MC/56 SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE EIGHTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York, September 1963 SUBJECT South Tyrol PARTICIPANTS [Here follows the same list as Document 181.] Kreisky said Austria had the warmest feelings of friendship for Italy and wants very much to settle their differences by negotiation. On the South Tyrol he saw two differing approaches in Italy. There were those, more toward the Right, who wanted to settle it internally by dealing with powerful interests in the Tyrol. This would only lead to new discontent and disorder and, in a few months the Austrian Government would again be involved. The other group, rather to the Left, favored agreement with Austria which would obviate further Austrian intervention. At present everything in Italy was in flux and they are not now ready to talk seriously. It was too late to have polite conversations about procedure, they had to get down to substance. The Rossi Commission ReportA report prepared by a committee of Italian parliamentarians, chaired by Social Democrat Deputy Paolo Rossi, was scheduled for presentation to the Italian Government at the end of October. had some good points, Kreisky said. Austria felt it necessary to reach an agreement in which the Italians would say how they would deal with problems which might arise in the future. Austria believes the best procedure for this would be agreement by the Italian Government to deal with the Senators from the South Tyrol as the true representatives of these people. This was the way the Italians dealt with other internal problems. The Austrian Government wants a formal document, perhaps an annex to the Paris Accord, and would also want to report any agreement to the GA. Such a formal agreement would include provisions for treating any breach of the agreement. For this purpose Austria was not averse to the International Court’s acting. Kreisky said there were minorities in many European countries and there were satisfactory arrangements for all except for those in the South Tyrol. He warned that there was real danger in the situation. If Italy and Austria reached no agreement this would become a German/Italian issue. This was already true in part of German public opinion. He did not welcome the engagement of the German press in the problem and wished above all to avoid its becoming a pan-German issue. Within the CDU in the Federal Republic, there were strong nationalist elements and exile German groups with great influence who were pressing to make the Brenner boundary an issue like the Oder-Neisse boundary. Kreisky said Italy had failed to heed his warning about terrorism and the center of these activities had now shifted to Munich. Kreisky complained that the Italians kept finding pretexts to cancel meetings with the Austrians. He said the U.S. had not been able to accept his proposals several years ago that we tell the Italians they must cope with the problem and offer our assistance, as had been done successfully in Trieste. The Secretary noted the great and numerous burdens which we have in the world. He implored Kreisky to save us this one and to work it out with the Italians. Kreisky said they did not intend to ask for GA action this year. They had to keep the pressure on Italy and, therefore, he had reported on the matter in his address to the GA. 184. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Frank and approved in U on October 15. The meeting was held in Under Secretary Ball’s office. Washington, October 10, 1963, 4:30 p.m. SUBJECT Austrian-EEC Relations PARTICIPANTS Austria Foreign Minister Bruno Kreisky Ambassador Platzer, Austrian Embassy Minister Kurt Waldheim, Director General of Political Affairs, Foreign Office Minister Hans Thalberg, Director of Information, Foreign Office United States Under Secretary George W. Ball Mr. Galen L. Stone, Deputy Director, Office of Western European Affairs Mr. A. Eugene Frank, WE Turning to the subject of relations with the EEC, Minister Kreisky said that exploratory talks between Austria and the EEC had started. So far as the economic matters to be discussed were concerned, he thought it would be possible to find a common ground with the Commission. However, this might not be possible with the Council. The French, for example, would want an answer soon on Austria’s attitude toward EFTA. To this the Austrian Government will reply that it cannot take a position before seeing what sort of an arrangement is worked out with the EEC. Kreisky noted a dilemma here, with France pressing for Austrian withdrawal from EFTA, while the Dutch, he thought, would not want to see EFTA weakened at this stage by such a move. The main problem, however, was what Austria could actually do, and this will require that the Austrian Government come to an internal agreement on this. He noted that Austrian trade within EFTA had increased from 11.5% to 16.8% without any loss of trade with the EEC. This growing EFTA market had considerable appeal to Austria and it would be reluctant to take any steps which would damage this trade. Moreover, the Socialist Party and elements within the People’s Party would both be unhappy to leave EFTA so long as the other two neutrals were still members. In response to Mr. Ball’s query whether membership in both EEC and EFTA was not an unrealistic goal, the Minister agreed that it was, but he still favored such a “multilateral” solution, even if it were unrealistic. Moreover, at the present time matters in Europe were perhaps on the verge of change with Erhard coming to power in Germany and with the strong possibility that a Labor Government would soon take over in the UK. However, he agreed with Mr. Ball that things would not change very fast. In response to the Minister’s question of what he thought about the possibility of the UK association with the EEC, Mr. Ball replied that he had spoken to French Foreign Minister Couve de Murville about this a few days ago, and Couve gave the impression that the French were not serious in this and that even a trade arrangement between the EEC and the UK would be impossible unless the UK were to give up its special relationship with the United States and the Commonwealth. Minister Kreisky added that he thought perhaps a Labor Government might be more receptive to the idea of association—that oddly enough, a Labor Government would be more Anglo Saxon than the Conservatives. Mr. Ball agreed except that it might be difficult for Labor to deal with a Gaullist Government in France. Minister Kreisky thought this would be no more difficult than for the United States to deal with Spain. Minister Kreisky went on to note that the neutrals were of course no problem for De Gaulle. The problem was, as he had stated earlier, what the Austrian Government could do. Turning to the present attitude of the neutrals, Kreisky said that while the Swiss had initially been very strong in their support of EFTA, they were now less favorably disposed. This was because the Swiss industrialists were concerned about the Socialist complexion of EFTA. With Socialist Governments in the Scandinavian countries, with a Labor Government probable in England, and a half-Socialist Government in Austria, the Swiss were worried that EFTA might rely too much on government planning. Sweden, while in favor of association with the EEC, was unwilling to leave EFTA. The presence of the two neutrals and their continued support of EFTA led Kreisky to want to have Austria remain in EFTA. In passing, he thought the UK under a Labor Government would be positive towards EFTA, which was, in fact, a sort of European Commonwealth. Finally, Mr. Ball asked how Austrian trade with its Eastern European neighbors was going, to which Minister Kreisky replied that at the moment it seemed stabilized. The problem, as always, was what could the Bloc sell Austria in order to enable the Bloc to buy from it? While the USSR was presently able to purchase for cash, he thought that it would not be long before it would be pressing for credit. The meeting closed with a brief discussion of the present grain crisis in the USSR and of the USSR’s intention greatly to expand its fertilizer output. 185. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Secret. Drafted by Stone and approved in the White House on October 22. The meeting was held at the White House. Washington, October 11, 1963, 11 a.m. SUBJECT Meeting Between the President and the Austrian Foreign Minister PARTICIPANTS United States The President William R. Tyler, EUR Mr. Galen L. Stone, WE Austria Foreign Minister Bruno Kreisky Ambassador Wilfried Platzer, Austrian Embassy Ambassador Kurt Waldheim, Austrian Foreign Office Minister Hans Thalberg, Austrian Foreign Office The President greeted the Foreign Minister and said that he had heard that President Truman had admired very much the speech that the Foreign Minister had given in Kansas City. Foreign Minister Kreisky said he had enjoyed talking with the former President and had received a fine lesson in modern American history. He had met many, many businessmen and other civic leaders. The President said we were having some difficulties with the Soviets on the autobahn. Our convoys were still being held up. We did not know what this development indicated as far as the Soviets were concerned. Foreign Minister Kreisky said he had just heard of this development. He had just told Mr. TylerNo record of the Tyler–Kreisky meeting has been found. that the real problem was that Khrushchev was very popular with the Soviet people because he stood for two things—peace and de-Stalinization—but having popularity with the Russian people meant nothing to the Communists. An outstanding German Communist had once told him that Stalin thought he could build up the same apparatus in China as they had developed in the Soviet Union. The German Communist was asked if this were done what would happen if there had to be a choice between the support of the majority of the people and support of the people in the hierarchy. He replied he thought in any event the decisions must conform with the pressures of convictions of the hierarchy. This conformed to the Communist pattern. Foreign Minister Kreisky said that as far as he could see there were only two individuals in the Soviet Union who might be in a position to succeed Khrushchev. There was no doubt in his mind but that the Soviet leaders were already preparing for the period after Khrushchev. These two men were Brezhnev and Malinovskiy. He did not include Malinovskiy as one of the two because he was important as a Marshal of the Soviet Union but because he was important as a Communist leader. The Foreign Minister had known Malinovskiy personally right after the war in Vienna and said he thought he was intelligent. Malinovskiy had served in the French army during the First World War and spoke French. He thought Malinovskiy was a brilliant man. He said Malinovskiy had told him a story that shortly after the war when the Soviets were occupying Austria Stalin had received a message from the then Austrian President Karl Renner to say that the people had nothing to eat and Stalin had telephoned from Moscow to Malinovskiy and had asked him what he could do. Malinovskiy said he replied that he could provide 20,000 tons of wheat. Stalin expressed surprise at this relatively large amount. Malinovskiy said he wanted to tell Stalin a story and he told the story of Peter the Great who had received a delegation of Germans who had asked for some material assistance. Peter the Great had reportedly replied that he would not give them the material assistance they required but would give them a whole city. When one of his ministers started to protest, he told him to shut up and said he was giving them their own city. The Foreign Minister said he thought Kozlov was out of everything because he was a very sick man. Mikoyan was not a Russian and the other leaders such as Suslov were basically technicians. The President said he thought the timing of the recent Soviet action on the autobahn was quite curious. The Foreign Minister said he was certain that this action did not have the approval of Khrushchev. Also he was convinced that it could not be said that this development was caused by a lack of communications or bad organization. The Soviets might have their problems but they were not in the organization or communications of the Soviet army. The Foreign Minister said that Khrushchev might have a great deal of popular support and have a commanding position within the Politburo but there were two areas which gave evidence that he did not have complete control. One was Albania and the other was Molotov. Albania was a relatively small country and if Khrushchev wanted to, the Russians could take it over in two hours. The Albanians had more people in their Embassy in Vienna than there were in the Austrian Embassy in Washington. These people distributed booklets against the Soviet Union. As for Molotov, he was still walking the streets of Moscow. The Foreign Minister said he was convinced that the leaders of the Communist parties in Europe and Asia were continuously working to overcome the Peking–Moscow split. The Foreign Minister said in his opinion the President’s policy was the only possible one at this time. We had to be responsive to the Soviet approaches. We could never find out how far the Soviets might be prepared to go unless we were willing to meet them. He personally believed that a policy could only be built through direct conversations. The Foreign Minister said in this context he had been in favor of Mayor Brandt of Berlin meeting personally with Khrushchev. To make it a question of policy whether to meet with the Soviets or not would always be doomed to failure. It was important to meet. The Foreign Minister said he thought that the role of Germany in East-West relations would be easier after Adenauer had stepped down. Erhard would be more in favor of dealing with the Soviets. On the other hand Adenauer would use his power against such dealings and he would use it with all the resentment of an old man but in a short time the Christian Democrats would react against him. The party would soon decide in favor of the new Chancellor. It would be an extremely difficult situation. The Foreign Minister said that German Foreign Minister Schroeder was a much more intelligent man than Erhard. Erhard was not a very clever man. He was not a man to handle political power and would have a lot of difficulties. Erhard had had to wait a long time before becoming Chancellor and Adenauer had done a great deal to undercut him by making such remarks as saying that Professor Erhard believed he was a German miracle. The Foreign Minister felt that Erhard would not be Chancellor for a long period of time. Foreign Minister Schroeder was a coming man and former Defense Minister Strauss was not dead politically. The Foreign Minister said he personally believed that if a coalition government was formed with the Socialist Party, Strauss would be in the government. The situation after Adenauer was really not a very clear one but any real political change could only emerge from a great coalition. Neither party could run the risk of making a major move vis-à-vis the Soviets for fear of being accused of treason against Germany. The Foreign Minister said he thought the next election in Germany might see an increase in Socialist strength by about three percent. He felt that personalities could only affect the vote by some two to three percent. Below that was a hard core of votes which would not change. The President asked for the Foreign Minister’s judgment regarding Europe and the United States. He pointed out that our policies toward Europe were based on past as well as present policies. The Foreign Minister replied that to speak of Europe as a unit was unrealistic. He felt there would be no unified Europe. Rather Europe would be divided into two major groupings. One would be the Europe des patries and the other would be a Europe des affaires. Europe would not be a unit because De Gaulle detested integration and there was no real desire among the Six to integrate with France. The second point he wished to make regarding Europe was that one must understand that there was a real divergence between generations. The younger generation was for the unity of Europe and was not for de Gaulle. The Foreign Minister said that if one compared the crowds in Germany that greeted De Gaulle with the crowds that had greeted the President you would find that those who cheered De Gaulle came from the middle generation and those that cheered the President were predominantly from the younger generation. The younger generation was now extremely tired of the old man who was in power. They were attracted to the President because he represented a young nation and was himself young. The Foreign Minister said he was not saying this out of flattery but that this was a fact. The whole way of living of the younger generation in Europe was nearer to the younger generation of America in such things as clothes, dances, newspapers, etc. He could see it in his own children. The American way of life had had a lot of influence on European youth. The Foreign Minister said he had also noticed during his visits around the United States that Europe had had an influence on American youth. This was not a political fact but it was the basis for political conclusions. As far as De Gaulle was concerned the Foreign Minister said that no one could change him. He was an old man and he had made his policies with a view to history. He ignored Parliament. It was an ironic fact that the one party in France which had always been against Parliament, namely the Communists, had lost out because Parliament had no power. By liquidating the French Parliament, de Gaulle had made the French Communists powerless. De Gaulle was following a policy of absence. The Foreign Minister said he thought the only way to handle De Gaulle, if it was possible to do so, was to ignore him and not to provoke the French. De Gaulle was a great man for France and he was a great man in his own right. He believed that the Anglo-Saxons had to be kept outside of Europe. Swiss Foreign Minister Wahlen had told him that De Gaulle should have said that the United Kingdom could join Europe but they would have to come “naked as a worm”. 186. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 Aus-It. Confidential; Noforn. Repeated to Rome and USUN. Vienna, October 17, 1963, 4 p.m. 953. South Tyrol. In conversation today with Foreign Office Political Director Waldheim, Embassy received impression Austrians satisfied with way things went on South Tyrol at UNGAAn apparent reference to talks held with Italy during the General Assembly meeting. The General Assembly took no action on the South Tyrol question in 1963. and with conditions established for holding October 23 meeting between Kreisky and Piccioni in Geneva. They expect no great results from meeting, but see it as useful in getting two governments together again in reasonably cordial atmosphere. More important consideration is what contents Rossi Commission report will be, and whether report will be approved unanimously by Commission, thereby making it easier for Italian Government accept. Waldheim said he believes report is serious attempt solve problem, but difficulty is that it responds to only about two-thirds South Tyrol complaints. From Waldheim’s comments we gather that Austrian Foreign Office, at least, fervently hopes Rossi report will be accepted by Italian Government and that political leaders South Tyrol can muster necessary support for it. If this should happen, Foreign Office envisages Austrian-Italian agreed report to UN and establishment some kind of international arbitration to settle any disputes arising from implementation agreement. While projecting this optimistic-sounding schedule, Waldheim repeated his basic doubts about whether agreement could actually be reached between Tyroleans and Italians. Riddleberger 187. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AustriaSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 Aus-US. Confidential. Drafted by Lambert and approved by Stone. Washington, November 26, 1963, 7:15 p.m. 1597. At 10 minute courtesy call President last evening, Gorbach said there were no major problems in Austrian-U.S. relations he needed to discuss at this time. In view our heavy commitments elsewhere in world, Austria did not wish burden us with its problems. If our help ever needed, he knew Austria could always count on us for sympathetic response. President thanked Gorbach for coming to funeralPresident Kennedy had been assassinated in Dallas on November 22. His funeral was held November 25. and expressed keen interest and appreciation Austria’s special position. Rusk 188. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, ECIN 6 EEC-Aus. Confidential. Drafted by Lambert. The meeting was held at the Metropolitan Club. Washington, November 29, 1963. SUBJECT Austrian-EEC Relations; Habsburg Case; Eastern Europe; Sino-Soviet Relations; Various Other Topics PARTICIPANTS Austria Dr. Erich Bielka-Karltreu, Secretary General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Ambassador Platzer, Austrian Embassy United States Mr. William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary, EUR Mr. Dwight J. Porter, Assistant Secretary for Administration Mr. Francis X. Lambert, WE Mr. Tyler had invited Ambassador Bielka to lunch. A member of the Austrian delegation to the UNGA, Bielka had come to Washington for a three-day visit. Dr. Bielka said that some of the EEC countries had been pressing Austria for a commitment to leave the EFTA if an Austrian-EEC arrangement were successfully negotiated. French Foreign Minister Couve de Murville was one of those insisting that Austria make such a commitment. Austria, however, did not wish to commit itself, no matter how informally, until it had a much clearer idea than now of what kind of an arrangement it would be able to work out with the EEC. Austria’s trade with the EEC had not suffered to date as result of the increased EEC discriminatory tariffs, but some manufacturers and exporters were complaining that, in order to compete in the Common Market, they had to reduce their profit margins and even sell at a loss on occasion. It was extremely difficult to ascertain how much truth there was in these complaints. Turning to Eastern Europe, Dr. Bielka said that there were indications that important changes were taking place there. He referred specifically to the recent relaxation of travel regulations by Czechoslovakia and Hungary and to the apparent attempts by the satellites to gain a greater degree of economic independence from the USSR. He knew of no recent developments concerning Cardinal Mindszenty. Cardinal Koenig, who had seen Cardinal Mindszenty at the U.S. Legation in Budapest several months ago, had been attending the Ecumenical Council in Rome during the past two months. In reply to a question, Dr. Bielka said that Otto von Habsburg had publicly denied recent reports in the Vienna press that he would attempt to enter Austria during the Christmas season. Bielka thought that the Government controversy over Habsburg’s attempts to return to Austria, which reached a crisis stage just before the summer holidays, had subsided markedly since then and that it was unlikely to pose a serious problem for the coalition again in the near future. Agreement of the coalition partners on the budget was a good sign. Dr. Bielka asked about the future of U.S.–USSR relations, the Sino-Soviet controversy, the situation in Laos, and the possibility of a President Johnson–General De Gaulle meeting. Mr. Tyler thought that Mikoyan’s thumbs-up gesture at the Moscow airport upon his return from President Kennedy’s funeral was significant. The Russians were not given to making such gestures lightly. President Johnson had stressed to Mikoyan that he would make unremitting efforts to continue President Kennedy’s policy of seeking peaceful solutions to outstanding problems in U.S.-USSR relations.For documentation on the Johnson–Mikoyan meeting, see vol. V, Documents 236 and 237. As for Sino-Soviet differences, Mr. Tyler said it was difficult to foresee what the outcome might be. However, he thought these differences involved something more than ideological interpretations. He saw no indications that the gap would be closed appreciably in the near future. With regard to Laos, Mr. Tyler said that he was not fully current on the situation there since he did not normally have time to read the cable traffic on this subject. So far as he knew, there had been no significant changes in the Laotian situation recently. As for a President Johnson–General De Gaulle meeting, agreement had been reached in principle that there should be such a meeting, but no details were settled regarding the time or place. President Segni of Italy would pay an official visit to Washington in January and meet with President Johnson. This visit had been scheduled before the death of President Kennedy. Replying to a question by Mr. Tyler, Dr. Bielka said that he had no matters relating to U.S.-Austrian bilateral relations to discuss. When Mr. Tyler said that he also had no bilateral matters to raise and in passing mentioned the assets problem, Dr. Bielka merely nodded. Ambassador Platzer asked if Mr. Mansfield (IGA) had returned from Europe, where he had gone to investigate the grain diversions. He said that Mr. Plan, the Embassy’s Financial Counselor, would like an appointment with Mr. Mansfield to be briefed on the progress of the investigation. There followed a brief discussion on the possibility of lifting the suspension on PL480 feed grain shipments to Austria. The recent press articles on the diversions and the interest of Congress in the irregularities, as well as the fact that the investigation had not yet been completed, were cited by Department officers as impediments to an early lifting of the suspension. Further on Austrian-EEC relations, in reply to questions by Mr. Porter, Dr. Bielka said that there were some Austrians who were willing to make a commitment now to the EEC that Austria would withdraw from the EFTA upon entering an arrangement with the EEC. Others, however, were opposed to making such a commitment, in part because they feared it would entail a progressive decline in Austria’s exports to the EFTA countries while the Austrian-EEC negotiations were still in progress. They feared permanent loss of EFTA markets if the negotiations with the EEC were unsuccessful. As for the USSR’s attitude toward an Austrian-EEC arrangement, Dr. Bielka said that although it was true that the USSR had not recently reiterated its earlier warnings, there could be no doubt that the Soviets took a serious view of Austria’s entering an arrangement with the EEC. Their recent silence stemmed from the realization that an arrangement was not imminent and their warnings would undoubtedly be resumed if the prospects for an arrangement improved. Finland 189. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/10–1661. Secret. Drafted by Tyler and approved by the White House on November 2. The meeting was held at the White House. In February 1961, the Finnish Government indicated its desire for a Kekkonen visit to the United States to coincide with an already planned visit to Canada. (Memorandum of conversation between Rusk and Seppala, February 23; ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330) Ambassador Gufler presented an invitation to Kekkonen on April 15. Washington, October 16, 1961, 3:30 p.m. PARTICIPANTS The United States The President The Secretary of State Bernard A. Gufler, Ambassador to Finland Arthur Schlesinger, Spec. Asst. to Pres. Wm. R. Tyler, Act. Asst. Sec., EUR Finland President Urho Kekkonen Foreign Minister Ahti Karjalainen Richard R. Seppala, Ambassador of Finland Max Jakobson, Chief of the Press Bureau The Secretary of State opened the meeting by outlining the Berlin problem as it stands today. He said that while there had been talks with Gromyko there was as yet no blue sky to be seen. Khrushchev was continuing to call into question our vital interests on which we could not yield. The Secretary said that if Khrushchev were to continue to press on these vital points, then we were all in for trouble. President Kekkonen said he had the opportunity of hearing Soviet views on Berlin since January 1959, when he talked with Khrushchev. Since then, he said, he had met Khrushchev again once and had talks with President Brezhnev.Soviet Premier Khrushchev visited Finland September 2–4, 1960, and Kekkonen visited the Soviet Union November 21–24, 1960. He had tried to find some evidence of change in the Soviet attitude, but in vain, which was no surprise to him. The Secretary said there had been some clarification on two procedural, not substantive, points: (a) the Soviets had indicated they were prepared to consider a four-power agreement on access which would not require negotiations with the GDR; (b) they had said there was no “fatal” date for signing a peace treaty. President Kekkonen said that Brezhnev had also told him that the Soviets were not prisoners of their own timetable, if there were to be real negotiations which were not merely a pretext for further delay. President Kekkonen said he had the impression that the Western Powers have not taken the Berlin problem as seriously as they should have since 1959, because Khrushchev had given up his first six-month ultimatum. He said that West Berlin, as such, was not of great importance, but that it was the German question as a whole which was involved. He said he had gained the strong impression, from what Brezhnev said about the Germans, that the Soviets in fact do fear Germany very much, though they don’t use the word “fear”, and that they are apprehensive about the Germans unleashing another war. President Kennedy, who joined the conversation at this point, summarized the importance of the German question for the West. He said we had done all we could to integrate the Federal Republic into the rest of Europe, and whatever the outcome of the present crisis, Germany’s ties to the West must not be impaired. On no account should West Germany be neutralized. Thus, said the President, West Berlin was not the sole issue. President Kekkonen said it was easy for Finland to understand the US point of view in this matter. If the West were to give up its position in West Berlin, the result, in so far as Germany was concerned, might well be along the lines mentioned by President Kennedy. He said he had tried to find out from Brezhnev what advantage a separate peace treaty held for the Soviet Union, in view of the fact that it was not possible for it to apply to the whole of Germany. Brezhnev said that one could not be sure, but that he thought there was a 50% to 60% chance that after a separate peace treaty had been concluded, conditions would be clarified in such a way as to lead toward the consolidation of Germany. President Kekkonen had then pointed out that the West considered access to Berlin vitally important. Brezhnev had said that the Soviet Union was prepared to guarantee access but that the Ulbricht regime would have to be associated with such a guarantee, since the GDR was a sovereign state. The President pointed out the very great difficulties that lay in the way of recognizing or dealing with the GDR, due to the fact that the Germans would then feel that the prospects of reunification had been fatally impaired. He said our hope was that it might be possible to reach an agreement with the Soviets under which our rights would be unimpaired. President Kekkonen referred to the difficulties of relations with Eastern Europe. He recalled that President Eisenhower, at the start of his administration, had spoken of liberation of Eastern European countries. However, Germany could not be reunified by force. President Kennedy said we could not recognize the GDR. To do so would provoke a very strong adverse German reaction. This could be seen from the effect of the creation of the wall in Berlin on German opinion. He said we did not want a revival of nationalism in Germany. Germany should not be allowed to become isolated, for this would lead to the destruction of freedom in Europe. He said he hoped that the Soviets would be prepared to reserve our rights to access in any agreement, otherwise there might be war. President Kekkonen said the Soviets always use the argument that the West doesn’t really want the reunification of Germany. President Kennedy said this might be largely true in the case of individual countries, but that it was not the point. He said that Germany was now divided, and that this was a fact. The Soviets were taking an unnecessary risk in trying to force us to associate ourselves formally with them in proclaiming this. To do so would bring about the end of NATO and of the European Community, and this would mean the end of freedom in Europe. We were of the opinion that a strong Europe was of great help to Finland and that if the West collapsed this would be very harmful to Finland’s own interests. President Kekkonen said he had been passing on to the President what he had been told from the Soviet side because he thought this would be of interest to us. Brezhnev had told him at the conclusion of their talk that when the Soviets had signed a peace treaty with the GDR, the Allies would have to reach an agreement with Ulbricht, otherwise, should they try to pass, the Soviets would shoot down their planes as they did the U–2. President Kennedy said we had every intention of upholding our rights. If the Soviets were to follow the course just described, this would mean war. This issue was not like the Laotian problem, for example. It was at the heart of our vital interests, and we could not give way, for if we did, Europe would be gone. President Kekkonen noted that both sides had remained exactly on the positions they had taken at the start, and that there had been no move forward by either side. President Kennedy referred to his talk with Gromyko,For the memorandum of the President’s conversation with Gromyko on October 6, see vol. XIV, pp. 468–480. who had used the phrase “respect of the sovereignty of the GDR.” He had not defined this further, but this should be looked into to see what it meant. The wall in Berlin had worked to the advantage of the GDR since it had put an end to the flow of refugees. What was needed now was some leadership from the West Germans. This should come from the new government which they were about to form, so that the Germans should themselves accept and share the responsibility of new terms for an agreement, without being able to claim that they had been let down by their Allies. President Kekkonen said that time was short. He referred to a maxim by Clausewitz to the effect that when there is an issue between one power and a group of Allies, the single power has the advantage because it can decide by itself which concessions it is prepared to make. President Kennedy said we were not prepared to grant concessions, in return for which we would merely be given that which we already enjoy, i.e., our rights. Otherwise we would be giving away such things as the Oder–Neisse territories, and the ties of the West with Berlin; and then Soviet pressures would start all over again. This would not be a bargain. As the Secretary of State had said to Gromyko, we would be buying the same horse twice. The problem was a difficult one because of the peculiarities of the location of Berlin, but we had to stay there and we hoped the Russians knew it. President Kekkonen said that a foreign newspaperman, who had interviewed him, had blamed him for Khrushchev having become more recalcitrant. He added that, as an outsider, he thought the situation was a terribly difficult one. The question was how could progress be made. President Kennedy said that if the Soviet Union would agree to take steps which would improve our rights, we would see on what points we could meet them. He hoped that the Soviets would see this and would agree to reserving Allied rights under any new peace treaty they signed instead of turning them over to Ulbricht. President Kekkonen observed that the Soviets could not fail to go ahead and sign a peace treaty. President Kennedy agreed, but said the point was whether the Soviets would reserve our rights in so doing. President Kekkonen said the Soviets frequently defend their position in terms of international law, referring to the sovereign right of nations and to the precedent of the peace treaty with Japan. President Kennedy refuted both arguments, saying that the Soviets had no right to give parts of Germany sovereignty. With regard to Japan, the case was entirely different. Japan was not divided and had its own government. If Germany and Japan were to be overrun, the road would lie open to the Soviets and this we could not permit. President Kekkonen said he felt he was in an awkward position because he had been relating what he had heard the Soviets say and it might be thought that this represented his own views, which was not the case. President Kennedy reassured him. He added that he wished to stress the necessity of the United States meeting its commitments, otherwise it would mean the destruction of NATO and create a dangerous situation for the whole Free World. President Kekkonen said it was interesting that the United States also believes that the Soviet Union will in any case sign a separate peace treaty with the GDR. The question was: What happens afterwards? Turning to the subject of Soviet resumption of nuclear testing, President Kekkonen said he had told Brezhnev of the bad effect throughout the world which this had created, and had asked him why the Soviet Union had resumed tests. Brezhnev said that the Soviet Union knew that this was an unpopular thing to do but that it had been considered necessary, and that 30% of the tests (the 13th had just taken place at the time) had now been carried out. President Kekkonen said he had the impression that the resumption of tests had a connection with the German problem. When he had seen him in 1960, Khrushchev seemed self-assured and conscious of Soviet power. President Kekkonen said he had the impression that the Russians suffer from an inferiority complex and feel they are not always treated in a manner appropriate to their power and their importance. President Kennedy said that in his talks with Khrushchev he had sensed two contradictory feelings and attitudes on his part: first, a feeling of not being quite sure of himself, and, second, a feeling of great superiority. It was difficult to balance these two. President Kekkonen mentioned that the Soviets had been at pain to impress Finnish politicians visiting Russia with the improvement in their conditions of living, and often asked their visitors to see for themselves whether their homes were really as described by the West. President Kennedy asked President Kekkonen how he saw the future of Finnish relations with the Soviet Union. President Kekkonen said that the economic relationship with the Soviet Union was stable. Exports to, and imports from the Soviet Union were balanced at about 15% of Finland’s total trade. This figure had been made possible by a five-year trade agreement. The President asked what the effect would be on Finland if the UK joined the EEC. President Kekkonen said that Finland had been satisfied by the terms of her relationship to EFTA, but that if the EFTA countries were to join the EEC, this would create a very difficult situation for Finland. The problem appeared to be insoluble—Finland would have to compete with her competitors on intolerable terms. 35% of Finland’s exports now go to the Common Market countries. In order to meet the competitive terms of the Common Market, Finland would have to resort to measures which would lower her standard of living. President Kennedy asked if Finland was in a position where she could sign the Rome treaty now. President Kekkonen did not reply directly, but referred to difficult political conditions. He said the Soviets had not exerted pressures on Finland. President Kennedy asked whether the Soviet Union was satisfied with the present form of government in Finland or would they prefer a Communist regime. President Kekkonen said he thought the Soviets were satisfied, and that their primary consideration was one of security. President Kennedy listed the reasons for United States support of the Common Market. He said that it would cost us something in our trade, but would be a stabilizing force for Germany and for Europe if the UK were to join it. He felt sure that the countries involved would recognize the special problems of other countries, for example, Switzerland and Sweden. President Kekkonen said that there was, of course, a great variety of interests involved, and that Finland would have to look after her own. Finland faced the problem of coming to terms both with the Common Market and with the Soviet Union—“That is our Berlin”, he said. President Kennedy referred to Finland’s most-favored-nation agreement with the Soviet Union, which had posed a problem for GATT. He said this would be compounded if the UK joined the Common Market. President Kekkonen said he hoped the objections which had been formulated to the terms of Finland’s agreement with the Soviet Union were more formal than substantial. President Kennedy reiterated the unhappiness which granting MFN treatment to the Soviet Union had created in the United States and said he hoped President Kekkonen would make use of this in resisting any attempts at encroachment by the Soviet Union. Turning to the conduct by the Soviet Union of atmospheric nuclear tests, President Kennedy said that it was obvious that they had been preparing them over many months, during which conversations had been going on in Geneva, between the West and the Soviet Union. Being a free society, it was not possible for us to test without inspection, whereas the Soviet Union could. We now faced the situation where the Soviet Union might complete their current series of tests and then call for an unpoliced moratorium on all tests. The President said that the requirements of our security determined that we could not accept this, nor would we go back again to negotiations under a self-imposed ban on testing. President Kekkonen described Finland’s position today as a happy one compared with what it was in 1944. He referred to the agreement reached at Yalta that countries that were neighbors of the Soviet Union should have governments friendly to the Soviet Union. President Kennedy recalled the Soviet pressures on Finland in 1958, which the Finns referred to as “frosty night”. He asked what the pressures were which the Soviets had applied and what caused them to raise these pressures. President Kekkonen said that during his visit to Leningrad in 1959 he had asked Khrushchev the same question. Khrushchev had said that Finland and the Soviet Union had a common border of 1300 kilometers and thus there was a substantial element of security in their relationship. Khrushchev had said that certain members of the then Finnish Government had been doing things which impaired this element of security. President Kekkonen said that Finland had complete freedom to decide what government it should have, and that the Soviet Union had made no demands on Finland. However, Finland must take the Soviet position and attitude into account even when she disagrees with the Soviet Union. This was a difficult position for Finland, which, before 1940, had always been fully armed to defend itself against the Soviet Union. President Kennedy inquired what methods the Soviet Union had used to express its displeasure with Finland. President Kekkonen said that they had recalled the Soviet Ambassador, who had left without saying “good-bye” to the President. Also they had caused trade difficulties. While Finland could have gone on this basis for some months, this would merely have made matters worse economically. Finland’s internal political problems were inevitably related to foreign policy considerations. President Kennedy asked how President Kekkonen saw the evolution of Communist policies in the next decade. President Kekkonen said that he thought in 30 years time, the capitalist system would gradually be transformed by various modifications and restrictions, and that the Communist system would be progressively liberalized, to a point where both systems would be so close to each other that it would be difficult to know what to quarrel about. President Kennedy observed that the problem was how to survive until then. He said he thought that we had witnessed an increasing strength of nationalist sentiment since 1945 and that this would prevent a major change in balance of power in the world, if we could prevent problems of the Berlin type from exploding. He said that Central Europe was a vital area, and that the Soviet Union should not push us too hard in such areas. President Kekkonen said he thought the economic systems of East and West were getting closer to each other but that Soviet support and exploitation of nationalist sentiment in areas such as Africa had the effect of increasing Soviet political strength. President Kennedy said he felt it was important to support and encourage national sentiment in Africa, even though this occasionally brought us into conflict with some of our European Allies. President Kekkonen said that so long as countries like South Africa and Portugal pursue their present policies, this conferred a great advantage on the Soviet Union. President Kennedy said that the problem was a very difficult one. For example, the Azores Base Agreement, which was coming up for renegotiation soon, was of very great importance to the United States, and this had to be borne in mind with regard to Portugal. President Kekkonen said that Egypt herself would not be able to do as much for the Soviet cause in Africa as does Angola. He had become aware during the war how strongly United States policy had worked against colonialism, and he thought this was a wise policy. President Kennedy said he felt it was important that the Soviet Union should distinguish between areas of secondary importance and those of primary importance. Even though Finland has problems, he hopes that she would realize that the object of United States policy with regard to Berlin was to keep Europe free, and that although Finland could not herself do much about it, she could understand that her fate was bound up with the outcome of the issue. President Kekkonen said that Finland had a special position with regard to the Berlin problem. The Soviet-Finnish Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Aid of 1948For text of this treaty, see 48 UNTS 149. contains a clause whereby Finland was committed to accept Soviet aid, if necessary, in order to repel any attack directed against the Soviet Union across Finnish territory, from Germany or from any powers allied with Germany. President Kennedy pointed out this clause was not relevant to the situation with regard to Berlin. President Kekkonen agreed, but said that, as in the field of trade, we did not want to “anticipate events” (as rendered by the interpreter—in the context the probable meaning is “provoke” rather than “anticipate”). He said that it was an interesting political situation. President Kennedy said that the risks and the dangers were equal for all. Both the United States and the Soviet Union were in very great danger. Finland could perhaps be said to be in less danger than we were. President Kekkonen said that in 1939 the Soviets had asked for a strip of territory in East Finland in order to safeguard the security of Leningrad. This showed the Soviet Union’s concern for its security. He said that both great powers carried enormous responsibility and that he prayed for success of the efforts to find a solution. The President outlined the various steps which the United States has taken in order to create conditions of peace in the world. However, in areas which were of vital interest to the freedom of the West and the security of the United States, our stake must be recognized by the Soviet Union. President Kekkonen observed that it was a great pity that the problem of Berlin had been created at the end of the war. Otherwise, he said, the possibilities of stabilization of the situation in Europe would have been greater. President Kennedy agreed and said that the circumstances of access to Berlin posed considerable difficulties. President Kekkonen said that the Soviets have declared their plans openly and have committed themselves to them. President Kennedy said that it was perfectly possible for the Soviets to sign a separate peace treaty with the GDR which would meet their commitment and would reserve our rights. Khrushchev could do this if he wanted to. President Kekkonen said that possibly one way out would be for the United Nations to play a role in the solution. He had mentioned this to Brezhnev, who had agreed. President Kennedy said that when the wall had been built in Berlin, we had not interfered because we recognized that this was a matter of vital Soviet interest. The Soviets had the power, if they so wished, to sign a separate peace treaty, and to limit their objectives. He agreed that certain United Nations offices could be set up in West Berlin, if this would help to bring about a solution, but that we would not accept Soviet troops. President Kekkonen said that Brezhnev had used the phrase: “If the West have ingenious proposals, the Soviet Union would always be prepared to consider them”. President Kennedy said we were fully conscious of the danger of the situation and were anxious to find a solution. President Kekkonen said there was at least some hope in the fact that the Soviets had stressed that they were not prisoners of time. President Kennedy said he hoped that Khrushchev was sufficiently interested in the race of production with the United States, which we thought we would win in spite of his claim, to give us all the time in which to decide the outcome. President Kennedy then asked if there was anything which President Kekkonen thought the United States could do to help Finland. President Kekkonen said there were no concrete issues or proposals between us. He appreciated the sympathy and understanding of the United States. He was going to say in his speech at the Press Club on the following day that it was very flattering to Finland to be front-page news. President Kennedy said that he knew that trade was a most important field for Finland. President Kekkonen said that Finland was a capital-hungry country and when Finland accepts credits and loans from others, the Finnish sense of honor requires that these be repaid. As for Finland’s internal problems, he would also ask for understanding with regard to them too. Finland’s wishes were modest; she was not asking for dollars. She wishes to maintain good relations with the United States and thought that the best way to do this was not to take aid from the United States. The President raised the point of certain limiting language in the aid bill with regard to investment guarantees and asked whether there was anything we could do to prevent its working against Finland. Ambassador Seppala then pointed out that the agreement with Finland involving investment guarantees had been signed just before the amendment to the bill had been introduced. The President said we would look into the possibility of working something out on this point. President Kekkonen said that Finland was considering floating a $10,000,000 bond issue in New York. He said that Finland also had plans to increase the capacity of her wood industry by at least 40% and that this project was being financed largely by Finnish capital. Finland was also receiving some supplementary credits from the World Bank to the extent of $25,000,000. President Kennedy turned once again to the question of why President Kekkonen thought the Soviets had not used pressure to overthrow a free society in Finland on their own border when they have repeatedly gone to such efforts and such lengths to expand throughout the world. President Kekkonen said he was convinced that for the Soviets the decisive factor was their security interest. So long as the Soviet Union was satisfied that there was no danger from, or through, Finland, the relationship between the two countries would be stable. However, as soon as the Soviets felt that they might be threatened from that quarter, they reacted. President Kennedy observed that with regard to Finland, the Soviets seemed to be following a purely nationalist rather than ideological line. President Kekkonen said that the case of Finland was a special one which Finland herself could not always understand. Ideological factors did not play a major role. For example, the Soviets ignore the Finnish Communist Party and treat it contemptuously. Certain Finnish Communist leaders had recently gone to the Soviet Union and had talks with Suslov which had not gone well, and had made them very unhappy. In conclusion, President Kekkonen expressed his appreciation of this opportunity for a talk with President Kennedy, who told him he was looking forward to seeing him again on the following afternoon.Presidents Kennedy and Kekkonen met privately at the White House at 5:10 p.m. on October 17 for cocktails prior to a formal State dinner hosted by President Kekkonen at the Finnish Embassy. No record of this meeting has been found. For text of the joint communique following their meetings, see Department of State Bulletin, November 6, 1961, p. 761. The meeting adjourned at 5:45 p.m. 190. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–161. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Also sent to Moscow. Helsinki, November 1, 1961, 6 p.m. 189. Called this morning on Hallama, Acting Secretary General of Foreign Office, who is in effect acting Foreign Minister in absence Karjalainen. (I had tried without success see Hallama yesterday.) Hallama gave me the following information: Gromyko delivered his note to the Finnish Ambassador in Moscow on Monday, saying it could be released to press Tuesday or Wednesday.The text of the Soviet note was forwarded to the Department of State in telegram 182 from Helsinki, October 31. (Ibid., 660E.61/10–3161) For text of the U.S. statement on this note, see Department of State Bulletin, November 20, 1961, p. 866. Hallama asked that release be postponed until Kekkonen’s return, Finnish Ambassador Moscow failed reach Gromyko. Hallama heard quite by chance through Stockholm that Soviets were releasing note Monday night. He had to release information here regarding note at a time when Finnish Foreign Office had only hastily made translation of note. Hallama has not had time think out implications note but believes it motivated by something more than mere desire accomplishment Soviet aims in Finland. He thinks it part of over-all efforts Soviet Union now making. He notes that except for some criticism of elements in Finland that are not friendly to Soviet Union (this criticism has been made often before and Finns take its inclusion in note lightly) note contains no strictures against Finland or its government and concentrates its main attacks on Germany, its NATO Allies with special attention to Scandinavia. Hallama does not think that Soviets now mean to push for an occupation of Finland or even for bases in Finland. He thinks that if something drastic with regard Finland had been intended it would have been done suddenly when note was presented and points out that note sets no deadline. Hallama thinks Finland should go slowly and play for time while showing enough activity to give Soviets feeling that matter not being taken lightly. He advised President Kekkonen by telephone not to return immediately but to carry on planned program.Kekkonen was in Los Angeles, the final stop on his visit to the United States. In Hallama’s opinion speeding up of return of Foreign Minister, who will arrive Helsinki five this afternoon, is enough evidence for Soviets feel Finland taking matter seriously. Hallama added that he met yesterday with Cabinet to present translation of text not then available and that matter is being reported today to Parliamentary committees. Hallama is convinced that Finland cannot refuse invitation enter into conversations with Soviets or it must do so within framework of “policy of friendliness”. He added that when 1948 Treaty was concluded President Passikivi had said that Article Two would present difficulties of interpretation that would cause problems if consultation were ever demanded. Hallama believes however that accepting invitation consult does not constitute automatic admission contentions of Soviet note. Finns will insist that their territory is not menaced and that Soviet Union is not menaced through Finnish territory. They cannot however deny that war tension exists elsewhere. Hallama will advise President not to go with Finnish delegation to Moscow but to send Foreign Minister and not to include any military men in delegation. Hallama believes that President should at least ini-tially in no way enter directly into negotiations. Finland has been in consultation with other Nordic States and has asked them in their reactions to the Soviet contentions, which it hoped would be prompt and to the point, not to say anything with regard to Finland until Finnish Government had itself made public statement. Hallama expressed gratification with cooperation received this matter. He made particular mention of excellent statement by Swedish Government. Finland realizes that it will have to handle its problem with Soviet Union alone and can hope for sympathy but cannot count on material assistance from outside. Gufler 191. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–161. Secret. Drafted by Christensen. Washington, November 1, 1961. SUBJECT The Finnish Situation PARTICIPANTS Mr. T. Brimelow, Counselor, British Embassy Mr. J. B. Denson, First Secretary, British Embassy Mr. W. C. Burdett, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary, EUR Mr. M. C. Rewinkel, Acting Director, BNA Mr. K. Christensen, Officer in Charge, Northern Europe, BNA Mr. Brimelow called at his own request. He presented a paper on contingency planning on Finland,Not found. but said that he had come primarily to discuss the Finnish situation. Mr. Burdett gave him the substance of Deptel 2384 to London,Telegram 2384, October 13, provided the Department of State’s analysis that the Soviet note was part of a wider campaign of psychological pressure and outlined U.S. plans for a political and propaganda response. (Department of State, Central Files, 762.00/10–1361) and in addition stated that we were sending a message to Paris about a possible NATO response to the allegations made by the Soviets in their note to the Finns.In Topol 669 to Paris, November 1, the Department of State outlined its proposal for NATO action to counter the Soviet propaganda offensive, stressing its view that Finland should not be specifically mentioned. (Ibid., 375/11–161) Emphasizing that he was speaking personally, Mr. Brimelow said he gives some credence to reported leaks through Poland to the effect that the Soviets intend to stage a series of crises. He suggested that the Soviets are endeavoring to orchestrate increasing tension, one element of which is to demonstrate a stronger conventional war posture by making troop movements through satellites. He considers this important, and said that the Soviets may wish to move troops into Finland as part of this effort which is designed to bring about negotiations on Berlin. Continuing in this vein, Mr. Brimelow suggested that the Soviet note to Finland plays on Scandinavian nerves already frayed by fallout fears, and takes into account lingering Scandinavian doubts and worries regarding Germans. Mr. Brimelow suggested that even though Finland may not agree on the alleged threat from the West, the Russians would say that nevertheless they (the Soviets) consider the threat real and accordingly need certain facilities in Finland. (Mr. Brimelow was inclined to think, however, that the Soviets have not made up their minds on how far to go.) Mr. Brimelow suggested that Khrushchev could reason that, in order to establish the credibility of his own deterrent vis-à-vis the build up of Western conventional forces, he could not leave Leningrad undefended. Thus, if one considers there may not be a nuclear war, it would make sense for Khrushchev, in further orchestration of tension, to move troops into Finland. Soviet emphasis on West German militarization, continued Mr. Brimelow, illustrates that the rearmament of the FRG is taken seriously by the Soviets. Mr. Brimelow suggested that the Soviets may wish to do more than use the Note to the Finns for propaganda purposes. The Note, he believes, may be part of a Soviet build up of tension in the crisis on Berlin, and the Soviets probably feel that in this area they can go far with little danger to themselves. Soviet concern with a German threat may, Mr. Brimelow continued, be emphasized through actions in Finland in order that the Scandinavians will see that pressure on them, including Finland, can be relieved by negotiations on Berlin. The Scandinavians will thus be induced to place increased urgency on negotiations. In conclusion, Mr. Brimelow indicated that Prime Minister Macmillan has had a longstanding personal interest in Finland. 192. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–361. Confidential. Repeated to Stockholm, Oslo, Copenhagen, Moscow, London, Paris, and Bonn. Helsinki, November 3, 1961, 3 p.m. 205. Called on Foreign Minister this morning. He thanked me most cordially for warm reception and pleasant hospitality he and President had enjoyed in US. With reference to situation created by Soviet note, he made following remarks: The Soviet note came as great shock but as more shock than surprise as Finns have feared some Soviet action of this sort.In telegram 207 from Helsinki, November 3, Gufler elaborated on this point, stating that the Finns had feared Soviet invocation of the 1948 treaty ever since the heightening of tensions over Berlin. (Ibid.) The Finn Government will take several days to formulate its reply to Soviet note. It will have to enter into some sort of discussions with Soviets but does not yet know exactly within what framework these will be conducted. The Finn Government has no idea at the moment what Soviets intend to demand from it. Finland does not feel it is menaced by NATO and does not accept the premises of Soviet note. It does not feel it is militarily menaced by West Germany either, but the “German problem has angles that must be considered in the light of history”. The Germans are an active people and there have after all been two world wars. He talked last night with the President,Gufler Kekkonen was in Los Angeles until November 2 when he returned to Finland. who is keeping cool and optimistic. He hopes that President’s optimism will be justified. As all observers can see, the Finns are keeping cool and have genuine hope that they can arrive at satisfactory solution. I remarked that, as he could see from reception Finnish party received in America, the American people have a very genuine liking for Finland and wish it well and that the US wants nothing from Finland but a genuine maintenance of its neutrality. In reply to this remark, he sighed and said with real feeling, “that is exactly what we want to maintain”. Gufler 193. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–661. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution; No Distribution Outside Department. Helsinki, November 6, 1961, 10 p.m. 221. Source mentioned preceding telegram numbered 218In telegram 218, Gufler reported that Hallama had inquired about reported U.S. diplomatic consultations with other Scandinavian states regarding action to take in response to the Soviet note. (Ibid.) today gave me following information: Final decision had not been taken as to how GOF will reply to Soviet note, whether by written note or orally through diplomatic channel. Decision will be taken tomorrow. He favors reply by note. Present draft note is short, does not mention Germany, or acknowledge validity Soviet contentions. He hopes that draft will be accepted and that reply will be by note which can be published and will record Finnish Government’s position for benefit other countries and especially of Finnish public. Published note advisable in view rumors to effect that there have been some secret exchanges that are not known to public. If reply is made orally through diplomatic channel, these rumors will tend find even more credence than at present. Finns under no condition refuse to talk but will send to Moscow only small delegation headed by Foreign Minister and consisting entirely of civilians. With regard to source’s statement that no mention of East Germany would be made in note, I remarked that, speaking without instructions and entirely on a basis of personal opinion, I had wondered why reference to West German rearmament and statement this “cause for worry on Finland’s part” had been made in President’s television speech. That seemed rather inconsistent with other statement in this speech that NATO is founded on defensive intents. My informant said he could tell me in very greatest confidence that this reference had been added as an afterthought to speech almost at last minute before it was delivered. When taking leave I emphasized that my remarks had been merely personal. He stated that his remarks are equally personal and expressed hope I would not communicate anything we had talked about to anyone else in Helsinki, adding that too many people were running around town repeating things and contributing to increased tensions in atmosphere. It most important that this source be protected. Gufler 194. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–1661. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Oslo, Stockholm, Bonn, London, Paris, and Moscow. Helsinki, November 16, 1961, midnight. 246. Reference: Embtel 244.Telegram 244, November 16, reported that the situation with regard to Germany and Berlin seemed to be worse. (Ibid.) Helsinki has been full today and yesterday of rumor and conjecture regarding circumstance surrounding announcement Parliamentary elections. Some persons have contended that main initial purpose Soviet action initiated by October 30 note was to insure re-election Kekkonen and taken for granted that arrangements had been made by him with Soviets before he announced elections. This belief found some support attitude local communist leaders and press who immediately express approval elections, probably for primarily tactical effect locally. Other persons have thought that elections were clever move that would gain time for Finnish Government and have felt that Soviets had enough faith in Kekkonen to approve his action or at least let him appear get away with move. Wishful thinking has prevented most from facing possibility that Finland might be on way to satellite status though some have expressed such fears. Until Wuori arrives and reports, no one here can know for sure precisely what Soviets intend or how far and how fast they mean to go. I believe, however, it unlikely that Kekkonen had advance agreement from Soviets for Parliamentary elections. Soviets are notoriously and from their point view rightly distrustful such unpredictable things as free and uncontrolled elections. Intention behind Soviet action may have included some small element of desire to help re-election Kekkonen, though that difficult believe in view circumstance his re-election considered almost certain. Main intention must be draw Finland closer into Soviet orbit. It hard to see how this process can be begun without being carried on at accelerating speed. Finnish efforts slow or stop process by holding Parliamentary elections may have been futile and to Soviets provocatory action that may be all more irritating to them because it undertaken by person hitherto regarded as inclined take “realistic and understanding view” their attitudes and wishes. Since Soviet note became known Finnish public on morning October 31 sentiment has swung from deepest depression and conviction that “1939 is here again” to hopes that somehow Kekkonen would save the situation. Reports that Soviets dissatisfied his action and attitudes will send Finnish morale plummeting to bottom. With borders undefensible by comparison with 1939 and an inadequate military establishment, all Finns convinced there can be no question of repetition of 1939 resistance. All Finns subscribe to Paasikivi line. If this proves insufficient satisfy Soviets, there is in reality nothing for the Finns to do except realize that degree of independence, if any, that Finland will be able maintain depends entirely on the Russians and not on anything they or the most skillful of Finnish leaders can do. Gufler 195. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–1761. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Also sent to Moscow. Helsinki, November 17, 1961, 3 p.m. 248. Saw Hallama this morning. Substance his remarks as follows: He was greatly disturbed by circumstance that Finnish Embassy Moscow leaked to press news of Wuori’s call on Kuznetsov (Embassy’s telegram 245)Telegram 245, November 16, reported that the Finnish Ambassador had met with Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov. (Ibid., 660E.61/11–1661) and that information about call had become known to public with bad results even before it reached Finnish Government. Reading from Moscow’s telegraphic report he confirmed information re Kuznetsov remarks given in Embassy telegram 244.See footnote 1, Document 194. He added that Kuznetsov had said that Finnish Delegation must be sent Moscow soon to begin consultations. Wuori asked about meaning of “soon”, at what level the delegation should be and whether it should include military members. Kuznetsov replied that Finnish Government should determine how soon it could send delegation and whether delegation should include military. Without specifying level delegation, Kuznetsov left impression it should be headed by Foreign Minister. Wuori asked if public report about call would be issued. Kuzne-tsov replied that up to Finnish.A Finnish communique detailing talks with the Soviets was released on November 17. The text of the communique was transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 251 from Helsinki, November 17. (Department of State, Central Files, 760E.00/11–1761) President and Foreign Minister both deeply shocked by latest Soviet action. President apparently fears that calling of elections done too hastily. He had apparently already decided before Soviet note do some such thing and grasped at this already prepared action as possibly beneficial in situation created by note. Soviets had not given advance commitment to calling elections. Only discussion elections in Gromyko–Karjalainen conversations had been following: Karjalainen had said Finnish Government could give guarantee it would maintain present foreign policy up to time of elections. Gromyko had remarked with two elections coming up in Finland, one probably as late as next summer, Soviet Government felt that it was being asked to wait too long for definitive guarantee. Gromyko indicated in no way any desire, however, for speeding up elections. Hallama feels latest Soviet action should disprove unfair rumors that have had wide circulation particularly in Helsinki that Kekkonen in any way leagued with Soviets or tied to them by some secret agreements. He believes that it is high time for other parties to rally around Kekkonen and for Honka to withdraw his Presidential candidacy. Finns are faced with disturbing puzzle presented by enigmatic Soviet statement that “if proper political guarantees are given” military consultations may [be] avoided. As late as yesterday afternoon Hallama made further unsuccessful efforts obtain definition this term from Za-kharov. Zakharov implied that it was up to Finland to define terms and to offer guarantees which Moscow would define as acceptable or unacceptable only after they are offered. Please protect source. Gufler 196. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FinlandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–1761. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Cook; cleared by BNA, SOV, and S/S; and approved by Burdett. Repeated to London, Paris, Moscow, Oslo, Stockholm, and Copenhagen. Washington, November 17, 1961, 9:59 p.m. 163. Early afternoon Nov 17 Finnish Ambassador contacted Dept to relay request to Secretary he had received by telephone from ForMin Karjalainen. Karjalainen had said he understands we wish to be as helpful to Finland as possible in its current difficulties and is very appreciative this attitude. Karjalainen hoped we would not make any strong statement at this juncture. To do so would complicate Finland’s efforts to resolve matters. We told Ambassador we did not contemplate issuing any press statement. Report of Secretary’s comments on Finnish situation during Press Conference this afternoon by separate cable.For a transcript of Secretary Rusk’s November 17 press conference, see Department of State Bulletin, December 4, 1961, p. 924. Finnish Ambassador Seppala called at Dept later in afternoon. Stated he had talked to Karjalainen by telephone this morning. Said Karjalainen had sounded cheerful and told him he believed Finnish problem with Soviets could still be settled satisfactorily. Ambassador noted that Karjalainen had not yet spoken to Ambassador Wuori who was returning from Moscow. Finnish Ambassador continued that Karjalainen said it seemed to him that Finnish talks with Soviets would have to continue now. ForMin still felt it would be best for Finland to handle situation alone, and that expressions of support from West might make it more difficult for Finns. Finnish Ambassador was told US watching situation very closely and we would welcome keeping in close touch with both Ambassador and Finnish Government. Pouching MemCon.A memorandum of Seppala’s conversation with Tyler is in Department of State, Central Files, 760E.00/11–1761. Rusk 197. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–1761. Confidential; Priority. Received at 10:46 p.m. Helsinki, November 17, 1961, 11 p.m. 250. Re Deptel 161 November 16.Telegram 161, November 16, reported that the Department was “urgently preparing policy paper on Finland” and requested the Embassy’s analysis and recommendations. (Ibid., 660E.61/11–1661) Hope Embassy telegram 246Document 194. will at least partly have met Department’s needs. Shall send forward additional thoughts and analysis as situation develops. Uncertainties as to how situation likely develop make it difficult for US suggest exactly what lines should at moment be set down in policy paper. Suggest extension of deadline for submission this paper be sought unless interim short paper subject to continuing revision can be submitted as temporary stopgap. Appreciate request for recommendations. Have only one definite one for immediate action, that is, reasoned and solemn refutation by NATO of charges set forth against it in Soviet note of October 30, for by “Germany and its allies” NATO is most clearly meant and its hesitation to reply to these charges, dishonest and ill-founded though they be, is regarded here as puzzling and of no assistance to Finland. (Embtel 230, 220, 209, and 190)Telegram 190, November 1, reported that Hallama had suggested that NATO make a “reasoned refutation” of the Soviet note of October 30. (Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–161) In telegram 209, November 3, the Embassy endorsed the Department’s views on NATO action. (Ibid., 375/11–361) Telegram 220, November 6, reported that Hallama had again stressed the need for a NATO statement. (Ibid., 660E.61/11–661) In telegram 230, November 9, Gufler reported that he had explained to Hallama the reasons for NATO reluctance to make any statement. Hallama replied that he believed that initial Finnish contacts with other Nordic states might explain their reluctance to support a NATO declaration. (Ibid., 660E.61/11–961) We consider idea set forth in Department telegram 144Telegram 144, November 1, was transmitted to Paris as Topol 669; see footnote 3, Document 191. well worthy of pushing. We realize that to accomplish anything this area without giving away sway Finnish source of suggestion, in view Danish-Norwegian conviction that nothing should be done and illusion that statement not wanted by Finns, presents really difficult diplomatic problem that may be insolvable. We hope though that something can be done, all the more so because other Finns including Diet members have suggested issuance of some statement refuting Soviet charges by France, UK, US and West Germany. Only other suggestion we can make that might be feasible is that, in connection with NATO or independently by US and if possible by other Western powers, statements be issued that NATO or separately issuing powers have every intention respect independence of Finland and expect other powers also to do so. Gufler 198. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–2061. Secret (With Top Secret Attachment). Drafted by Burdett. Washington, November 20, 1961. SUBJECT U.S. Policy Towards Finland The enclosed paper considers what steps the United States should take alone or in cooperation with friendly governments in the face of current Soviet pressures on Finland.The enclosures, the paper entitled “U.S. Policy Towards Finland,” a proposed message to President Kekkonen, and a Top Secret Appendix, are not printed. The first and most pressing action recommended is a message from you to President Kekkonen. President Kekkonen is meeting Premier Khrushchev in Novosibirsk on November 24 and will be leaving Helsinki on November 22 or November 23. Therefore the message should be transmitted today, November 20. The conclusion of our study is that the Finnish-Soviet problem should not be treated as an isolated bilateral matter. If we continue to maintain a hands off position the Soviets are likely to achieve a good portion of their objectives, that is, assuring effective control over Finnish policies; weakening the determination of the Scandinavians to stand up to them; and in general an impairment of free world resolve. Thus we believe it is necessary to accept a confrontation with the Soviets in Finland despite all the advantages the USSR possesses in that area. This would involve a readiness to assist Finland in the political, economic and propaganda spheres. We believe the Soviets are unlikely in the Finnish context alone to resort to military force. We would continually make clear that our only purpose is to help Finland follow its chosen path of neutrality and independence. The message to President Kekkonen is intended to strengthen his internal fortitude prior to his meeting with Khrushchev. While he has shown himself in our view overly pliable in the past in relations with the USSR, there seems to be no alternative but to place reliance in the first instance upon him. I recommend that you give general approval to the course of action set forth in the attached paper and specifically that you authorize transmission of the message from you to President Kekkonen. Dean RuskPrinted from a copy that bears this stamped signature. 199. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FinlandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–2061. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Burdett and cleared by Rusk and Bundy. Repeated to London and Moscow. Washington, November 20, 1961, 10:07 p.m. 167. Ambassador requested deliver message below from President Kennedy to President Kekkonen soonest. Message should be conveyed orally and written communication not left. Approach should be made inconspicuously. We wish to avoid public knowledge that American Ambassador saw President immediately before his departure to meet Khrushchev. Should press learn of your meeting suggest you say only that you called to obtain President Kekkonen’s views. You should agree with Kekkonen beforehand on this line to be followed with press in case of queries or leaks. “On the eve of your departure for Novosibirsk I am sending you this private message so that you may not be in doubt of the position of the United States. It will receive no publicity whatever in my country, for I am mindful of your desire not to be embarrassed by public comments from others which might be misconstrued as infringements on Finnish neutrality. In our joint communique of October 16 in Washington I expressed American understanding for Finland’s policy of neutrality, our firm intention scrupulously to respect that chosen course, and the necessity for all nations to avoid interference in the affairs of Finland. This remains the basis of the relations between the United States and your country. You will appreciate that our concern in this matter derives not alone from our great interest in the welfare of your country. My Government, and other Western Governments, have accepted Finnish neutrality in all good faith. We have placed on ourselves a solemn obligation to respect that neutrality at all times and in all ways. In our own national interest we have to expect that in turn Finland will in fact be truly neutral. I realize the doubts and anxieties which you and the Finnish people are now suffering as the memories of 1939 return to you. However, today peace prevails and we have in the United Nations a forum where the strength of world opinion is brought to bear against the employment of force. Furthermore given the close interrelationship of all elements in the present world situation, the overwhelming deterrent power of the Free World, of which the Soviet Union is well aware, provides all nations assurance against resort to arms. I want to assure you of the readiness of my country to give Finland our political and economic support. We stand ready to extend commercial and economic assistance in the event of economic pressure against Finland designed to secure political compliance. We are prepared, when opportune, to speak out firmly in behalf of Finland’s security and independence. We would be willing to carry to the United Nations actions seeming to threaten your country’s independence, depriving you of the right to follow your chosen course of neutrality. I am sure that the unity of all patriotic Finns, irrespective of party, when their country is threatened is a great source of strength underlying Finland’s resolve to determine its own destiny.” Report date, hour of delivery. Further instructions follow on US policy. Rusk 200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FinlandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–2161. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Burdett and Christensen, cleared by Davis, and approved by Johnson. Also sent to Stockholm, Copenhagen, Oslo, and London and repeated to Moscow, Paris, Bonn, and Ottawa. Washington, November 21, 1961, 8:38 p.m. 171. Addressee action posts requested speak to Foreign Office at high level about Finnish situation on following lines modified at posts’ discretion to meet local circumstances. In US view Soviet objectives in exerting pressures on Finland appear to fall in three general spheres: 1) to assure effective control of major internal Finnish policies and actions; 2) to weaken determination Scandinavian countries stand up to Soviets, in particular to reinforce neutral and pacifist sentiments and to increase anti-German feeling and acceptance of belief that FRG is becoming threat to status quo in Scandinavia; 3) to weaken free world resolve and generate increased pressure for negotiations on Berlin by continuation policy of intimidation. To accomplish its objectives in Finland Soviets are likely use variety of pressures similar to those applied in 1958 “Frosty Nights.”Reference is to the Soviet policy of cutting back its trade with Finland. These include propaganda, diplomatic moves, economic pressure, play upon divisions between anti-Soviet political parties and in labor movement, and internal agitation and subversion by Finnish Communist Party. One apparent objective is inclusion Communists in Finnish Government. We doubt Soviets would be prepared to use military force in Finnish context alone. 201. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–2161. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Received at 8:45 p.m. and passed to the White House. Also sent to Moscow and London. Helsinki, November 21, 1961, 9 p.m. 266. Re our telegram 265.Telegram 265, November 21, reported that Gufler had delivered Kennedy’s message to Kekkonen who expressed thanks for “President Kennedy’s thoughtfulness and for the inconspicuous way message delivered.” Kekkonen also praised Rusk’s November 18 press statement as “helpful.” (Ibid.) Following numbered paragraphs give in summary–quotation remarks made by President Kekkonen, when I delivered President Kennedy’s message: 1. I am very grateful for this expression of President Kennedy’s consideration. I am also appreciative of fact that this is just between us two because if press were to get wind of your message my position in upcoming talk would be seriously damaged. 2. As I said in my speech Sunday, I will leave with grave thoughts. We Finns are concerned about outcome of talks, but I do not personally believe that situation is as serious as President Kennedy thinks. Perhaps some of the press speculation about Finland’s difficulties may have influenced him. 3. All Finn actions taken since receipt of note have had one aim in which so far we have not been successful. We want to avoid military discussions according to Article II of the 1948 treaty, because that would be tantamount to agreeing that threat mentioned in note actually exists. That was why we sent Karjalainen to Moscow. We wanted to have civilian rather than military delegation, for latter would have been construed as tacit admission that threat exists. That was why we decided to dissolve Parliament. I figured that in this way we could gain a 3-month breather. That breather lasted only 2 days. Now only remaining alternative is to send me. 4. I hope that I have necessary arguments to use in my discussions with Khrushchev to convince him that it is in interests of Soviet Union to permit Finland to retain its present position. If I can convince him of this and avoid discussions under treaty, then we will have come out on plus side. Worst would be if Khrushchev were to insist that Commies be put into positions of authority here in Finland. I do not think that this is realistic alternative, but in present situation all sorts of ideas go through one’s head. 5. If this were to happen, though, and if my policy were to be shown as unacceptable to Soviet Union, then I will not continue in this position. One of most difficult statements I ever have had to make was one in speech November 5 in which I said that if my policy is demonstrably unsuccessful, then I will resign. I have worked for fifteen years on assumption that my policy is right for Finland. If it develops that I have worked in vain, then I am not going to try to hold onto this job by hook or by crook. I would consider it my duty to resign and leave the area if my policy were to fail. 6. Regarding economic assistance offered by President Kennedy, I am grateful for his consideration, but do not believe that such assistance will in fact be required, because I do not expect any economic pressures. 7. My statement regarding Strauss visit to NorwayWest German Defense Minister Franz Josef Strauss visited Norway November 16–17. was part of effort to create favorable basis for negotiations with Khrushchev. I for my part don’t care much what Strauss was doing in Norway, but I said what I did in order to create better atmosphere for talks with the Soviets. Number of statements made in my earlier speeches, if taken out of context, would be unsupportable, but I made them with this same motive of creating favorable atmosphere and basis for discussing matters with Soviets. 8. Actually, you know, there is genuine fear in Soviet Union regarding West Germany. They are afraid that if present development continues West Germany will be so strong that it will be able to do what it wishes without worrying about its allies. This is fear they have, and it is only being realistic to acknowledge its existence. 9. Once again, I appreciate discreet way in which President Kennedy’s message has been delivered and am particularly grateful for wisdom and restraint shown by US Government in its attitude toward current crisis. Secretary Rusk’s recent statement was most helpful. 10. Please convey to President Kennedy my warm personal thanks for his consideration in sending his message. With reference President Kekkonen’s statement regarding West Germany, I remarked that US had not helped form NATO and re-armed West Germany to support any military adventures by West Germany or anyone else in NATO. I added that West Germany was no longer Germany of Hitler either in size or spirit and that it was contained within framework of its Western alliances. I gave my opinion that Soviets know this and that their expressions of fear represent propaganda rather than reality. I was impressed by real warmth and sincerity with which President Kekkonen expressed thanks for attitude of President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk. At first glance President Kekkonen looked normal and reasonably cool. He began conversation in controlled, calm manner. When I looked at him more closely, however, I was struck with deterioration his appearance since I saw him at airport when he returned here on November 3. He had obviously lost weight and his skin looked slightly yellow. He looked drawn and heavily burdened with care. As he unfolded his thoughts, particularly when he referred to possible failure policy for which he has worked fifteen years, he revealed strong undercurrent of emotion and some sense of desperation. He aroused in both me and Youngquist of our Embassy, who served as interpreter, feeling of sympathy for sorely tried man, who though he has made mistakes, is nevertheless trying to do what he believes is best for his country. President Kekkonen is apparently going on his mission intent on playing as his only card himself and his past record of dealing with Soviets and their leader. It is to be hoped that things go as he expects but in the light of the rebuffs experienced by Finns within past two weeks it appears more likely that he may encounter situation beyond his control. Gufler 202. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FinlandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–2261. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Cook, Beyer, Christensen, and Rewinkel and approved by Burdett. Also sent to Stockholm, Oslo, and Copenhagen and repeated to London, Moscow, Bonn, and Paris. Washington, November 22, 1961, 9:09 p.m. 177. Paris for Emb and USRO. Nordic Ambassadors called separately today at Dept. request to discuss Finnish situation. Deputy Under Secretary Johnson spoke along lines Deptel 275 to Stockholm,Printed as telegram 171 to Helsinki, Document 200. informing Ambassadors their Foreign Offices also being approached. Reactions of Ambassadors given below. Swedish Ambassador Jarring’s reaction was: a) great care must be exercised in any public statements (as GOS is doing) to avoid prejudicing Finland’s position; b) Secy Rusk’s press conference statement extremely well balanced and widely appreciated in Scandinavia and Finland; c) GOF already knows it could count on Scandinavian and US support; and d) Swedish thought is to leave further course of action to Finnish judgment. Norwegian Ambassador Koht noted that authoritative comment GON must come from Oslo. On question possible economic support for Finland not sure Norway could help as in sense their two economies were competing ones. Surely there could be no doubt among Finns they had support of their Scandinavian friends. Norway felt that up to this point GOF had stood up quite firmly to Soviets and GON has had feeling Finns themselves could best handle matter. Ambassador Koht confirmed fact Lange had long talk with Gromyko and also seeing Khrushchev in Moscow Dec. 2. Assumed his Foreign Minister would once again put forth well-known Norwegian views on defensive character of NATO. Danish Ambassador Knuth-Winterfeldt said although he had not received comments from Copenhagen he thought one Soviet objective in Finnish situation was to hinder NATO developments such as formation Baltic Command by frightening Denmark out of participation. Broader objective was to frighten Scan countries generally into compromise on Berlin problem. Quoted Danish UN PermRep to effect Danish Govt decision would remain firm re Baltic Command despite obvious Soviet effort. As to Finland itself he thought Soviets seeking inclusion Communists in key govt posts for purposes working from within to weaken Finnish neutrality policy. He considered objectives of bases in Finland and Finnish signature eventual GDR peace treaty as lesser possibilities. [1 line of source text not declassified] said would inform his govt re US views and suggestions. Finnish Ambassador Seppala said Finns aware deep American friendship; nevertheless comfort have specific assurances of friendship and assistance. Said his own assessment situation very similar to Department’s. However, Soviet demarche of November 16 following Kekkonen’s announcement dissolution Parliament suggested Soviets more interested in military than political matters. Seppala asserted there is no political deterioration in Soviet-Finnish relations, and expressed hope problem could be solved. Said Finnish-Soviet trade was only one of many points on which Soviets could bring pressure, and not necessarily the most important. Stated he would report US views Helsinki. Rusk 203. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–2261. Secret. Received at 10:58 a.m. on November 23. Repeated to London, Bonn, Paris, Oslo, Copenhagen, Stockholm, and Moscow. Helsinki, November 22, 1961, 9 p.m. 274. Embassy has endeavored on basis information available in Finland assess motives behind present Soviet action against this country. This action might be result mere desire gain control all or part of Finnish territory or at least establish directing influence over policies of Finland. It may look opportune do so while world preoccupied with Berlin, South Asian and other crises synthetically created by Soviets or raised from minor to major scale by their fostering and under shadow of multi-megaton bombs recently exploded. Cynical way in which Soviets showed contempt worldwide public opinion by this latter act augurs ill for Finland. In order better understand what may be principal Soviet motive, brief look at past history may be revealing. In 1939 Soviets using opportunity created by their then ally Hitler began to move against former Russian imperial possessions, Baltic states and Finland. Finns alone successfully countered this by “winter war”. Following Finnish defeats this war and “continuation war” Soviets probably found it inexpedient take over Finland completely as they needed their forces elsewhere. At end winter war they distrusted their ally Hitler. At end continuation war they were able use Finnish army against Germans in northern Finland and free Soviet troops for drive into Germany. In second instance Soviets were probably limited, partly too by circumstance that British and other allied nations were co-belligerents and parties to peace treaty. That they did not subsequently lose their desire take Finland may be assumed from efforts made 1948 to seize it from within by Communist coup d’etat and by nature their continued support Finnish Communist Party. They may have decided that time is ripe at least begin process making good what they failed do in 1939 and 1948. Following considerations may also have given Soviets motives for action: Prior October 30 principal topic in this part of world was how can EFTA members and affiliates, including Finland, and other neutrals work out some method of association with augmented Common Market. As one observer has said success already attained and hope for future was “making even neutral flags blow westward.” This must have created concern in Soviet Union which doubtless fears integrated Western Europe both as economic power and ultimately as military one. Since West is standing firm in Berlin, Soviet-Finnish treaty may have seemed next best available instrument for pressure on West in general and Scandinavia in particular and good point departure for terror operation against member Nordic Community and EFTA affiliate. Gufler 204. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional OrganizationsSource: Department of State, Central Files, 375/11–2561. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Christensen and Rewinkel, cleared by RA and EUR, and approved by Burdett. Repeated to Helsinki, Oslo, Copenhagen, Stockholm, London, Bonn, and Moscow. Washington, November 25, 1961, 3 p.m. Topol 803. Paris also for Emb. References: Topol 800; Polto 700.In Topol 800 to Paris, November 24, the Department of State instructed the Representative to NATO to impress the seriousness of Soviet actions upon the other member states and seek a common response. (Ibid., 375/11–2461) Polto 700 from Paris, November 25, reported views of the NATO Permanent Representatives on holding a special session to discuss developments in Finland. (Ibid., 375/11–2561) Ini-tial reading of Kekkonen–Khrushchev communiqueFor text of the November 25 communique, see The New York Times, November 26, 1961. (which assume available to posts from press) suggests Kekkonen may have been at least temporarily successful in standing off Soviet demands on Finland for military consultations. However, communique itself leaves threat future military consultations still hanging and should be read in conjunction with press reports of Khrushchev’s remarks at luncheon for Kekkonen which indicate Soviet objectives remain unaltered. Soviet deferral of military consultations with Finns does not relieve pressure on Finland and through Finland on Scandinavia. Department therefore continues desire discussion in NAC but would agree to postponement not later than Thursday Nov 30. In meantime you should take opportunity to place onus on Norwegian and Dane PermReps to report to Council on their assessment of communique, knowledge of content Novosibirsk talks and what if any quid pro quo given Soviets by Kekkonen. You may remind them of our previously expressed view they should take lead and say we acquiescing in their suggestions re timing NATO meeting to permit them do so. Ref FYI paragraph in Topol 800. USRO may wish call attention to Adenauer–Kennedy communique which refutes Soviet charges of aggressive intent by NATO and FRG.For text of the November 22 communique, see Department of State Bulletin, December 11, 1961, pp. 967–968. Rusk 205. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–2861. Secret. Drafted by Cook and approved in G on November 30. Washington, November 28, 1961. SUBJECT Call of Finnish Ambassador to Present His Country’s Views on Finnish-Soviet Situation PARTICIPANTS Richard R. Seppala, Ambassador of Finland U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary of State Eiler R. Cook, Finnish Desk, BNA The Finnish Ambassador opened the conversation by immediately stating that they considered the problem to be solved to their entire satisfaction. There had been many interpretations in the press of the results of the Fenno-Soviet talks, and these interpretations had not all been correct. He understood that many journalists are friends of Finland, but their conclusions, however, are not necessarily the right ones. On the basis of his telephone conversation with Foreign Minister Karjalainen yesterday, Finland considers the problem solved and does not agree with the point of view expressed by many that the whole matter is still hanging over Finland, so to speak. Ambassador Seppala referred specifically to the penultimate paragraph of the Novosibirsk communique where Khrushchev had stated “that the Soviet Government finds it possible to postpone for the time being the military consultations it had suggested”. Despite Khrushchev’s use of the word “postpone”, he wished to clarify the Finnish interpretation of this. They interpreted this as meaning that the Soviets of course retained their right to raise this general question again under the 1948 Fenno-Soviet treaty. There could have been no question of the Soviets forever renouncing the right to speak of this matter—therefore Khrushchev’s use of the word “postpone” in the communique. From the Soviet side there had been no pressure nor were there any secret arrangements or requests. President Kekkonen had stated this clearly in his November 26 speech to the people of Finland following his return from Novosibirsk. The Finnish Ambassador went on to say that his Government feels that this intermezzo has not changed Finland’s political situation nor has it changed the policy of neutrality which they so sincerely wish to follow. Ambassador Seppala said that he hoped this would be understood here and in other countries. The Finnish Ambassador turned briefly to the Fenno-Soviet trade negotiations which had been going on simultaneously. He noted that it was a coincidence that the annual trade negotiations happened to be going on at the same time as the Novosibirsk talks. He stated that these trade negotiations were not at all influenced by the Khrushchev–Kekkonen talks. There had been absolutely no pressure from the Soviets and the trade arrangements were arrived at as before, through normal negotiations. The Ambassador stated that Foreign Minister Karjalainen had told him that the 25 percent increase in Fenno-Soviet trade reported by the press was a slightly high figure, though generally correct. Karjalainen attributed little importance to the “slight increase”. The Finnish Ambassador went on to say that Finland’s trade with the Soviet Union varied between 14 percent and 15 percent of the total and has actually diminished in relation to Finland’s over-all trade picture. He wished to make it perfectly clear that the 25 percent increase in Fenno-Soviet trade meant in fact a 25 percent increase of 14 percent, and not an increase of 25 percent in the total trade picture. The Ambassador went on to say that the 14 percent size of Finland’s trade with the Soviets was useful, in his opinion. The Ambassador referred very briefly to the Saimaa Canal, stating that these negotiations were going along normally also. (Note: This refers to negotiations for possible resumption of Finnish use of this canal which was formerly in Finnish territory before World War II.) Ambassador Seppala next turned his attention to the resignation of Mr. Honka from the presidential race. Mr. Karjalainen had told the Ambassador that the Finns had known nothing of this in Novosibirsk until the news came over the wires. Mr. Honka had made his own personal decision—admittedly arrived at on the basis of the situation as it existed. Certain Social Democrats had seemed bitter about this, especially as regarded the timing of their candidate’s withdrawal from the presidential race. Karjalainen did not know why he timed his resignation when he did actually—the timing was unfortunate. The Finnish Ambassador next turned to Khrushchev’s comments on certain rightist elements in Finland. He admitted that one could interpret this as interference in Finnish internal affairs. He noted that President Kekkonen had also mentioned the matter of rightist elements in his speech to the nation. Ambassador Seppala stated that he was sure we knew who Khrushchev was referring to. Mr. Vaino Tanner, Chairman of the Social Democratic Party, was by no means a radical, or a Nazi, or anything else bad. He recalled the important and patriotic role Mr. Tanner had played during the war years. However, he had come into bad grace—it was too bad but that was a fact. What Finns might think of Mr. Tanner did not matter, it was the opinion of their neighbor that was important. That was the brief background to President Kekkonen’s suggestion that certain political leaders step out of the political picture. The Finnish Ambassador stated that Mr. Karjalainen had told him that there had been no hint whatsoever from the Soviets that they wished to have communists in the Finnish Government. Mr. Johnson thanked the Ambassador very much for his extremely interesting presentation of the views of his Government. It of course again raised the question what was the whole purpose of the Soviet exercise. Ambassador Seppala answered that the Soviets had used the opening the 1948 treaty with Finland gave them for this move to discuss the threat of war, particularly as it involved Germany. The Finnish Ambassador viewed the note as directed not so much against Finland as in a larger context. Mr. Johnson agreed, adding that it seemed that Finland was being used. The Ambassador agreed. He noted that they had never expected the Soviets to invoke the 1948 treaty until perhaps some actual shooting had started. The fact that the Soviets had chosen to invoke it under these conditions had admittedly come as something of a surprise to the Finnish Government. The Finnish Ambassador said that as to the communique wording about Finland having to watch the situation in the Northern Europe and Baltic Sea area, he did not believe this was necessarily to the disadvantage of Finland. It could be interpreted that Finland as well as the USSR could have something to say about the situation in the North. The Ambassador again said that they were glad the problem had been settled. Mr. Johnson said that we were also pleased, of course, but not as pleased as Finland seemed to be. He realized that Finland must certainly be relieved. Ambassador Seppala wondered what we thought of the recent happenings. Mr. Johnson said that we were also of the opinion that the note had certainly not been directed at Finland alone. It was his own reaction that the Soviets had demonstrated that they could crack the whip. Every Finn, politician or citizen, would have this in the back of his mind from now on. The Ambassador agreed, adding that every responsible Finnish statesman would now also have in his mind more than ever the need to get along with the Soviets. He also agreed that something new had been added to Finnish relations with the USSR. In closing Mr. Johnson once again thanked the Ambassador for his frank presentation and told him that he would see to it that the Secretary and the President heard of this Finnish assessment of the situation, as they were both much interested in Finland. Ambassador Seppala said that he believed his account of the Finnish position to be quite accurate. 206. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional OrganizationsSource: Department of State, Central Files, 375/11–2861. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Christensen and Burdett; cleared in draft by BNA, RA, EUR, SOV, and Kohler; and approved by Burdett. Repeated to Helsinki, Oslo, Copenhagen, Stockholm, London, Bonn, and Moscow. Washington, November 28, 1961, 3:24 p.m. Topol 814. Paris for Emb and USRO. Deliver Finletter 9:00 am November 29. Topol 800 and 803, Polto Circular 64.Topol 803 is printed as Document 204. Regarding Topol 800, see footnote 1 thereto. Polto circular 64, November 27, reported on the reactions of the Norwegian and Danish Permanent Representatives to the Khrushchev–Kekkonen communique. (Department of State, Central Files, 375/11–2761) Following is additional guidance for NAC discussion Nov 29 on Finland. You should endeavor dispel belief Novosibirsk talks have eased Finnish problem or altered essentials situation as set forth Topol 775.Topol 775, November 21, authorized transmission to Paris of telegram 266 from Helsinki. (Ibid., 660E.61/11–2161) Telegram 266 is printed as Document 201. Sense of euphoria in Finland and idea Kekkonen scored great triumph most disquieting as is feeling of relief apparent in Scandinavia and in some other NATO countries.In telegram 1621 from Moscow, November 26, the Embassy reported that Hallama had expressed “satisfaction” with the outcome of talks with Khrushchev. “He said no specific demands had been made of the Finns and the question of political guarantees was not even raised.” (Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–2661) Favorite Soviet tactic is to exert heavy pressure and present exorbitant demands then settle for something less and claim public applause for reasonableness. Danger to Finland’s neutrality and independence is just as great from series of nibbles aimed first at paralyzing Finnish will and ability to resist as from all out effort at immediate satellization. Finnish people and leaders are not necessarily in best position themselves to assess significance of Soviet moves or steps which must be taken to counteract them. NATO itself should judge facts irrespective of what may be intentions of individual Finns or interpretation they may seek to place on recent events. Starting with October 30 note Soviets in our opinion have asserted successfully right to exercise large measure control over major internal and external Finnish policies. Finland’s freedom to act has been severely restricted. Soviets have: (a) Ensured reelection President Kekkonen by in effect causing withdrawal of leading opposition candidate. (b) Demanded withdrawal from political life of Finnish political leaders and other Finnish elements considered by Soviets to be anti-communist (i.e. too pro-Western); a demand reiterated publicly by Kekkonen in Finland. (c) By their seeming magnanimous treatment of Finland given filip to election prospects of Finnish Communist Party. (d) Defined, in Kekkonen’s words, Finnish neutrality as essential part of Soviet security policy. (e) Elicited statement from Kekkonen to effect that maintenance of Soviet confidence is not only Finland’s responsibility but that loss of that confidence would be “exclusively” fault of Finns. (f) Obtained Kekkonen’s concurrence that it is Finnish Govt’s duty in light future developments to initiate military consultations with Soviets under Article II; onus therefore on Finland to observe and interpret developments in Northern Europe in manner acceptable to Soviets. We note also that Finland has signed new trade agreement with Soviets providing for 25 percent expansion in trade. If implemented this would serve increase Finnish dependence on Soviets and provide further important lever which Soviets may use for political purposes. According to Kekkonen–Khrushchev communique and Kekkonen’s Nov 26 speech “relaxation” of Soviet pressure dependent on Finnish performance on matters noted above and “easing of tensions in Northern Europe”. Latter defined to mean reduction in military preparations of Sweden, Norway and Denmark. Warning thus served on Sweden, Norway and Denmark that unless they relax their military posture and attenuate ties with NATO and FRG new Soviet demands on Finland will be made. In sense Finland being used by Soviets as hostage for policies on part of Scandinavian countries deemed “proper” by Soviets. Thus NATO should not conclude matter may be left at rest or that Soviets will not resort to further pressures on Finland. Firmness especially on part of Scandinavians essential at this juncture. Appearance of weakness will only encourage Soviets. Would be grave error in our view to regard situation as hopeless (as done by Boyesen, para 6(b) Polto 64). In essential respects situation does not resemble that existing in 1939. We doubt Soviets would be prepared to use military force in Finnish context alone. Given close inter-relationship of all elements in present world situation, overwhelming deterrent power of Free World, of which Soviets well aware, provides all nations assurance against resort to arms. In non-military areas NATO can do much. Efforts will be greatly complicated unless Finns themselves are brought to understand significance of current developments now taking place and are prepared to stand up to Soviets. Thus first task is to strengthen Finnish resolve. We hope Norway, Denmark and through them Sweden will take lead. We should study desirability individual demarches, public statements and use of propaganda themes bringing to world attention what transpiring. NATO should also prepare itself to move quickly to provide economic and commercial support should Soviets resort to pressure in these fields. FYI. We concur that as first step USDel to OECD should prepare recommendations as to actions that would be required under various contingencies (Polto 698).Polto 698 from Paris, November 24, had suggested a delay in NATO consideration of the Finnish situation until after the talks between Kekkonen and Lange and Khrushchev. (Ibid., 660E.61/11–2461) End FYI. Rusk 207. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/11–2961. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Moscow, Oslo, Copenhagen, Stockholm, London, Bonn, and Paris. Helsinki, November 29, 1961, 7 p.m. 303. Paris for USRO. Embassy has endeavored basis communique, speeches and subsequent reactions Finland assess nature and effect Novosibirsk conversations. Soviets appear temporarily have contented themselves demand listed paragraph 1a Embtel 280.Telegram 280, November 24, provided the Embassy’s estimate of Soviet objectives at the Novosibirsk meeting. In paragraph 1a, the Embassy suggested that in the political field, the Soviet Union would “initially” request only reassurances about Finnish foreign policy and a personal commitment from Kekkonen to close ties with the Soviet Union. (Ibid., 600E.61/11–2361) Soviets may think pause useful because: 1. If they drive Kekkonen and his supporters too far too fast they might balk or by being too obviously obedient lose their effectiveness for Soviet purposes. 2. Lull interested countries and circles in free world. 3. Preserve Finland as usable hostage which still in danger being strangled slowly or left alive more in appearance than fact. Even if Soviets give Finland breather until after Diet elections on February 4–5 they have made great gains and have started political developments here that may serve their purposes best without further overt action by them. Following is Embassy’s estimate of give and take and possible consequences conversations: A. Finland was given some fair words and postponement of military consultations which Soviets completely again demand tomorrow. B. Soviets received: 1) Kekkonen’s firm commitment to concept that Finnish foreign policy and political leadership must always be acceptable to Soviets. He may have to be all more careful now conform this line because he did not come at once to heel after October 30 but first tried gain time. 2) Reduction Finnish presidential election to empty formality amounting Kekkonen’s “reappointment”. 3) Public acknowledgement by President Finland that: a) Soviet note to Finland justified by international tensions; b) Soviet fear Germany genuine and understandable; c) Khrushchev great friend Finland but must naturally look after his own country’s interests; d) It great achievement for Finland that Finnish policy recognized by Soviets as integral part of Soviet security system; e) If Finland’s neutrality and independence are lost, it will be Finland’s own fault; f) Finland has duty of standing on watch in Baltic; g) There must be no criticism of Khrushchev in Finland; h) Nation’s interests require that all those in disagreement with foregoing remain quiet. C. Possible consequences: 1) Increase apprehensions about disagreements with Soviet Union in any field; 2) Freer field for Finland’s communists and increase inhibition against attacking them as agents of Soviets; 3) Decrease general knowledge of what happening because of tendency silence objective public discussion in press and otherwise foreign policy and matters involving Soviet interest; 4) Greater disorganization than ever among anti-communist groups and parties; 5) Anti-communist voter apathy indicated by sense futility and fear that heavy anti-communist vote could produce immediate Soviet reprisals; 6) Communist Diet election gains that could furnish basis demand for inclusion in government. Despite gloomy situation above outlined there are in Finland active pro-democratic, anti-communist elements that even this soon after Novosibirsk have recovered enough hope and courage continue struggle preserve and reinforce country’s will to survive as genuinely neutral independent nation. Their courage gives justification for efforts help on part Finland’s friends. These efforts might take form well considered public statements, quiet diplomatic actions designed encourage Finnish will to resist and discreet offers political or economic help at appropriate times. Gufler 208. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Subgroup Meeting July 20, 1961. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Moscow. Helsinki, December 2, 1961, 9 p.m. 318. Called on President Kekkonen at his suburban residence and gave him copy of Kennedy–Adzhubei interview in Finnish translation.President Kennedy talked with Khrushchev’s son-in-law, Izvestia editor Aleksei Adzhubei on November 25. For a transcript of the interview, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 741–752. He showed real gratitude for it. He explained he had tried read it in New York Times but with his limited English had to give it up. Finnish press coverage had been incomplete and fragmentary. We spent about one hour, mostly on what took place in his conversations with Khrushchev. Following paragraphs summarize his remarks. On future Finn-Soviet relations he reiterated previous statements that nothing had changed except that deterioration of world situation is reflected in pressure on Finland. If Berlin crisis for example could be settled amicably, Finland could again perhaps live in peace. At this point I remarked that the crisis had been created and was being maintained by the Soviets. The President replied that he understands my views and has heard those of the Soviets and that he in turn has his own separate impressions which may or may not be correct. President Kekkonen intimated that he had been more optimistic about peaceful settlement when he spoke with President Kennedy and was less so now. When I asked him why he was less so now, and whether it was because of something said to him in Soviet Union, he dodged question and returned to praise of thoroughly good [omission in the source text] balanced and reasonable attitude in the interest of a peaceful settlement of international disputes. In his conversation with Khrushchev, Berlin crisis and Finland were not directly linked, although Khrushchev did repeat practically the same words that Brezhnev used about West Germany and NATO. He added he had already reported these remarks to President Kennedy and to Secretary Rusk. Next he answered my direct questions about what, if any, commitments had been made. First, he said no political commitments were made with regard to Finnish internal affairs nor did he agree sign separate treaty with Ulbricht regime or recognize it, nor were any these matters even brought up by Soviets. Second, no military commitments. President Kekkonen’s tactical plan was to avoid any sentence with the word military in it. If Khrushchev had mentioned military topic he had planned to change subject. I asked him about part of communique which charges Finland with standing on watch in Baltic. He replied that this topic was mentioned only in passing by Khrushchev. He was, therefore, surprised when Soviets wanted insert it in communique. Foreign Minister Karjalainen, Ambassador Wuori and Minister Hallama had got together with Soviets write up communique after talks. Minister Karjalainen came to President Kekkonen to ask what should be done. Kekkonen told him if Soviets insisted on proposal, accept it. His reason was that he felt this might imply Soviet acceptance of Finnish interpretation Article 2 of friendship treaty. Finns contend that both parties must agree that threat exists. Secondly, this item which calls for Finland follow events in Baltic now leaves initiative for military consultations up to Finns. President Kekkonen considered this victory, but added he knew there would be wrong interpretations in Scandinavia which, he said, would disappear with time. No economic matters were discussed. He speculated on what might have been Soviet motive for sending October 30 note and said that he believes it directed against NATO, Sweden and to lesser extent Finland. If Khrushchev just made a speech or had directed some complaint to NATO, it would have been quickly forgotten. On contrary by directing request for consultations to Finland they had aroused world attention. Article II of the friendship treaty was available for use and they used it with unfortunate results for Finland but Khrushchev does not care about those. As to Finland’s future: Finland must continue to watch situation closely, keep steady nerves and make each move with an eye to next one Soviets may make and trust that its moves are the right ones. I asked President Kekkonen if he though Communists would be taken into next government. He said he does not think so; but, whether they are or not, depends primarily on the SKDL’s relations with other parties; that is, whether other parties will cooperate with them. I asked him whether the Communists lose votes next Diet elections. He answered no, they have about one-half million votes upon which they can count. These voters stuck with SKDL through Stalin’s time and Hungarian revolution, so does not think note from Soviet Union will affect number who turn out at the polls in February. He said Communists have profited from nine months in which Honka was Social Democratic candidate because they were able attack Social Democrats full force for nominating reactionary. Situation is better with Social Democrats now that they have a new candidate. President was relaxed and friendly but not up to his top physical form as he has just recovered from an illness which struck him immediately after his television and radio speech. He attributed his illness particularly to relaxation of nervous tension thereafter. Frank Friberg who acted as interpreter and I believe that President endeavored give much better picture situation than he feels is really warranted. We believe his efforts explain and justify inclusion in communique of Finnish watch dog responsibilities are unreal and may be effort shut his eyes to what may well be a major concession to Soviets. Gufler 209. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Kekkonen and the Ambassador to Finland (Gufler)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.60E/1–562. Confidential. Transmitted as an attachment to a January 5 letter from Gufler to Tyler. Helsinki, January 2, 1962. President Kekkonen received me on January 2 and we talked for about fifty minutes. Nothing of much significance emerged, but there were a few points which give useful indications of his thinking. 2. I began by stressing that I was not speaking on instructions but wanted to review the situation with him. For the first ten or fifteen minutes he said little more than his usual line in public, and in describing his conversations with Khrushchev emphasized the hostility the Russians had expressed to certain political circles in Finland. This was a fact of life which he must take into account. 3. Ipressed him to say whether he expected the Russians to renew their request for military talks. While admitting that they could do so at any time (next time if they liked without a note), he persistently expressed confidence that the request would not be renewed in the near future at all events. He emphasized the value of the last sentence of the Novosibirsk communique as leaving the initiative with Finland, and he confirmed, when I asked him about the point, that Finland could still contest whether a situation justifying the formal invocation of the 1948 Pact existed. But he admitted that next time, should the Russians really press hard for military consultations, it might prove impossible to avoid them. 4. I asked him whether he was satisfied that the general line of silence and official unconcern taken during November by friendly Western governments had been the best from Finland’s point of view. He said he was, instancing something he had said to Mr. Rusk in America to the effect that Finland must be left to deal with her problems alone. He referred also to the Swedish Prime Minister’s statement about the maintenance of Swedish neutrality. He knew that Mr. Erlander had been criticized for this statement, and it had been argued that on the contrary Sweden should have said that Soviet action against Finland would lead her to abandon neutrality. But he thought this would have made things worse not better for Finland. I said that while I understood his point of view, if the world at large maintained an indifferent silence the Russians might feel no one would object if they absorbed Finland completely. The President said he was well aware of this consideration. 5. I told the President that all Finland’s friends realised the difficulty of her situation and no-one could easily suggest a satisfactory alternative policy. But I assumed that Finnish policy, while concerned not to provoke the Russians, to conciliate them as far as possible and to deserve their confidence, must nevertheless contemplate that there was a certain point beyond which Finland would not be driven without resist-ance. It seemed to me that Finland must be prepared to contemplate the possibility of having a period of bad relations with the Soviet Union. Other countries had had such periods of bad relations and had survived them. The President replied that there was indeed a point beyond which Finland could not go. But he hoped and believed that the Russians would not press them as far as this point. 6. I reminded the President that I had been instructed in November to inform him of my Government’s support for Finnish neutrality. For my part, I felt it was essential that the nature of its neutrality should be defined by a neutral government itself and by no-one else. The President said that was indeed so, but the government then had to satisfy itself that those concerned agreed with its definition. I said this seemed to me dangerous. If under pressure from one side neutrality were extended in one direction it might cease to look like neutrality from the other. 7. Turning to internal affairs, I reminded the President that in his New Year speech he had said the country’s greatest need was for an effective majority government after the elections. What kind of Government did he think might then be formed? He said he believed the elections would produce a bourgeois majority (i.e. a majority of parties other than Communists, Social-Democrats and Skogists). From his point of view the ideal government after the elections would be one composed of the Agrarians and both the elements into which the Social Democrats were now split. He agreed with me that Social Democratic unity could not be established before the elections. (What he has in mind, presumably, is the possibility that it may be established after the elections by the withdrawal or ousting of the group now in control of the Social-Democratic Party (i.e. Tanner and his associates) and the emergence of a new dominant faction—perhaps led by Paasio, now the Socialist candidate for the presidency—which will be able to heal the breach with the Skogists.) The President added that if such a Government could be formed, then he hoped it would be possible to form a bourgeois coalition (i.e. Agrarians, Conservatives and minor centre parties). 8. I told the President I was glad to hear what he said about a possible future government, as naturally I shared the widespread concern lest the next Finnish Government should include Communists. If it did, then Finland’s relations with her Western friends were bound to suffer. And once Communists got into a Government it might not be easy to get them out. Finland had got Communists out of her Government in 1948, but she might not be able to do so again. The President replied with apparent confidence that he did not think it likely there would be Communists in the next Government. He did not expect a Communist success in the elections. And even if they did win a few seats this would not be of real political significance. Anyhow, no other party was ready to collaborate with the Communists, and that alone probably settled the matter. 9. In thanking the President for receiving me I said I hoped that, if difficult times for Finland should return, the Finnish Government would be prepared to take friendly Western governments into its confidence as to its hopes and fears. I felt sure he realised that my Government at all events would treat whatever the Finnish Government told us with discretion. The President replied rather half-heartedly that he would always be glad to let us know about his problems. 210. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/2–262. Confidential. Repeated to Helsinki and Stockholm. Moscow, February 2, 1962, 6 p.m. 2104. Finnish Embassy officers here understandably reluctant reveal details but confirmed agreement signed concerning purchases of Soviet military equipment by mission headed by Defense Minister Bjorkenheim, who departed for Finland February 1. However, Finnish counselor informed us that: No change in policy involved, as Finns in past have purchased Soviet military equipment; new agreement represents draw-down of about one-third of 1959 Soviet credit of 100 million rubles; equipment includes “some aircraft.” Soviet press, which has not mentioned signature of any agreement, reported Finnish Mission entertained and escorted by Soviet Defense Ministry officials. Thompson 211. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.60E/2–562. Secret. Drafted and initialed by Kohler. Washington, February 5, 1962. SUBJECT Finland PARTICIPANTS Richard R. Seppala, Ambassador of Finland Foy D. Kohler, Assistant Secretary I lunched with the Finnish Ambassador at his invitation. The Ambassador indicated that he wanted to talk with me about Finnish-Soviet relations on the basis of a personal letter from President Kekkonen and on the President’s specific request that he relay these observations to “his friend Kohler.” Following are the highlights of the fairly long communication as related to me by the Ambassador. (1) President Kekkonen had appreciated Ambassador Gufler’s call on him prior to his visit to the USSR, and the US offer of help put forward by the Ambassador. However he had felt it was essential that Finland stand on its own feet and try to solve its own problems. (2) The President was rather upset that we had told the Swedes about our demarche to him. [2–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] (3) President Kekkonen had made practically a lifetime study of the Soviets and Soviet-Finnish relations. He felt that he knew how to deal with them and was sure that Finland was better off if it handled the problems connected with this relationship alone. (4) The President was satisfied that the talks with Khrushchev had come out very well for Finland. He wanted the point made that Khrushchev had not insisted on any political changes inside Finland and had not told him to make the statement which he did make in his TV address on his return about other Finnish politicians stepping out of the way. (5) The President had been made aware of what the defector from the Soviet Embassy in Finland had been saying and it was nonsense. I replied at some length after expressing appreciation for the President’s communication and my conviction as to his sincerity. Following are the main points I made in response to the numbered points above. (1) I pointed out that we had shown great restraint, even though the Soviet communication to the Finns had contained malicious and distorted statements with respect to NATO to which we would normally have replied forcefully and promptly. We had in fact refrained from doing so. Our offer to help had been a very sincere indication of our interest and concern and our desire to strengthen the Finnish position. (2) I pointed out that informing the Swedes had seemed most natural to us. The Scandinavians themselves had set the pattern in this respect by their close relationships and we made it a practice to inform them of our moves in their area. Moreover I commented that even if this had become known to the Soviets I found it hard to understand why it would have embarrassed or weakened President Kekkonen’s position to have it known to the Soviets that outside powers were interested and concerned. (3) Continuing this same line I pointed out that in fact a small weak country like Finland was at a considerable disadvantage in negotiatiating with a great power like the Soviet Union not renowned for its restraint. It was dangerous to think that a small power could in fact hold its own in this situation and I would think it would welcome having its hands strengthened. (4) Repeating that I had great understanding for the difficult situation Finland is in, I said I would again remind the Ambassador of what I had often said to him. We did not object to reasonable accommodation on the part of the Finns to the facts of this situation. However we did beg them not to “kid themselves.” I did not see how it could be denied that with this move the Soviets had in fact interfered in a most serious way in Finland’s internal affairs. Moreover President Kekkonen had gone quite a ways in his public statement on his return toward accepting the thesis of the German menace and agreeing to be responsible for keeping his eye on developments in this connection. I then asked the Ambassador how the acute German crisis portrayed in the Soviet note to Finland could be reconciled to Moscow’s current flirtation with the Federal Republic and desire to enter direct talks and improve relations—a point which impressed him very much. The Ambassador said that he would also be speaking to Deputy Under Secretary Johnson on this subject.The Department of State reported on the Seppala–Johnson meeting in telegram 269 to Helsinki, February 8. (Ibid., 660E.61/2–862) Addendum—February 6 I called Ambassador Seppala today to express my pleasure and congratulations on the outcome of the Finnish elections. He indicated that he was also pleased and greatly relieved. He thanked me for the call and for the conversation yesterday. 212. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.61/2–1362. Secret. Also sent to Moscow. Helsinki, February 13, 1962, 5 p.m. 432. Department also pass Army, Navy, Air, DOD. Reference: Moscow telegram 2178, repeated Helsinki 60.Telegram 2178 from Moscow, February 10, reported on a Finno-Soviet agreement to amend the terms of their 1948 treaty, increasing the size of Finnish military forces and expending remaining Soviet military credits. (Ibid., 660E.61/2–1062) Embassy has following comment regarding information in telegram under reference. Limitations on Finnish armament contained in 1947 peace treatyFor text of the 1947 Treaty of Paris, see 48 UNTS 203. signed by ten allied and associated powers including USSR and UK. Article 22 of peace treaty provides for amendment military provisions by agreement among all signatories or by Finnish agreement with UN Security Council. Evidence suggests Bjorkenheim may well have approached Soviets on question of raising these limitations. Finnish military has long had this objective. This is first time Finnish purchases of Soviet arms negotiated by Cabinet Minister. Moreover, we understand [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that Bjorkenheim explored amendment of peace treaty military provisions prior to his departure for Moscow. Source may be correct regarding types of equipment to be purchased. No previous indication here, however, Bjorkenheim group intended purchase anti-aircraft guns and radar from Soviets. Finns have, however, previously shown interest in anti-aircraft missiles. Of $125 million Soviet credit, about 50 percent has been allocated Finnish military. This includes latest $37.5 million allocation. According best available information, approximately $25 million of original $125 million credit remains unallocated and could be made available for additional military or other purchases. Regarding cable, presume source referring to four-tube coaxial Helsinki–Leningrad cable presently being installed. Embassy has reported extensively on this cable which scheduled for completion 1963. Cable to be used for ordinary communications purposes, according to Finns, but it readily adaptable for military purposes. This message prepared in consultation with military attaches. Gufler 213. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FinlandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5/2–1462. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Christensen; cleared by BNA, RA, the Bureau of Budget, and Department of Defense; and approved by Burdett. Washington, February 14, 1962, 10:49 a.m. 272. Deptel 198.Telegram 198, December 6, 1961, requested the Embassy’s comments on a Department of Defense proposal to make $10 million in military assistance available to Finland and on the possibility of a Finnish approach for aid. (Ibid., 760E.5/12–661) Program to make up to $10 million available for possible military assistance to Finland nearing completion. As indicated reftel no Government to Government agreement will be required. Practicable effect would be to enable Finns purchase US equipment (classified equipment on case by case basis) through private channels at discount prices. No offer of assistance would be made. Envisage informing Finnish Military Attache here that US equipment could be made available on terms accommodating to Finland’s special requirements. Next step would be up to Finns. Publicity, if any, would occur only from fact private purchases made. Believe program conforms with recommendations Embdes 253.Despatch 253, November 27, 1961, provided a military appraisal of Finland. (Ibid., 760E.5/11–2761) Objectives are to strengthen Finnish links with West and bolster morale and Western orientation of Finnish military authorities. Request Embassy comments soonest on merits program in terms these objectives.In telegram 435, February 15, Gufler responded that the proposed program would meet Finnish needs while reinforcing its “Free World orientation.” (Ibid., 760E.5/2–1562) Rusk 214. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5/2–1762. Secret. Repeated to London and Moscow. Helsinki, February 17, 1962, 10 a.m. 441. Reference: Army Attache message C–11.Not found. British Ambassador informed me today that his government had acceded to request presented by President Kekkonen when he visited London last spring that it “close its eyes to enlargement in size Finnish armed forces above maximum fixed by Paris Peace Treaty”. British agreement conditional on Finnish assurance that Soviets are also willing “close their eyes”. British Government has not, however, consented to Kekkonen’s other request that it permit “re-interpretation of treaty to allow Finnish equipment with guided missiles”. London felt last May and gives evidence of still feeling that it would be contrary to principle of sanctity of treaties to acquiesce to this request under fiction of “re-interpretation” of treaty. London apparently believes that for this alteration in treaty Finns should approach all signatories and secure proper legal waiver of conditions. British Embassy has been requested by Finnish Government consent to visit to London by Bjorkenheim, Finnish Defense Minister, and has been told that he will take up in London re-interpretation of treaty to permit guided missiles to which Soviets have already given their consent during recent Bjorkenheim visit in Moscow. (Soviets have also offered supply missiles.) British Ambassador has forwarded Finnish request with favorable recommendation. He hopes that London will at least allow visit though it has shown itself reluctant do so. He has no reason at moment to believe London disposed change its attitude re guided missiles though he hopes it will. I believe he may fear that if British consent is withheld, Finns will not bother with lengthy and possibly complicated efforts revise treaty legally with consent all parties but will, with Soviet connivance and even maybe under Soviet pressure, simply ignore it. Gufler 215. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/2–2462. Secret. Repeated to London, Stockholm, and Moscow. Helsinki, February 24, 1962, 1 p.m. 449. Re Deptel 280.Telegram 280 to Helsinki, February 21, reported on discussions with the British Embassy in which the British representatives explained their rationale for reinterpretation of the 1947 Paris Peace Treaty with Finland. (Ibid., 660E.611/2–2162) Agree with reasoning of British Ambassador Helsinki. Finnish military is firmly anti-Communist in sentiment. It needs modern arms to make it even defensively effective and to maintain its self-confidence. Do not agree with British Ambassador Moscow. Evidence indicates initiative for reinterpretation of treaty arms limitations came from Finns. Finns have long been anxious secure modification arms limitations in order build military establishment which they could convincingly assert has capacity prevent use Finnish territory against USSR without need of Soviet aid envisioned by Finno-Soviet mutual assist-ance treaty. Finns have regarded Soviets as principal obstacle to modification arms limitations and have several times sounded them out on matter. First Soviet resort to mutual assistance treaty in October 30 note increased Finns anxiety and, we believe, shocked them into approaching Soviets again on revision of limitations. Do not agree Finnish arms build-up would tend suggest Finnish concurrence in Soviet thesis USSR threatened by West Germany via Finland. Finnish effort to clear way for build-up preceded development Soviet thesis. Finland seeking status like that of neutral Sweden which continually developing modern armed force without it being suggested they doing so because of West German threat. Possible Soviet pressure for incorporation of Finnish and Soviet early warning systems unrelated to modification arms limitations, since early warning systems not covered by peace treaty. Hope British will permit guided missiles to which Soviets have given consent, but believe it in Finns own interest to approach all treaty signatories to secure proper legal waiver of limitations as British desire President (Embtel 441).Document 214. Formal amendment of treaty would help bind Soviets and thus place obstacle in their way should they later desire reverse position or engage in wider reinterpretation feared by British Ambassador Moscow. It would also help establish precedent for consultation with UK and other signatories if Finland desires further modifications. Gufler 216. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.611/2–2462. Secret. Drafted by Burdett and Christensen and cleared by BNA, RA, Kitchen, and the Department of Defense. Repeated to Helsinki, Oslo, Stockholm, Copenhagen, Moscow, Paris Topol, Ottawa, and Reykjavik. Washington, February 24, 1962, 4 p.m. 1473. Deptel 280 to Helsinki rptd 4486 London, 1942 Moscow, 445 Stockhom.See footnote 1, Document 215. According British Embassy HMG prepared to seek agreement in principle of Western cosignatories to formal amendment 1947 Finnish Peace Treaty and to early start in Finnish reequipment with defensive guided weapons in anticipation amendment of Treaty. British state that since Soviets have said they are willing to stretch Treaty provisions, Finns consider they would be open to pressure under 1948 Pact if they did not take steps to modernize their defenses. FonOff satisfied there is real urgency in meeting Finnish request. FonOff requests US views urgently. In US view question of amendment Finnish Treaty would seem to affect entire NATO alliance and Sweden. Would Soviets permit Finns acquire non-Soviet guided missile air defense weapons? Weapons systems could be of such sophistication as to require intimate and close relations between Finnish and Soviet military technicians and authorities. Would Soviet control of Finnish air defense system, or joint use of facilities (which cannot be ruled out) be of serious disadvantage to West? What effect would this have on Swedish military posture? Modern air defense system in Finland could be military asset of value to USSR and tempting political objective. It could be argued, particularly in light of Kekkonen’s expressions of “understanding” of Soviet worries over rearmed Finns that Finnish request constitutes tacit recognition that threat from FRG and her allies exists. We are apprehensive that overall effect amendment of treaty might be to facilitate military satellization of Finland by Soviets. We would hope FonOff would give long and careful thought to Finnish request and consider whether subject should be discussed in NAC. London should inform FonOff that we have reservations proposed course of action as indicated above and wish clarification several obscurities before definitive reply can be made. We are studying matter urgently and desire information on following: 1. Reasons for urgency. Difficult to see why FonOff believes necessary make decisions quickly on matter such importance not only to British and ourselves but also to our NATO allies and Sweden. Understand Finnish negotiations with Soviets for arms still continuing; Finnish interest in urgent decision may suggest intent immediately to acquire Soviet guided missile weapons system. 2. Basis for assertion that USSR willing to stretch provisions of Treaty. Has FonOff learned this only from Finns or directly from Soviets? 3. Procedures for amendment of Treaty. Article 22 of Treaty states that military provisions may be modified by agreement between Allied and Associated Powers (US is not signatory) and Finland or by Agreement between UN Security Council and Finland. 4. What would be reaction NATO members, especially Germany and also Sweden? 5. Are Finns relating amendment of treaty and purchase of British equipment, e.g. frigate. 6. Would UK envisage supplying sophisticated weapons, involving security classification? 7. Would UK plan tie-in sale of missiles to sale of other equipment such as radar? Request views all addressees. Rusk 217. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.60E1/3–762. Top Secret. Washington, March 7, 1962. Dear Mr. Johnson: The Department of Defense has reviewed your letter of 1 March 1962, and its accompanying enclosure, concerning possible revision of the Finnish Peace Treaty of 1947.Not printed. (Ibid., 033.60E41/2–2662) Defense views on this general subject are as follows. The basic objective of the United States with respect to Finland continues to be an independent, democratic and Western-oriented Finland as free as possible from vulnerability to Soviet pressures. Soviet domination of Finland could put the USSR in control of advance air defense and early warning positions and additional Naval bases in the Baltic. In addition, such domination would be a heavy blow to Western morale and could weaken the resistance of some other small Free World nations to Soviet Bloc pressures. The continued denial of Finland to the USSR thus is both militarily and psychologically important to the West. From the military point of view, the acquisition by Finland of guided missile weapons and an early warning radar system is not in the best interest of the United States. The Department of Defense, on the advice of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, therefore recommends that Article 17 of the Finnish Peace Treaty not be interpreted or revised to permit such acquisition by Finland. Specific answers to the questions raised in your letter, as well as a strategic appraisal of the military importance of Finland, are attached hereto.JCSM–168–62, not printed. Sincerely yours, Paul H. Nitze 218. Circular Telegram from the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource: Department of State, Central Files, 660E.611/3–1062. Secret. Drafted by Owen, cleared in draft by Burdett, and approved by Rewinkel. Repeated to Helsinki, Stockholm, Copenhagen, Oslo, Reykjavik, Moscow, Paris Topol, and Ottawa. Washington, March 10, 1962, 5:18 p.m. 1548. Ref: Deptel 4659 to London.Telegram 4659, March 2, summarized a March 2 note from the British Embassy urging U.S. support for the sale of missiles to Finland. (Ibid., 660E.611/2–2762) Comments from field re amendment Finnish Peace Treaty were most helpful. Our conclusions set forth in note handed British Embassy March 10 in reply its note March 2Neither printed. (Ibid., 033.60E41/3–262 and 760E.5612/3–1062, respectively) supporting amendment Finnish Peace Treaty. Summary follows: Subject has undergone serious study within US Government and views of Defense Department and Joint Chiefs have been obtained on military aspects. Central question is whether Finland’s independence and freedom action will be enhanced or reduced by action taken on Finnish request acquire modern guided weapons system either through Treaty reinterpretation or amendment. Question also arises whether strategic position USSR will be advanced by readier Soviet access to Finnish early warning system and air defense capabilities. In Department’s view either tacit or formal acquiescence in Finnish request could very well weaken Finland’s position and offer USSR strategic advantages. Finnish authorities both political and military assert that if Finland better armed it could be argued Article 2 of 1948 Fenno-Soviet Treaty need not be invoked since Finland would be capable taking care of its own defense and maintaining its neutrality. This viewpoint rests on two premises of dubious validity: first, Soviet motives for note October 30 were of purely military nature, and second that Finnish defenses could be strengthened to point of reassuring Soviets re their allegations of aggressive intent of West Germany and its allies. There ample evidence that provision such highly sophisticated equipment as presently envisaged would require considerable assist-ance to Finnish military by Soviet technicians. Such system would not only be readily adaptable for joint use but also increase dependence of Finnish armed forces on USSR. Finns would accordingly be forced into closer military relationship with USSR with resulting opportunities for greater Soviet influence over Finnish armed forces. Opportunities for development useful contacts between British and Finnish military not present to same extent in terms British equipment in which Finns have expressed firm interest. Radar to be purchased by Finns from United Kingdom together with modern air defense weapons from USSR would give Finland beginning of highly sophisticated air defense weapons system control of which would be tempting political and military objective to USSR. USSR would have opportunity extend its air defense system several hundred miles westward to detriment NATO. While Finnish military authorities would probably resist such Soviet endeavors Finnish political leadership would be determining factor. Events since October 30 do not provide grounds for confidence in willingness or ability present Finnish leadership withstand dangerous accommodations with USSR. No assurance modern air defense weapons on Finnish soil would not be used against West. Possibility Finns may in any case purchase Soviet missiles in breach of Peace Treaty cannot be excluded. However such step in complete disregard views friendly Treaty signators would be drastic and would demonstrate that Finnish independence and national will had already become seriously compromised and weakened. This in itself would justify decision not proceed favorably on Finnish request. Department therefore believes reinterpretation or revision Peace Treaty would not be in best interest of West and accordingly hopes UK will reexamine matter in light foregoing views. Full text being pouched. Ball 219. Letter From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.56/3–2962. Top Secret. Washington, March 29, 1962. Dear Alex: The Department of State has requested Defense concurrence in the attached draft Presidential DeterminationNot printed. authorizing expenditure of up to $10 million to permit the armed forces of Finland to purchase United States military equipment in FY 1962 at reduced cost. The Department of Defense considers the provision of limited U.S. military assistance to Finland, including classified equipment on a case-by-case basis, to be militarily desirable. We are concerned, however, that any U.S. military equipment provided to Finland should not be of such a nature that it could be used to any significant extent against the West. Accordingly, all sales should be effected on a case-by-case basis, in light of security classification, availability, and after a careful appraisal of the potential value of the specific item in countering U.S. or Allied war plans. It is now recommended, however, that the proposed assistance be funded in FY 1963, rather than FY 1962 as originally suggested, since there is little likelihood that any sales could be negotiated and completed before 30 June 1962. Subject to the foregoing qualifications, the Department of Defense concurs in the draft Presidential Determination, dated 1 March 1962, which has been forwarded to us. A copy is attached for your reference. Sincerely yours, Bob 220. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at AthensSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5611/5–262. Secret. Drafted by Christensen and approved by Burdett. Secretary Rusk was in Athens to attend the NATO Ministerial Meeting May 4–6. Washington, May 2, 1962, 11:55 p.m. Tosec 31. Ref: ed Secto 7 from London and Tosec 30.In ed Secto 7, May 1, Rusk reported that Lord Home wanted to settle the issue of supplying missiles to Finland at the NATO meeting and requested a full briefing on the issue. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2104) Tosec 30 to Athens, May 2, summarized the Department note of March 10. For summary of the note, see Document 218. British Embassy note April 16 states US views given careful consideration but HMG nevertheless favors agreeing to Finnish request. Following is summary of long noteThe full text of the note is in Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5612/4–1662. which includes certain strategic-technical assertions: UK agrees Soviet control early warning facilities which Finns now have or are acquiring would give Soviet Union certain advantages, but UK also notes that acquisition such radar facilities and fighter aircraft not prohibited by Peace Treaty. Question therefore is to what extent acquisition of surface to air missiles, which are prohibited, would enhance advantages to Russians and disadvantages to NATO. While any increased sophistication of Finnish air defense system must be viewed with concern, UK of opinion that effect of acquisition even in worst case would be comparatively small. Furthermore UK understands Finns plan purchase some missiles from UK, thus providing opportunities for establishment useful contacts between UK and Finnish military which should help counterbalance Soviet-Finnish contacts. Regarding central political question of preservation Finnish independence, Finnish case is simply that effective defense of Finnish neutrality no longer possible without up to date defensive equipment. Peace Treaty was signed at earlier stage of technological development defensive weapons and includes provision for modifications. If matter came up in UN many other governments might take view it unreasonable for co-signatories refuse modification. Not possible give definite reply to question whether Finland would ignore a British refusal to agree to reinterpretation or amendment of Peace Treaty. Finns might drop their proposals if British concurrence not given and HMG now understands this is their intention. Political consequences British refusal would be serious. Such decision would seem unreasonable, would lead to loss Finnish confidence in West, and would cause inevitable decline in morale Finnish armed forces. Finnish Govt might however disregard UK refusal particularly in event Soviet pressure for consultation under 1948 Fenno-Soviet Agreement coupled with pressure to integrate Finnish defense system with that of Soviet Union. In UK opinion it would be easier for Finland to reject such demand if Finnish defenses already included some modern equipment and if she retained some confidence in West which would be gravely impaired by British refusal her present request. Ball 221. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5612/5–2262. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Christensen; cleared by Tyler, G/PM, and Bundy; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Helsinki. Washington, May 22, 1962, 7:18 p.m. 6212. For Ambassador from Secretary. Deliver following personal message from me to Lord Home: “Dear Alec: As I promised in Athens, I have carefully looked into the difficult question of permitting Finland to acquire guided missile weapons through a revision of the Finnish Peace Treaty. Although we are not a party to the Treaty, and your Government is the principal Western signatory, I have appreciated the opportunities to exchange thoughts on the subject with you. As you know my initial reaction as expressed to Ambassador Ormsby Gore on March 10 was against a Treaty revision. Now, after a careful reexamination of the subject, I have again concluded that the proposed revision of the Finnish Peace Treaty would be contrary to the best interests of the West. Officials in the Department of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and I all take the view that acquisition by Finland of guided missile weapons would be both militarily and politically unwise. The military aspects strongly indicate, in our opinion, that the strategic position of the West would be adversely affected. I am aware of how delicate a matter of judgment is involved in assessing the political aspects of determining whether the Finns should have these guided missiles. On the basis of all the information we have I am left with no alternative but to conclude that the political results would not be helpful to us. I question, on the basis of the review I have had made, that the acquisition of a modern air defense capability would give the Finns added confidence and political strength to resist encroachments by the Soviet Union. I am not sure but that, on the contrary, this might well give the USSR political as well as military advantages. If Finland were to acquire such modern weapons the political and military position of our other friends in Northern Europe would be directly affected. I understand that you have not discussed this matter with Norwegian, Danish and Swedish authorities. I recall that President Kekkonen told Mr. Khrushchev at Novosibirsk last November that a further build-up of armed forces in Northern Europe could be avoided if the USSR withdrew its demands on Finland. Mr. Khrushchev thereupon temporarily withdrew his demands. I am informed that the Bloodhound I and Thunderbird I missiles contain components incorporating United States classified information. I am quite sure that we could not agree to making the classified aspects of these weapons available to Finland. Let me assure you that, although my conclusions differ from those you have made, I have studied this problem thoroughly and carefully. Sincerely yours” Rusk 222. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5612/5–2862. Secret. Drafted by Christensen and approved in S on June 4. A summary of the conversation was transmitted to Helsinki in telegram 355, May 29. (Ibid.) Washington, May 28, 1962. SUBJECT Finland’s Interest in Acquiring Guided Missile Weapons PARTICIPANTS Richard R. Seppala, Ambassador of Finland The Secretary Mr. Keld Christensen, Officer in Charge, Northern European Affairs, BNA Ambassador Seppala opened the conversation by reading the text of a memorandum giving the considerations which prompted the Finnish Government to seek a reinterpretation of the Finnish Peace Treaty in order to acquire guided missile weapons (a copy of the memorandum is attached).Not printed. Ambassador Seppala commented that Finland had available for military purchases a Soviet credit of some 12 billion Finnmarks, of which only a quarter, or 3 billion Finnmarks, would be used for the purchase of Soviet guided missiles. The Finns would, the Ambassador said, pay the full price, and the quantity of missiles acquired would accordingly be relatively small. The purchase of guided missiles from the USSR was initiated by the Finnish Defense Forces; the Soviets have not tried to sell such weapons to Finland and there has been no collaboration between the Finns and the Soviets in this matter. Missiles would, the Ambassador continued, also be purchased from the United Kingdom, provided funds were allocated in the next budget. The Ambassador said the entire matter was of the greatest importance in order for Finland to be able to defend its own frontiers and its neutrality. Without such weapons, he said, Finland would be a military vacuum in time of war, or during periods threatening wars; such vacuums were invariably filled. The Ambassador expressed the hope that the U.S. Government would take an understanding view of Finland’s desires and interests. The Secretary asked what kind of missiles the Finns were interested in acquiring. Ambassador Seppala replied that it was his understanding that air defense missiles would be purchased from the Soviet Union, and anti-tank missiles from the United Kingdom. However, he repeated that the current budget did not have an allocation for the purchase of British missiles. The Ambassador then went on to explain the origin of the Soviet commercial credit, and the difficulties the Finns had encountered in making use of it. The Secretary asked Ambassador Seppala at whom the Finns expected to shoot their missiles. Ambassador Seppala explained that it was important for Finland to be able to defend its neutrality so that, under existing treaty arrangements, the Soviets could not say that the Finns could not defend themselves. The Ambassador commented briefly on the 1948 Finnish Treaty with the Soviet Union. The Secretary then asked if the Ambassador could explain why the Soviets were interested in selling the Finns guided missile weapons. The Ambassador replied that the Soviets had agreed to sell war materials to Finland, but that the Finns had taken the initiative to acquire guided missile weapons. However, it was difficult, he continued, to say what the Soviet motives were. The Ambassador reiterated that it was important for Finland to be able to say that it was able to defend itself and maintain its treaty obligations. The Secretary said it was difficult to understand, and in his own mind he wondered, why the Soviets would be willing to sell such weapons to Finland unless they were convinced they would be shooting in only one direction. The Ambassador replied that, on behalf of Finland, he could say definitely that Finland would not shoot the weapons unless Finnish soil was molested. He alluded again to Finnish obligations under the 1948 Treaty. The Secretary asked the Ambassador to comment on whether Finland was as independent and neutral today as at the time of President Kekkonen’s visit to the United States last October. The Secretary noted that the Soviet Union had made certain requests of Finland at that time. The Ambassador replied, “Yes, absolutely.” The Ambassador then went on to talk briefly about Finnish-Soviet trade balances, and Finland’s need to maintain a posture which was not unfriendly to the USSR. He said, with respect to the Helsinki World Youth FestivalJuly 29–August 6. for example, the Finnish Government had been obliged to bend in the direction of Soviet interests; Finnish policy had not, however, changed. The Secretary said that when the USSR presented its note to Finland last October the problem seemed to be a matter of great urgency and importance. Yet, after Finnish officials visited the Soviet Union, the public results seemed very meager. Why, the Secretary asked, had the Soviets been willing to settle for so little publicly when the matter had originally seemed so important? Ambassador Seppala replied that the Soviets had achieved their objectives of shaking up the Scandinavians in a matter which was related at the time to the Berlin situation. Finland was an area of maneuver for the Soviets. It is also well to remember, he said, that Finland is bound by treaty arrangements which place very narrow limits on Finnish policy. Kekkonen apparently persuaded Khrushchev to lift his demands on Finland. Admittedly, he said, the affair had helped re-elect Kekkonen President of Finland. It was difficult, he said, to understand Soviet motives. The Secretary said the Finns were proposing to acquire sophisticated guided weapons from two sides. Such weapons contained highly classified information. As yet such classified information had not crossed the curtain. There was, therefore, the problem of technical security. In addition to this technical problem there was the political question of how all this related to the neutrality of Finland, and why the Soviets would agree unless they were persuaded the weapons would shoot in only one direction. The Secretary said that we would give thought and study to the Finnish views, and indicated we were consulting with the British in the matter. He thought the revision of the Treaty was a matter of some substance, not only now, but also for the future. He said he had merely been asking questions and not giving any answers. 223. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5/6–462. Secret. Repeated to London. Helsinki, June 4, 1962, midnight. 589. Foreign Minister Merikoski asked me call this afternoon and received me in presence Director of Political Affairs, Max Jakobson. Merikoski remarked that he had just received report Ambassador Seppala’s conversation May 28 with Secretary RuskSee Document 222. regarding Finns desire reinterpret peace treaty to permit modernization their armed forces. He stated that in light Seppala’s report he would again like take up matter and proceeded reiterate points put forward by him on May 25 (points 1 to 4 Embassy’s telegram 578).Telegram 578 from Helsinki, May 25, reported on Jakobson’s presentation of the Finnish position on the legality of its effort to obtain missiles. (Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5/5–2562) He placed special emphasis on circumstance that initiative this matter came from Finnish side, pointing out that question had been raised by Finnish President when he visited London in spring of 1961. He contended that degree modernization was unimportant since Finns can afford only minimum number of expensive modern weapons and argued that principal importance would be psychological. He described it as tonic for Finnish armed forces and entire Finnish nation and indicated that Western refusal permit modification would have serious depressing effect on them. From remarks by Merikoski and Jakobson I have impression that Seppala made full and apparently to them depressing report and that report was essentially in agreement with summary contained Department’s telegram 355.See the source note, Document 222. In course conversation they expressed concern over length time it was taking Great Britain and its friends make up their minds about Finnish request and asked whether I could indicate any explanation of this circumstance which they found most puzzling. I told them I had no instructions and did not know what ultimate decision on matter might be. After making certain they understood I was merely thinking out loud in effort help them, I expressed opinion that delay might be partly result of bad timing. I reminded them that between initial discussion, when President Kekkonen visited London in spring 1961, and this spring there had occurred the incidents that began with Soviet note of October 30 [and] included President’s trip to Novosibirsk. These incidents had demonstrated to world ability of Russians to shake up Finland and had not in eyes of free world strengthened Finnish position, but rather had made evident degree to which Soviets are able disturb normal Finnish life and developments. Although Soviets had not proceeded carry out what free world and Finns themselves admittedly had recognized as possible military threat to Finnish independence, this threat still hung over Finland. Although Finnish Government had apparently thought it necessary, probably in effort reassure Finnish people after shock of October 30, present Novosibirsk as success, it may be merely stay of execution in light these developments timing renewal their request unfortunate. Foreign Minister himself then remarked perhaps matter might have been more effectively pushed some months earlier or some months later. Without endeavoring counter my opinion that Novosibirsk was not “success” it has been publicly represented as being, both Merikoski and Jakobson asserted that events following October 30 had made no difference in Finland’s policy or in its determination maintain its neutrality and independence. They invited comment and implied that Soviet note and Novosibirsk should have no influence on any decisions regarding Finnish rearmament. I replied that Soviet demonstration of ability shake Finnish nation was fact of foreign policy even though Finland’s friends might still be convinced of Finnish desire maintain independence and neutrality. They also asked whether I knew of any actions by their government that might indicate change in Finnish policy. I referred to open change in attitude toward forthcoming Communist Youth Festival indicated by statement by Prime Minister Miettunen (Embassy’s telegram 526).Telegram 526, April 12, reported on Gufler’s discussion with Karjalainen on the World Youth Festival. (Department of State, Central Files, 800.46/4–1262) They contended that this change was minor matter that had nothing to do with Novosibirsk, but obviously did not find their own argument very convincing. In course remarks regarding timing request treaty reinterpretation, Foreign Minister and Jakobson stated that one reason for pressing matter now was desire at time of budgetary difficulty take advantage available Soviet commercial credits that can also be used for weapons purchase. I remarked that British apparently had understanding that British missiles would also be purchased. They said that this understanding was correct. Despite my frank remarks about October 30–Novosibirsk period, conversation was cordial and sympathetic in tone. Both Finnish officials (Jakobson later privately) reiterated thanks for frank expressions of opinion. They left impression that they themselves feel timing their case is unfortunate and understand difficulties involved in matter, but, that nonetheless they desperately desire decision in Finland’s favor for what they regard as vital political and psychological reasons. Gufler 224. Memorandum From the Finnish Embassy to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760.E5612/6–1462. Secret. A typewritten notation reads: “Confidential (Finnish Classification)”. The memorandum was handed to Secretary Rusk by Ambassador Seppala during a June 14 meeting. A memorandum of their conversation is ibid. Washington, June 14, 1962. MEMORANDUM The President of Finland, with reference to the conversation between the Secretary of State and the Finnish Ambassador on May 28th,See Document 222. wishes to draw the attention of the Secretary of State to the following: 1. The Secretary of State, judging by the questions he put to the Ambassador, appeared to assume that Finland might have accepted such commitments or obligations as would limit her independence. This is not the case. No such demands were made by the Soviet Government either at the meeting at Novosibirsk or on any other occasion, and no commitments or agreements, secret or public, have been made on behalf of Finland. The President of the Republic has no powers to enter into agreements without the consent of the Government and the Parliament. Thus no change has taken place in Finland’s ability to pursue her policy of neutrality or in her relationships with other powers. The developments since the meeting at Novosibirsk have in fact confirmed this. 2. The initiative taken by the Finnish Government for the purpose of acquiring defensive guided missiles is not a result of the Finnish-Soviet exchanges of last fall in which this matter was not even touched upon. The acquisition of such missiles has been the aim of Finnish military authorities for several years. It may also be recalled that the President of Finland raised this matter in his talks with Prime Minister Macmillan in May 1961. 3. The Secretary of State asked the Ambassador how it could be explained that the Soviet Government, at the end of October last year, considered military consultations with Finland necessary and yet almost a month later agreed to put them off. No definitive reply to this question can be given from the Finnish side. We have no knowledge of how the Soviet Government viewed the European situation in the light of the Berlin crisis at different stages in the course of last fall. The note addressed to Finland on October 30th, 1961, should not, however, be considered as an isolated event. It was only one of several Soviet measures, the necessity of which was explained by the Soviet Government on the grounds of the danger of war created by the Berlin crisis. Similarly the proposal to initiate military consultations with Finland was withdrawn at a time when Soviet policy on the German question appeared to change. The fact that the Soviet Government at the end of November no longer considered military consultations with Finland necessary was thus entirely in line with the development of Soviet policy in general. 4. Naturally the Soviet note to Finland may have had several objectives. It has been suggested that one purpose, perhaps the most important, was to influence the Finnish Presidential election. There is no doubt that the note and the exchanges following it could not fail to have an influence on the course of Finnish politics on the eve of the election. If this was indeed the purpose of the Soviet Government, the intention could not, however, have been to bring about a change in Finnish policy, but rather to prevent any possible change. In any case the result of the Presidential election confirmed the continuity of the conduct of Finland’s foreign policy, while the results of the Parliamentary elections made it possible to form a coalition government based on the majority secured by the non-socialist parties in Parliament. 225. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 110.11–RU/6–2562. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bohlen and approved in S on July 3. The meeting was held at the Foreign Ministry. London, June 25, 1962, 11 a.m. SET/MC/35 SECRETARY’S EUROPEAN TRIP (June 18–28, 1962) PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Ambassador Bruce Mr. Bohlen Mr. Kohler (for the beginning) Great Britain Lord Home Sir Harold Caccia Sir Evelyn Shuckburgh Mr. Joseph Godber Mr. Ian Samuel [Ramsbotham, Mason]Brackets in the source text. SUBJECT Missiles for Finland Lord Home said the Secretary knew the situation in regard to the Finnish request for anti-aircraft missiles instead of obtaining them from Russia. The Scandinavian countries had indicated that they thought that this was very useful and, in addition, there was a military problem if Finland received them from Russia. He very much hoped that the United States would agree with them on this subject. The Secretary inquired whether there was any parliamentary reaction to this request. He said the Finnish Ambassador had recently told him that they would not bring up the matter again with the United States and had implied there was no great hurry in its solution. Lord Home said he did not understand since the Finns were telling the British that the delay was intolerable. Mr. Mason said that he had had some evidence which indicated a slight slowing-down of Finnish interest. The Secretary said it might merely be a difference in Ambassadors estimates of the national interest. The Secretary then inquired as to whether it is conceivable that these rockets would shoot at anybody other than the West. Lord Home admitted that this was the case since if the Russians wished to take action against the Finns, they would not do it in this fashion. The Secretary then inquired if the British had discussed this with their bomber command, and Lord Home said they had and they agreed that this might give a twenty-minute earlier warning to the Russians in the event of war. Mr. Mason explained that there were three cities that the Finns were trying to defend. The Secretary again asked against whom. Mr. Mason replied the Finns say against anybody, but did feel that the protection of the cities was better from our point of view than the idea of a belt, which would fit in more with Soviet plans. The Secretary then inquired whether the Bloodhound and Thunderbolt missiles could be used for training or whether they were too big. Mr. Samuel remarked that he had understood that they were about the same size as Honest Johns and doubted if they were small enough for practice or training, but that he would check into this with the technical people. Mr. Mason then remarked that they did not feel that these rockets contained any classified information under the 1961 agreement defining basic concepts, and that as far as they could gather, this was completely on Finnish initiative alone, with Soviet permission particularly to use the ruble credits. Sir Harold Caccia said the political arguments were strongly in favor of supplying missiles from the West, while the military arguments against it were minimal, and that the only problem of Western military defense was that they would be placed on the road to Russia. The Secretary said if the Finns were not crowding for an immediate decision, he would like to hold off and he would go back to Washington and check further on this matter with our military and also in regard to the nature of the information. He inquired whether or not commercial considerations entered into the British calculations. Mr. Mason said that the commercial effects had not been considered in any British examination of this matter and that in reply to the Finnish Embassy here, it had been said officially that commercial policy was not involved. The only things involved were political and military considerations. The Secretary repeated that our concern was that these missiles could only be fired at us. Mr. Mason stated that the Danes, Norwegians, and the Swedes had all approved this idea. Lord Home agreed that they could hold up, but hoped that our response would come quickly. The Secretary said he understood that the Finns had not yet voted any funds for the purchase of these rockets, and went on to say that the United States was perhaps more skeptical in regard to Kekkonen’s policy than the British. Lord Home said he understood this but felt that since the election there was less ground for suspicion since the elections had gone off quite well. The Secretary then inquired what were the number of missiles and what was the total cost. Mr. Mason said there were approximately seventy-two missiles in groups of seventeen or eighteen. He said he did not know the exact figure but would check. The Secretary said another aspect of the matter was that the Finns would pay out quite a lot of money for weapons which would only be useful against aircraft and in a short period of time, with the development of missiles, they would be useless. The Secretary said, however, he would consider it but he did not wish to imply that the result would be automatically favorable. He said we were having a great deal of difficulty with Congress on all matters affecting trade and foreign economics. He said the Executive was trying to maintain flexibility but that only yesterday the Senate, with one dissenting vote—the woman Senator, Mrs. Neuberg—had tightened up the financial export measure.S. 3161, a bill extending the Export Control Act of 1949 for 2 years, passed the Senate on a 59–1 roll call vote. For text of P.L. 87–515, approved July 1, 1962, see 76 Stat. 127. He repeated his willingness to reexamine this measure did not mean any yielding on substance at this time. 226. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC SG Meeting, July 20. Secret. Prepared in the Bureau of European Affairs for presentation to the July 20 meeting of the NSC Standing Group. In a July 19 memorandum to the Secretary, attached to the source text, Deputy Under Secretary Johnson endorsed the report’s conclusions.The NSC Standing Group discussed and concurred in the proposals made in this paper at its July 20 meeting. The President later read the paper and “approved in general.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, NSC SG Meetings May–August 1962) Washington, undated. UNITED STATES POSITION ON REVISING THE FINNISH PEACE TREATY Problem To prepare a United States response to a British request that the Finnish Peace Treaty be revised or reinterpreted, as requested by the Finnish Government, to permit Finland to acquire guided missile weapons. Factors The Peace Treaty. The Treaty ending the state of war with Finland was entered into by Finland with the USSR (and several Iron Curtain countries) and with the United Kingdom (and several Commonwealth countries). The United States is not a signatory to the Treaty. The Treaty places certain restrictions on the Finnish armed forces in terms of manpower and equipment. The Treaty specifically prohibits Finland from acquiring guided missile weapons. Early this year the Finnish Government requested British agreement to a reinterpretation of the Treaty to permit Finland to acquire guided missile weapons. The Finns stated that tacit approval of the USSR was indicated by a Soviet willingness to sell such weapons to Finland. The Finnish Position. The Finnish Government states that it is endeavoring to strengthen its armed forces in order “to strengthen the basis of Finnish neutrality”. It states that it is a generally accepted view that “a nation aspiring to neutrality must have a convincing capability of effectively protecting by its own efforts the integrity of its territory”. The Finnish Government holds that the restrictions of the Treaty prevent Finland from establishing a modern defense. The Finnish Government asserts that at the time the Treaty was written guided missiles were weapons designed exclusively for aggressive purposes; the military restrictions of the Treaty were designed to prevent Finland from acquiring an aggressive war potential. The Finnish Government asserts that as a result of technical progress guided missiles are now indispensable for defense, and without such weapons Finland cannot make her neutrality convincing. The Finnish armed forces have for long endeavored to acquire more modern and sophisticated weapons. According to the Finnish Foreign Office the acquisition of guided missile weapons is now seen as a method or device to strengthen Finland’s position vis-à-vis the USSR. The Finns state that the possession of such weapons will constitute a deterrent against Soviet demands that Article II of the 1948 Finnish-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Assistance be applied. This Article, which formed the basis for the Soviet Note to Finland of last October 30, provides for joint military consultations between the two countries when there exists a military threat to the USSR through Finland from Germany and her allies. This Article is a severe restriction on Finland’s freedom of action. The Finns now feel that the possession of some guided missile batteries will give them “grounds”, or an “excuse”, to resist future Soviet demands that Article II be implemented. Finnish Procurement Plans. The Finnish Government has stated publicly that, because of Finland’s neutrality, purchases of military equipment for Finland’s armed forces must be balanced between the East and West. The Finns have, in the form of an old Ruble credit, about $40 million available for military purchases from the USSR. The Finns have already agreed to purchase aircraft (presumably some MIG 21s), naval engines and guns with part of this sum. In addition they intend to spend some $12.5 million for two to three guided missile batteries of six launchers each. The Finns have told the British that they are prepared to spend in the United Kingdom some $560,000 for the Vigilant, an anti-tank missile. They have also shown an interest in British surface-to-air guided missiles, the Thunderbird I and Bloodhound I. The Finns have made it clear, however, that no budgetary allocations have as yet been made for such British weapons. The Finns have already this year purchased about $3 million worth of modern British radar, and a naval training vessel. They are also purchasing anti-aircraft weapons in Switzerland. These items are not prohibited by the Peace Treaty. British Position. The British Government accepts the Finnish contention that Finland’s position vis-à-vis the USSR will be strengthened by the possession of guided missile weapons. The British feel that the Finnish position is reasonable and realistic. Moreover, the British express much concern over the consequences of a refusal of the Finnish request. They fear that the Finnish armed forces, a strong pro-Western element in Finland, may conclude that the West has no confidence in Finland; morale in the Finnish armed forces would thereupon decline to the detriment of the West. The British admit that Finnish purchase of guided weapons from the USSR would involve technical consultations between the Finns and the Soviets; the British feel, however, that this would be compensated for by the establishment of useful contacts between the Finnish and British military. The British admit that there are some military risks in permitting Finland to have guided weapons. They feel that the overall impact of this would, however, be small; the Finns intend, it is asserted, to ring three or possibly four Finnish cities with guided missile batteries. This would not, in the British view, cause serious problems for the Western bomber forces. Position of Sweden, Norway and Denmark. The Norwegian, Danish and Swedish Governments all favor, according to the British, allowing the Finns to acquire guided missile weapons. Only the Swedes have officially informed the United States of their position in the matter which is that they perceive no objections to acquiescing in the Finnish request for reasons of Swedish national security. Reports from our Embassies at Oslo and Copenhagen tend to confirm the British assertion with respect to Norway and Denmark. United States Views. The Department has consistently taken the position that it would not be in the best interests of the West to agree to a Treaty revision or reinterpretation. The problem is a political-military one requiring careful appraisal of a number of complex political and military factors. The Department’s position has, accordingly, been based on the views expressed in the Department of Defense on the military aspects of the matter, and on a political assessment made within the Department. A military study prepared by the Joint Staff concluded that it would not be in the best interests of the West to permit acquisition by Finland of guided missile weapons; this conclusion was based chiefly on the statement that “there is no way to ensure that these weapons and facilities would not be used against the West”. It was also based on the conclusion that Finnish acquisition of such weapons would be interpreted by Sweden and the Northern NATO members as a shift in the balance of power to the USSR. (This has since not proved to be the case.) Subsequently, however, the Department of Defense, in again reviewing the problem, has revised its position. Although that Department does not withdraw its military analysis, as outlined above, it does now believe that the problem is essentially a political one and that the political considerations involved would appear to be overriding in favor of permitting Finland to acquire guided missile weapons. The Department of State has for long been concerned with the external policies followed by President Kekkonen. The course of events during the past 6–8 months reveals, in the Department’s view, an excessive Finnish accommodation to the Soviet Union. This has been demonstrated by the weakness of President Kekkonen’s response to the Soviet Note of October 30, the Khrushchev–Kekkonen conversations at Novosibirsk, Kekkonen’s dominant role in the formation of a new Finnish Government following elections early this year, and the about-face in the official position of the Finnish Government with respect to the forthcoming Communist World Youth Festival at Helsinki. The Department has held that, given the military risks, the problem hinges on the amount of confidence that can be placed in the Finnish political leadership. The recent course of Finnish-Soviet relations has not given grounds for much confidence. Consideration with Respect to British Missiles. The British wish to sell the surface-to-air missiles Thunderbird I and Bloodhound I to Finland beginning in 1964 or 1965. (The Finns have given no definite undertaking with respect to such purchases.) The United States has held that the sale of these missiles to Finland requires the consent of the United States Government because they contain identifiable classified information of United States origin. The British contest this view, asserting that the relevant information has been declassified. This matter is now undergoing study within the United States Government. The Secretary’s Conversation with Lord Home. Lord Home raised the subject of guided missiles for Finland with the Secretary in London on June 25 following an earlier restatement of United States opposition to acquiescence in the Finnish request. Lord Home put forward the known British views and the Secretary indicated his willingness to re-examine the subject, but emphasized that this did not mean any yielding, at the time, on the substance. Ambassador Nykopp’s Call on General Maxwell Taylor. Former Finnish Ambassador to the United States Johan Nykopp (now in private business) called on General Taylor on July 3. He made several points: (1) Finland is doing its best to maintain its position between East and West; (2) The Finnish Army is well trained and capable of giving a good account of itself; (3) The Finns feel that the time has come to equip their Army with modern equipment; they do not have in mind expensive sophisticated equipment, but are looking for cheap equipment; (4) In buying equipment, it will be necessary to strike a balance between Russian and Western equipment; (5) If the subject arises, Ambassador Nykopp hoped the United States would adopt an understanding attitude. Program of United States Military Assistance to Finland. The President has approved a program authorizing the sale to Finland in fiscal 1963 of military equipment at discount prices (involving a cost to the United States of $10 million). The President waived certain legal requirements with respect to this program, and no government-to-government agreement with Finland is contemplated. Insofar as possible, Finnish purchases in the United States would be carried out privately or on the basis of arrangements worked out directly between the Services. No offer of military aid to Finland will be made. The Finns have not as yet been informed of this program, and when they are they will be told simply that they can purchase military equipment in the United States at prices and under terms they will find attractive. Comment The Finnish Government has recently been more forthcoming in explaining what it considers Finland needs for a modern defense capability. The Finns have linked the problem to Article II of the 1948 Finnish-Soviet Treaty (as explained above). Although President Kekkonen has virtually complete control over Finland’s external policies, and has shown an excessive accommodation to the interests of the USSR, there are important restraints on him. Among such restraints are the Finnish armed forces which represent an important pro-Western element in the Finnish society and body politic; by diligent effort on the part of Finnish military leaders few Communists are within the officer and NCO ranks. The Finnish armed forces can continue to be a pro-Western influence in Finland of considerable importance. It is noteworthy that the Commanding General of the Finnish armed forces has accepted an invitation to visit the United States next autumn. It is evident that the Finns will, under presently known plans, be making their major purchases from the USSR. Finnish intentions with respect to purchases from the United Kingdom are most indefinite and vague. Acquiescence in the Finnish request, without more specific Finnish undertakings with respect to purchases from the West, could tend to facilitate Finnish purchases from the USSR. The result could be a one-sided bargain in which Finland may be drawn more closely into a military relationship with the USSR. In the Department’s view, it is only prudent to seek to prevent such a one-sided bargain. Attached is a suggested note to the BritishNot printed. See Document 228. in response to Lord Home’s request that we again review the matter. The note proposes that both the United States and the United Kingdom sell to Finland at attractive prices arms not prohibited by the Peace Treaty. While continuing to oppose revision of the Treaty, the note indicates that we would review our position if Finland gave undertakings that it would balance purchases of weapons now prohibited by the Treaty between the East and West. 227. Telegram From the Military attache in Finland to the Department of the ArmySource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.56/7–2062. Secret; Noforn. Also sent to the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, the Chief of Naval Operations, and the Department of State. The source text is the Department of State copy. Helsinki, July 20, 1962, 10:30 a.m. C–40. DEPTAR for ACSI, COFS USAF for AFCIN 1–D2, AFCIN–1Z–A. This is a joint Army, Navy, and Air Force message. State for EUR/BNA and ISA/DOD. (Immediately) Reference OUSARMA Finland msg C–39.Not found. 1. (S) Finland 350Not further identified. requested meeting with ARMA to discuss urgent topic. Source stated that he was acting as official spokesman for Chief of Staff, Lt Gen A A Maunula and made following remarks: a. Maunula considers it highly undesirable to purchase large quantities of Soviet mil equip for Finnish Army. Hopes that US equipment be made available. b. Maunula particularly pleased with approach thru mil channels and desires minimum political participation in purchase arrangements. c. Maunula desires to program purchases from US over extended period so that small numbers of US items can be included in series of supplemental budgets along with other foreign military items without giving impression of large US purchases. d. Maunula hopes favorable consideration may be given to Finnish request with items procured at lowest possible cost. If purchases made, Chief of Staff considers it necessary to work out method of documentation in Washington between Finnish and US mil to eliminate possibility of anti-Western critics in Finland using public info on cost and quantity figures for propaganda purposes. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] 2. (U) SCP–1. Msg signed by Drain USARMA, Byrd ALUSNA and Melvia Actg USAIRA. 228. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5612/5–2762. Secret. Drafted by Christensen, cleared by MC, and approved by Burdett. Repeated to Helsinki, Moscow, Stockholm, Copenhagen, Oslo, Reykjavik, and Paris Topol. Washington, July 27, 1962, 7:47 p.m. 588. Department today handed Greenhill, Counselor British Embassy, Note on question revising Finnish Peace Treaty.A memorandum of conversation is ibid., 396.1/7–2762. After reading the position paper, Greenhill commented that the United States had come “halfway along the road.” Following is brief summary of Note. (For Helsinki: text is identical to draft note attached to Position PaperDocument 226. pouched July 20.) Remains opinion US that revision Finnish Peace Treaty permit Finland acquire guided missiles would result in net military disadvantage for West. Disadvantage not so great however as to make military factor by itself decisive. US also remains of opinion that policies pursued by Kekkonen do not give grounds much confidence that he would be prepared withstand Soviet pressures. Record of events in Finnish-Soviet relations past six to eight months is one of dangerous compromises and accommodations with USSR. There is reason to fear that after Finnish purchase missiles from USSR, Finland may not carry through with purchases from West if Soviets object. Nevertheless US agrees with UK on importance strengthening pro-Western military leadership in Finland. Clearly in our interest avoid giving Finnish military impression they have been deserted by West and argument can be advanced that strengthening Finnish armed forces will make possible rejection future Soviet demands on Finland for consultation under Article II of 1948 Treaty. US–UK objectives accordingly should be to strengthen Finnish armed forces with Western weapons while guarding against preponderant Finnish purchases from USSR. US prepared to facilitate Finnish purchases from US sources at attractive prices of weapons not prohibited by Peace Treaty. Similiar action by UK would be helpful. Proceeding this fashion would contribute to strengthening Finnish armed forces without disadvantage involved in revising Treaty. Finnish proposals for revising Treaty (according to Foreign Office memo June 28 to Embassy London) accord disproportionate opportunities to Soviet Bloc. Arrangements are at hand for acquiring missiles from USSR while purchases from UK dependent on future appropriations Finnish Parliament. Specifically US Government wishes to know what undertakings UK has in mind obtaining from Finland to assure, if Treaty revised, that purchases will in fact be roughly balanced between East and West. Unless there are such undertakings from Finnish political as well as military authorities revision of Treaty likely to facilitate purchases from Soviet Bloc. US Government continues believe its consent required prior to release Bloodhound and Thunderbird missiles to Finland. US prepared however to hold joint consultation at technical level with a view to resolve misunderstandings and differences of opinion. End summary, full text being pouched. Department informed Greenhill we would appreciate early reaction to Note since we were getting number of indications that Finns interested in acquiring weapons from US. Greenhill reiterated urgency involved in settling problems connected with Thunderbird and Bloodhound missiles. Department suggested S–DMICC (State–Defense Military Information Control Committee) might meet with its British counterpart to resolve outstanding questions. Rusk 229. Telegram from the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5612/7–3062. Secret. Repeated to London, Moscow, Stockholm, Copenhagen, Oslo, Reykjavik, and Paris. Helsinki, July 30, 1962, 7 p.m. 41. Embtel 40.Telegram 40, July 30, transmitted the text of a Finnish aide-memoire to the British Government that announced Finland’s decision to withdraw its application to the Soviet Union for the purchase of guided missiles. (Ibid.) Following his call on Merikoski, O’Neill had appointment with Foreign Office Permanent Official Jakobson, who gave him following information, with authorization to pass it on to me. O’Neill requests, however, that discretion be used in handling this background information particularly in view frank discussion views of President Kekkonen. Action withdrawing application for purchase guided missiles was President’s idea and taken on his initiative after consultation with Finnish personalities concerned. President apparently motivated at least in part by concern he feels as result information he has received from Finn representatives abroad regarding reaction in interested free world countries to occurrences surrounding Novosibirsk meeting and by circumstance that this reaction appears have become entangled with question modernization Finnish armed forces. He therefore apparently considers it imprudent pursue matter at least for time being. His outstanding motivations for dropping it now are: (1) wish demonstrate that Finland made request freely and is free to withdraw it, and (2) belief it advisable, in view long delay in bringing matter to satisfactory conclusion, withdraw request in order remove any grounds Russians might feel application gives them press Finland for an answer or for action one way or another about it. I believe this action will disappoint many elements Finland that want proceed with modernization armed forces from genuine desire increase Finland’s ability defend itself and thus strengthen its independent position. Military circles in particular will probably not be satisfied indefinitely with suspension modernization and will likely at some time that may seem feasible to them again press civilians reopen question treaty revision.In telegram 53 from Helsinki, August 3, Gufler reported that Jakobson had summoned him to the Foreign Office and repeated the information given to British Embassy officer O’Neill. (Ibid., 760E.5612/8–362) Gufler 230. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5/8–662. Secret. Repeated to London. Helsinki, August 6, 1962, 6 p.m. 59. Re Deptel 22.Telegram 22, August 1, requested Embassy comment on a program of military assistance to Finland. (Ibid., 760E.5/8–162) Believe it desirable proceed now with implementation program to provide Finland with US military equipment at discount prices. Considerations leading to inception of program (Embtel 435, February 15)See footnote 3, Document 213. even though Finns not now seeking acquire guided missiles. Important proceed with program to bolster military morale which likely damaged as result President’s decision cease efforts acquire guided missiles for present. (Embtels 40, 41, 53)See Document 229 and footnotes 1 and 2 thereto. Program could also lessen dangers involved in possibility that President made decision re missiles in belief West had lost faith in Finland. Embassy perceives no objection to service-to-service approach. Finns have indicated they prefer negotiations of arms procurement on this basis (Military Attache’s joint message C–40).Document 227. Army Attache has today confirmed with Finn military that list of items desired by Finns forwarded to Finnish Military attache Washington July 17 (Military Attache’s joint message C–39).Not found. There no indication Finns contemplate changes in composition this list at present time. Presentation of Finnish list or discussion of list with Finns soon thereafter would provide appropriate opportunity present US program for sale US equipment at discount prices. Military attache concurs this message. Gufler 231. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5612/8–862. Secret; Limit Distribution; No Distribution Outside Department. Helsinki, August 8, 1962, 5 p.m. 69. Reference: Embtel 62.Telegram 62, August 6, reported that Gufler had received an album documenting Kekkonen’s visit to the United States and planned to use the occasion of its delivery to explore Kekkonen’s reaction to recent developments. Gufler requested instructions from the Department on whether to follow this suggested approach. (Ibid., 760E.11/8–762) Highly dependable sourceA handwritten note on the source text identifies Hallama as the source. with whom I discussed various matters today referred to Finnish decision postponing equipment its armed forces with guided missiles (re Embtel 53)See footnote 2, Document 229. and said that this action reflected President Kekkonen’s unhappiness over Western attitude toward Finland and his desire to demonstrate that he is bound by no secret rearmament agreements with Soviet Union. He feels that he is unreasonably mistrusted in West and that “good results his American visit seem to have run dry”. He is inclined reproach Finnish military with having been over eager modernize and equip themselves with guided missiles and blame them for having pushed matter too fast. From remarks both by this source and another one,A handwritten note on the source text identifies Jakobson as the source. I believe that his mood and decision have apparently been greatly influenced by reports received from Finnish Military attache Washington of attitudes displayed and remarks made in Pentagon. Both sources have given me impression that President is in somewhat disturbed and unhappy mood and feels badly hurt over what he considers Western misunderstanding of his difficult position and apparent Western failure to believe his repeated assurances that he undertook no secret agreements at Novosibirsk. Gufler 232. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.11/8–3162. Confidential. Helsinki, August 31, 1962, 4 p.m. 105. Called yesterday afternoon on President Kekkonen accompanied by Friberg as interpreter to present him with album of his visit to United States. Also presented framed colored picture sent to US earlier for delivery to him. Kekkonen appeared genuinely pleased, expressed his gratitude and said he would write personal letter to President Kennedy. After usual amenities about summer activities, I asked President what he thought of present world situation. “It doesn’t look too good”, he replied, “and Berlin is particularly bad.” He then mentioned his plans visit Soviet Union with nothing in mind of a political nature “for vacation” in October, prior to his visit to France. He remarked that right after De Gaulle had extended French invitation, Khrushchev had written him letter dated April 4, renewing earlier oral invitation. Khru-shchev’s letter was couched in such terms that Kekkonen assumes he will have chance meet and talk with him. This he believes will be particularly interesting since he will be able pass to de Gaulle his impressions of Khrushchev’s current attitudes. Returning to German question, I remarked that “Berlin crisis” had been created solely by Soviet Union which could turn it on and off at will and that it was therefore not genuine crisis. I strongly expressed hope that Finland would not change its policy toward Germany or in any way modify its present relationship toward Germany by signing peace treaty with Pankow regime or changing status Finnish relationship with it. I added that present relationship is consistent with Finnish neutrality. President said that he had heard rumors of Soviet pressure on Finland to recognize East Germany. They were simply not true, he affirmed. He added, “We have done fairly well so far and I hope it will continue. I don’t have any reason to doubt that we won’t come out all right.” I next took up with President matter Finnish participation in San Juan conference (Embassy telegram 93)Telegram 93, August 21, reported that a Finnish decision to attend the San Juan conference had to await the return of a number of senior officials to Helsinki. (Ibid., 398.06–SA/8–2162) on middle level manpower. I told him that attendance by Minister Pohjala or some other Cabinet member concerned with such matters would be welcomed. I explained that I had discussed the matter with Foreign Office and had provided papers pertinent to conference. The President replied that Foreign Minister Merikoski had spoken to him about conference although he had seen no papers. President promised study matter and talk to his Ministers about it. President raised topic of Finnish trade and said that besides German situation, Finland faces serious difficulties in years ahead on matters of trade but he had noticed that solutions arrived at by Finns had received the support of West. He hoped that support and understanding would continue. I asked whether he was concerned about enlargement of EEC. He said no, Finland was “following the situation from afar”; Finland will wait see how England, Switzerland, Austria and Sweden make out first. He said that representatives from “West” had given him to understand that “our action is only right one” and that policy of wait-and-see is, under the circumstances, wisest. This, he added, is also attitude of industrialists in Finland. He went on say that Finnish industrial expansion was going on rapidly and would continue to increase until 1965. For this reason it is all the more important that Finland assure itself of markets in West. Finland can arrange to build factories itself but needs support of West to insure continuing high level of trade to keep factories operating. He said this with obvious intent underscore that what Finland needs is trade, not just help in building industrial capacity. When we were discussing summer activities, I mentioned among other trips taken in Finland three day visit to Seppalas Island. President said that he had been ill this summer again with his old trouble, otherwise he had expected visit Seppalas same week-end. He felt illness was his gall bladder although the doctors have not been able to make definite diagnosis. He has been operated on twice but operations do not seem to have helped. He said he was just getting over the effects of his illness. I have heard from another well informed source outside government that he suffers from diabetes and for that reason always travels with physician in attendance. This source said that Kekkonen always suffers health troubles when subjected to strain or worry. Yesterday afternoon he appeared be in fairly good health although he showed his age more than when I last saw him. On taking leave, I thanked President for receiving me and told him I should like to see him again before long and would especially like see him after his visits to Soviet Union and France. He replied that he would be glad to see me then and added that if at any time I had anything on my mind I could call him. He said that he had hoped to have me at his summer place in Naantali but weather had been so bad that he was afraid to have anyone there this summer. “Next summer will have to be better”, he added jokingly. Throughout our entire conversation he was most friendly and relaxed and did not even hint at any controversial matters. Gufler 233. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FinlandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5/8–662. Secret. Drafted by Christensen; cleared by G/PM, PRCS, and the Department of Defense; and approved by Burdett. Repeated to London. Washington, September 8, 1962, 12:54 p.m. 55. Department considering how best proceed with plans to facilitate Finnish purchases in US of weapons not prohibited by Peace Treaty. Purpose of this action essentially to bolster position and determination of Finnish military, as one of the strongest pro-Western elements in Finland, and also to strengthen Finnish will to resist Soviet political and economic pressure. Embassy views requested on following: 1. In view of Finland’s public policy of neutrality no military aid type program for Finland is envisaged, no firm offer of military aid would be made, and no military or political commitment involved. It would, therefore, seem preferable to deal directly with the Finns at the Service level, and, in view of the missiles affair, to do so now (Embtel 59).Document 230. We would suggest to Finnish military authorities that we are prepared, in event Finns wish to purchase military items, to be accommodating with respect to terms and arrangements which take into account Finland’s special geographic and political position. We could inquire about list of military items which we understand Finns interested in buying from US. 2. This action could be taken with the Finnish Military attache in Washington by officials in DOD/ISA. Approach could also be made in Helsinki by Army attache directly with his Finnish military contacts. It might be desirable discuss directly with General Simelius perhaps ini-tially in Helsinki by the Army attache and then during his visit to US in October. 3. It may also be useful for Ambassador to inform Kekkonen (before his visit to USSR) along similar lines either before or after conversation with Simelius. This may, as suggested in Embtel 96,Telegram 96, August 24, reported that Gufler was seeking to arrange a series of meetings with Kekkonen to counter misimpressions of U.S. policy objectives in Finland. (Department of State, Central Files, 760E.11/8–2462) demonstrate our interest in Finland’s future, and while we have not, and do not now, look with favor on recent Finnish actions vis-à-vis the Soviet Union our willingness to make US military equipment available to Finland should serve to convince Kekkonen that he and Finland are not deserted by the West. It may also as suggested by the Embassy give useful opportunity to warn Kekkonen of dangers in placing too much reliance on USSR as source of weapons supply. Kekkonen would be informed that we are discussing subject directly with the Finnish military authorities, and that we are thinking in terms of Service to Service, and insofar as practicable, unpublicized transactions. Rusk 234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in FinlandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5612/9–1462. Secret. Drafted by Christensen; cleared by Burdett, PRCS, BNA, G/PM, and the Department of Defense; and approved by Johnson. Repeated to London. Washington, September 21, 1962, 5:56 p.m. 68. You should seek appointment with Kekkonen as far in advance his departure as feasible and inform him of our willingness to facilitate Finnish purchase from US sources of arms not prohibited by Peace Treaty. Believe Deptel 55 (as modified by Embtel 130)Telegram 55 is printed as Document 233. In telegram 130 from Helsinki, September 14, Gufler suggested he approach Kekkonen regarding the offer of U.S. military equipment at a discount. (Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5612/9–1462) contains adequate guidance. You may wish to stress that our proposals formulated in way to avoid any impingement on Finland’s neutrality which we recognize and support. Accordingly, no military aid type program is envisaged. Department concurs in soliciting Kekkonen’s views on procedures. Army attache should inform Simelius after you talk with Kekkonen and confine himself to Departmental guidance referred to above. He should state we would be glad discuss subject further with Simelius in Washington. In event either Kekkonen or Simelius raises subject of guided missiles, and our attitude thereto (Embtel 144)In telegram 144, September 20, Gufler responded that he welcomed the Department’s proposal that he inform Kekkonen of U.S. weapons purchase plans. He also requested guidance on issues of guided missiles and treaty revision. (Ibid., 760E.5612/9–2062) you and Army attache should state: The US wishes like the Finns to see Finnish neutrality strengthened and as our present offer demonstrates sympathizes with Finland’s desire improve its armed forces. However, what we have heard of Finland’s plans to acquire sophisticated weapons systems from USSR raises in our minds questions re (a) strategic and tactical thinking behind the proposed purchase and use these particular weapons, (b) the significance for Finland’s neutrality of dependence on USSR, and the relationships with USSR which this particular transaction involves. Moreover, from what we know of Finnish procurement plans purchases would be preponderantly from the USSR. Ambassador would welcome and report to Department President’s (or Simelius’) views. Finnish Military attache here will be advised after Department receives report your conversations. For Embassy London (Embtel 1180):In telegram 1180 from London, September 20, the Embassy reported that it had been unable to extract any comment from British officials about U.S. plans for supplying the Finns with weapons. (Ibid., 760E.5612/9–2062) You should inform FonOff that we have instructed Ambassador Gufler to see Kekkonen on arms matter early next week. Department of Defense concurs. Rusk 235. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5612/9–2962. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London. Helsinki, September 29, 1962, 9 p.m. 157. Reference: Deptel 68.Document 234. I called on President Kekkonen at 4 this afternoon and informed him as instructed that we are prepared arrange for Finland purchase US military equipment on favorable terms. I stressed that this was not gift or loan but offer arrange purchase terms and prices which would suit Finland’s special circumstances, taking into account need not embarrass or disturb Finland’s neutrality. I said I had no specific or detailed proposal present at this stage but was seeking President’s comments and advice. I added, that (A) no military aid program for Finland was envisaged, (B) that no offer of military aid would be made and (C) that no political commitments were involved. President expressed his appreciation for offer. He said that there are large gaps between plans for procurement military equipment and ability Finnish Government realize them and he therefore is grateful for our proposal. Finland is prepared buy weapons from different parts of world in line with its policy of neutrality. He made special point of stressing that in principle Finland has nothing against purchasing military equipment from US. He said that purchases from Soviet Union were made only because of availability of ruble funds. He took pains explain that ruble loan made to Finland in 1958 was originally intended for industrial and railway equipment. When, however, it was not possible find in Soviet Union equipment that would meet Finnish needs, large surplus remained which Finnish defense forces proposed be used for arms purchases. That is the history, he concluded, and “under no circumstances would I have sought loan from Soviet Union for purchase of arms.” In regard to manner of proceeding he said that he would take matter up with Finnish Cabinet at earliest possible time. He explained that as first step and before military take over matter, it would be wisest for him to get “political agreement” by consultations within Finnish Government. After that, he himself or some member of the Cabinet will get in touch with me. He told me that General Simelius would be informed of content of our talk and that matter could be taken up with Simelius in Washington. He suggested that Simelius might be shown equipment which we are willing sell and perhaps also equipment that Simelius himself asks about. I asked President whether we might expect some answer from him before Simelius goes to US. He replied that time is so short that it may be difficult and that perhaps it might be better continue our discussion after Simelius returns from his visit to US. Just before our departure, President said that Finnish Foreign Minister Merikoski, who is now in US at UN, has an appointment see Secretary Rusk on October 7. Subjects which Merikoski will take up, he said, were “routine and current.” He also said that Merikoski had gone to Paris to see his French counterpart to explain the Finnish situation prior to President Kekkonen’s visit there in October. President did not say whether he would inform Merikoski of our offer. We assume that he may, although his use of words “routine and current” may have been intended to imply the contrary. Frank Friberg who acted as interpreter and I have impression that President Kekkonen was gratified with our offer. We have additional impressions that: 1. Simelius may do some “shopping and exploring” in US and this may involve treaty modification and guided missile questions. 2. Extent to which Finns decide take advantage proposal likely depend on what is offered representatives beginning with Simelius and up-to-dateness of material offered in comparison that available elsewhere. 3. It would be unwise pending further information from Kekkonen make any further approach any Finns in Helsinki. Unless instructed to contrary Army attache will not approach Simelius here but leave matter to be taken up with him in Washington. View President’s expected absence on visits to Soviet Union and France and other factors affecting timing as well as possibility that Finns may await report from Simelius after his visit to US believe we cannot expect definitive reply until his return. Gufler 236. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.5612/10–762. Secret. Drafted by Davis on October 8 and approved in S on October 11. The meeting was held at the Waldorf Astoria. The source text is labeled “Part III of V.” Separate memoranda of this conversation are ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2153. New York, September 1962 SecDel/MC/137 SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE SEVENTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York, October 7, 1962, 11 a.m–noon. PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Richard H. Davis Finland Foreign Minister Merikoski Ambassador Seppala Mr. Max Jakobson, Director Political Department SUBJECT Acquisition of Ground-to-Air Missiles by Finland Having touched on Finland’s policy of neutrality and President Kekkonen’s visit last year to the USA, the Foreign Minister said he wished to turn to a more important question which had been the subject of previous discussions. This question was the Finnish plan to acquire defensive air missiles. However, last spring the Finns found their plan to buy anti-aircraft missiles from the USSR using their ruble credit there had raised some doubts in the US. As it became clear to the Finns that linking the question of the reinterpretation of the Peace Treaty to these particular purchases had become a liability to Finland in their foreign relations, the Finnish Government had decided not to go ahead on these purchases. By this decision the Finns wanted to demonstrate that they were not acting under compulsion from any quarter in this matter. The Foreign Minister continued that the acquisition of anti-aircraft missiles was not so important for purely military reasons. The Finns realize their military potential is not great. From the point of view of creating internal confidence in the Finnish potential to defend themselves, the acquisition of missiles is of considerable value. The Foreign Minister expressed satisfaction that the Finnish point of view has now been understood by the UK and the USA. He wished to extend to the Secretary his personal appreciation that this matter has been brought to a conclusion. It would now be possible for the Finns to modernize their defense forces in this important respect. The British Government’s decision to accept Finnish reinterpretation of the Peace Treaty and the willingness of the US to sell conventional armaments were regarded by the Finnish Govt. as expressions of confidence in its policy of neutrality. The sole purpose of Finnish efforts to modernize and strengthen their defense capacity is to strengthen their security and neutrality. As to what amount of armaments including ground-to-air missiles the Finns were prepared to purchase, the Foreign Minister stated this would be considered by the Finnish Cabinet after the return of President Kekkonen from his visit to the Soviet Union. He could only say at this time that the Finns are taking into account in deciding on what purchases to make the possible effect on Finnish neutrality. He emphasized that at the moment the Finns had no plans for the purchase of ground-to-air missiles. The British had made certain proposals in the past including the offer of Vigilant anti-tank missiles. These British offers will be considered at the same time the Cabinet meets. He reiterated that though in the past the Finns had planned to buy specific missiles from the USSR, at the moment there were no definite plans. Turning to the subject of aircraft purchases, the Foreign Minister pointed out that Finland had up to the present time purchased military aircraft from France, Sweden and the UK. The Finns were now negotiating for the purchase of a small number of Soviet aircraft—one squadron of MIG fighters. This type of fighter plane can carry air-to-air missiles but until now the Finns have not negotiated with the Soviets for the purchase of such missiles. This squadron would contain only 15 combat planes though in addition some training planes would be involved. The Foreign Minister said he had wanted to inform the Secretary in general terms of the Finnish position at this stage on the acquisition of defensive armaments. The Finns regarded it as most important to clarify their position on purchases of armaments. He also wished to refer to the information recently received from Ambassador Gufler by President Kekkonen that the US is willing to sell conventional armaments to Finland. As the President told Ambassador Gufler, the Finns have received this news with the greatest satisfaction. What the Finns may be able to buy from the US will have to be considered carefully when the Cabinet reviews the over-all problem of armament purchases. The Foreign Minister then referred to the disastrous year which Finland had experienced for its agricultural production and remarked on the great drain on the Finnish budget. However, he thought that some arrangements could be made for purchasing certain armaments in the US. The Secretary said he wished to emphasize that the primary responsibility in regard to the reinterpretation of the Finnish Peace Treaty rested upon the parties to that Treaty. It was not for the US to reinterpret the Treaty in place of the signatories to the Treaty. However personally the Secretary said he was a little puzzled by the underlying military rationale for the purchase of missiles now being considered by Finland. Missiles were a very expensive business. They require elaborate equipment, complicated radar, high technical skill and training and expensive construction work. For instance, the Secretary cited the limited number of ground-to-air missiles supplied to Cuba by the USSR which we estimate to cost in the neighborhood of $60 million. Subsequently the Secretary said he would like to make some further observations. He thought careful consideration should be given to the circumstances of Finland’s military position in regard to its geographical location and its relation to the continent of Europe. Besides the factor of expense of installing these air defense missiles and the training of personnel, the problem of war in Europe should be seen in terms of a rocket war. Here the Secretary remarked that while we of course hoped there would be no war, if his conversation with the Foreign Minister was to have any reality on the issue of armaments purchases, it must be spoken about in terms of the possibility of war. In the age of rockets manned aircraft were beginning to be obsolete and the Finns might not find any to shoot at with ground-to-air missiles. In his opinion the primary defense of Finland was not to become a target for either side in the event of war. The warring powers would probably be so heavily involved with themselves that these countries which had no targets would be left alone because there would be nothing worth shooting at. The Secretary said he did not wish to comment further on the expense of acquiring missiles from the Soviet Union since he was not certain the value the Finns put on their ruble credit. But if the Finns plan to spend their own resources for the purchase of missiles, he would counsel them to consider this matter very carefully. Missiles which other countries were willing to supply were in all probability already obsolete—first generation missiles—or otherwise these countries would not be willing to sell them to Finland. The Secretary reiterated that his comments did not cancel his earlier remark that the question of the reinterpretation of the Peace Treaty was basically an issue for the signatories to the Treaty. However, he thought as a friend to Finland he ought to express his personal puzzlement at the Finnish desire to acquire missiles given Finland’s limited resources. Foreign Minister Merikoski expressed surprise that the Secretary could look so deeply into one of so many countries in the world. He said their ruble credit in the USSR was a commercial credit and therefore it did have value. It was not a gift from the Soviet Union. As he had already remarked, the Finns realize their planned purchase of ground-to-air missiles was not of great value from the military viewpoint. The Finnish idea was to have some kind of air defense which their population supports. Even at that he realized this would not be a completely effective defense. Their main purpose was to strengthen the belief and confidence of the Finnish people in their government’s efforts to be able to defend themselves. This project would not run into anything like the cost mentioned by the Secretary in regard to Cuba. They had previously planned to purchase from the USSR only three batteries costing in the neighborhood of $12 million. They had already made a contract in the UK for the necessary radar amounting to approximately four million pounds. The Secretary observed that his remarks had related only to ground-to-air missiles and not to anti-tank missiles or other armaments. He added that if we were sending an official note to Finland, we would not be saying the things said today. The Foreign Minister commented the Secretary had mentioned the training of personnel for these complex ground-to-air missiles. He wished to note that the question of training of crews had not yet come up with the USSR. The portion of ruble credit allocated for purchases from the USSR of defensive weapons by the Finnish military had already been used up so if there were to be new purchases it would require a new decision by the Finnish Government. The Secretary observed that training ground crews for missiles requires about twelve to eighteen months. If the purchase of air-to-ground missiles meant that crews would be furnished by the supplying country in the intervening time, this could create embarrassment for Finnish neutrality. For instance in Cuba if their defensive air missiles were to be used in the next year, we would have to assume that they would be serviced by Soviet crews. This question of trained crews could present difficult political problems. The Foreign Minister asserted that the only current training project concerned the training in the Soviet Union of Finnish air officers for aircraft purchased in the USSR. There would be no Soviet instructors in Finland. The Secretary remarked that he was glad he was not a member of the Finnish Cabinet and had to participate in decisions on the question of purchasing missiles. This question involved the position of Finland in relation to the total military picture in Europe. If the Finns had a different geographical position, the problems might be different. Referring to the expense of sophisticated weapons, the Secretary observed somewhat laughingly that some officers in the Pentagon have a saying in regard to weapons that “if it shoots, it’s obsolete”. Ambassador Seppala stated that the Finns have an army which needs to be modernized. They could not be armed just with old rifles. Here the psychological element was very important. Small countries can’t defend themselves but they need to have the potential to make a “bang”. The Secretary concluded by referring to an African friend who recently had asked for the US to supply his country with supersonic aircraft. He had pointed out to this African friend that the cost of these aircraft would be enough to establish and run two universities. Again the Secretary emphasized that this issue was basically a matter for the signatories to the Peace Treaty. 237. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.56/10–1562. Secret. Helsinki, October 15, 1962, 5 p.m. 172. Reference: Deptel 85.Telegram 85, October 12, reported the concern of the Departments of Defense and State that Simelius would expect to reach prompt agreement on military equipment. (Ibid., 760E.5612/10–1062) Believe it most unlikely Simelius will expect conclude prompt agreement on purchase US military equipment, given limitations placed on his authority by President Kekkonen and budgetary situation. At same time, our offer of discount sales has inevitably affected nature Simelius visit in Finnish eyes. Would be most unfortunate, particularly in our relations with Finnish military, if we not prepared respond to reasonable demonstration of interest in hardware on part Simelius within his limited authority. Circumstance that Kekkonen immediately passed on information regarding our offer to military and did not hold knowledge for himself or restrict it to purely governmental-political circles best evidence we have that he has taken offer seriously and is prepared pursue further. It is, therefore, all the more important not to take any action here in advance Simelius visit that might discourage Finnish military or call into question in their minds seriousness our offer. Believe Simelius realistic enough to be satisfied with general survey types military items we are prepared to have him see, and will readily appreciate that declassification and related security problems will preclude full disclosure of others at this time. Gufler 238. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.56/10–2662. Secret. Drafted by Owen. Washington, October 26, 1962. SUBJECT List of Military Materiel In Which Finnish Armed Forces Are Interested PARTICIPANTS Richard R. Seppala, Ambassador of Finland William C. Burdett, Deputy Assistant Secretary, EUR William M. Owen, Officer in Charge, Swedish/Finnish Affairs Ambassador Seppala referred to the British decision in favor of reinterpretation of the Finnish Peace Treaty, to the Secretary’s recent conversation with Foreign Minister Merikoski, and to the information conveyed to President Kekkonen by Ambassador Gufler that the United States would be willing to sell military materiel to Finland. Regarding the latter subject, Ambassador Seppala said that General Simelius, Chief of the Finnish Defense Forces, had brought with him on his current trip to the United States a list of military items in which the Finns were interested, and that the list had been presented to General Wheeler, Chief of Staff of the US Army, who was his host. The list was also discussed by General Simelius with General Maxwell Taylor, who had indicated that General Wheeler would be the point of contact in discussions regarding the list. The Ambassador said that he had not been aware of the list beforehand, but that no harm had been done. Ambassador Seppala then said that he wished to inform the Department of State of the list and to give us exactly the same list. He said that he desired to stress that it was only a tentative list, and that he did not know how orthodox it was, but that it gave some indication of the items in which the Finnish armed forces were interested. What they would actually purchase, he said, depended on the rather limited Finnish budgetary resources and the decisions yet to be made by the Cabinet or the Defense Council. He recalled that Generals Taylor and Wheeler had observed that on some items there would be no difficulty but that others would have to be studied by the Departments of State and Defense. Mr. Burdett expressed appreciation to Ambassador Seppala for making the list available. He said that we had anticipated that General Simelius would be informed of this question, and asked how the matter had been left in the Pentagon in terms of the next step. Ambassador Seppala said that as he understood it there was not enough time while General Simelius was in Washington for a thorough study of the list to be made, but that when such a study had been completed Ambassador Seppala or his Military attache would be informed. Mr. Burdett referred to the Ambassador’s earlier comment regarding the treaty reinterpretation question and noted that the Secretary had made certain comments on this matter during his conversation with Foreign Minister Merikoski on October 7. Mr. Burdett said that we have nothing to add on that subject and that the US offer of military equipment had been in our minds for some time and was not related to the other problem. Ambassador Seppala reiterated that he hoped the list would be handled on a very confidential basis. A brief discussion of various aspects of the present Cuban situation then followed, with Mr. Burdett providing current information regarding the quarantine and the other regulations regarding shipping to Cuba. Ambassador Seppala commented that the Finns were especially interested in the impact of developments on the Berlin situation. 239. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760E.11/12–1462. Secret. Repeated to Bonn, London, Paris, and Moscow. Helsinki, December 14, 1962, 11 p.m. 207. Department telegram 96.Telegram 96, December 7, suggested that Gufler offer to discuss in Washington during a return for consultations any subjects that might be of interest to Kekkonen and to request any comments Kekkonen might make about his talks with other European leaders. (Ibid., 760E.11/12–562) I called on President Kekkonen this afternoon accompanied by Friberg as interpreter. Told him I was returning to Washington for consultation and volunteered take back any message he might want to convey. He thanked me and said he first wanted say as Foreign Minister Merikoski said to Secretary Rusk in November [October]See Document 236. that he is gratified with direction in which Finnish-American relations have developed. Next he turned to topic our last meeting (Embassy telegram 157),Document 235. offer of favorable terms for procurement of arms. He has given matter great deal of thought and now believes that, because of Cuban situation, he will have postpone taking advantage of offer. Whenever it is considered, he fears leak will inevitably occur and, if it is considered now, Soviets might interpret US proposal as effort to follow up American success in Cuba by pushing into area close to Soviet Union. Soviets, he explained, are so suspicious that they react to much smaller moves and he is afraid Finland cannot afford take chance right now. I asked President whether postponement meant that he was still interested in offer. He replied, “yes, but at time that would present more favorable opportunity.” He added that he wanted underscore that his actions were not prompted by anything said by Soviets to him or any other Finnish officials but that his decision was based on his personal weighing of risks and familiarity with Soviets. President made some general comments about economic situation in Finland, saying it had slowed down but that developments were not too bad. Majority Cabinet had brought political peace in nation except for one question which was presently timely, matter of forest workers pay, which could cause government fall although he believed and hoped difficulties could be ironed out as it would be shame have government fall over such minor issue. President said had found good deal of sympathy in France particularly on question of trade. De Gaulle had asked him how development of EEC had affected Finnish trade. He answered it had not affected Finnish trade as yet because Finland’s biggest competitors, Sweden and Austria, have been in same situation as Finland. De Gaulle promised keep that in mind in future. Re his Soviet visit President said that he had already fully informed Foy Kohler in Moscow.Kohler reported on his talk with Kekkonen in telegram 996 from Moscow, October 17. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.60E/10–1762) He went on say, however, that Khrushchev had told him that he did not foresee trouble over Cuba. As to Berlin, Khrushchev had repeated his earlier harshly-worded stand for separate peace on Soviet conditions but had set no time limit. Khrushchev had said Soviets were not “prisoners of time.” President said he had difficult task re Finno-Soviet trade. He had tried without success persuade Khrushchev agree handle payment negotiations separately from trade negotiations. Later on when trade negotiations were held in Finland, Soviets did give in. President explained that it would have been bad for employment in woodworking industry, which is already working at only 75 percent capacity, if some agreement could not have been reached on continued export Finnish forest products to Soviet Union. Soviets have now agreed maintain their imports up to five-year trade agreement level. Finns pressed for more payment in convertible currency in trade with Soviet Union but so far without success. Finns now getting about 9 million rubles in convertible currency but have asked Soviets raise this to 18 million to cover amounts Finns are obliged pay for electrical machinery and other equipment procured outside Finland for installation in icebreakers and other completed products exported to Soviet Union under trade agreement. President said Khrushchev had made no reference to differences between China and Soviet Union. Kekkonen’s personal impression is that matters developing badly. He said that Khrushchev’s strong words on China were big surprise to him as, despite fact that differences existed, he did not expect them be brought out so openly. He added it obvious that big changes taking place in Chinese politics. He remarked that Soviets have problem of resisting pressure from China while trying maintain their position in West. He offered opinion that despite Cuba and China’s reaction, Khru-shchev’s position had only become stronger, speculations in Western press notwithstanding. Khrushchev’s health was good, he added. In course discussion, President referred to Kissinger “Nuclear Power and Foreign Policy”.Reference is to Kissinger’s book published by the Council of Foreign Relations in 1957. He thought Kissinger’s ideas formed basis for much of U.S. strategy and preparedness and termed book very enlightening. He foresees difficulties in NATO countries accepting basis of this strategy, however. Kekkonen’s remarks re Rusk–Merikoski conversation gave me favorable opening raise with him Maakansa editorial of 28 September attacking U.S. handling of Cuba, about which Secretary Rusk had spoken to Merikoski (Embassy’s A–330).Dated October 22. (Department of State, Central Files, 760E.12/10–2262) I explained that Finnish press is closely read in Department of State and that Maakansa known as organ close to government as is Paasikivi Society’s publication Ulkopolitikka (Foreign Policy). I added that article in Maakansa to my knowledge occasioned first protest ever made by us about Finnish newspaper item. President’s reaction was very conciliatory. He explained article had appeared while he was away and while chief editor Sorvali was away. As soon as Sorvali returned and learned what had happened, he called Kekkonen to express his regrets and promised convey those regrets to someone he knew in American Embassy. President said, “and I hope he has done this”. (Note: Up to today no expression of regret by Sorvali has been passed on to me.) President deplored incident, said that damaging accidents happen of which this was one and gave assurances it would not happen again. As to publication Ulkopolitikka, President said he did not consider its articles too dangerous. It contained anti-German articles and other critical opinions similar to those expressed by some organs of British Labor Party but there was nothing really serious in them. Article in Maakansa was in another category, however, which he regrets. Perhaps, he added, this will be good lesson for chief editor, but it unfortunate that accident happened at such bad time. In closing conversation President asked me convey his personal regards to President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk. Gufler 240. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Finland. Secret. A cover sheet and table of contents are not printed. Washington, January 1963. FINLAND Guidelines of U.S. Policy and Operations I. Basic Approach Finland’s vulnerability to Soviet political and military power, and its established policies of neutrality shape the form and substance of U.S.-Finnish relations. President Kekkonen’s belief that he can best handle Finnish-Soviet relations alone without the support of the Western countries, and his judgment that Finnish independence and security are dependent on a clear policy of friendship for the USSR serve to emphasize the need for delicacy in U.S.-Finnish official exchanges. Such attributes of Finnish national character as integrity and tenacious courage, when united in common endeavor, give the country its greatest strength. Our policies should seek to direct these genuine Finnish impulses to the purpose of defending Finnish independence and resisting Soviet pressures. We should endeavor to change the chronic Finnish bias to define and interpret Finnish national policies in terms of anticipated reactions of the USSR. To do this we must convince the Finns that the destiny of their country lies with a confident and strong Western community of nations. This involves strengthening and increasing the economic, political and cultural ties which link Finland with the free world. It means that we should encourage greater cooperation between non-Communist Finnish political parties in order to strengthen Finland from within. As Finland’s self-confidence and internal strength grow, and as the Finns show greater determination to stand firm against pressures from the USSR, we should be prepared to give more direct support to the country. For the foreseeable future, however, we should take care to avoid commitments which cannot be sustained, and—insofar as possible—a direct confrontation with the USSR in Finland. [Here follows Chapter II. Background.] III. Objectives 1. The maintenance of an independent, democratic, and genuinely neutral Finland. 2. Reduce Finland’s vulnerability to economic and political pressures from the USSR. IV. Lines of Action A. Internal Political Affairs 1. Continue to assist those democratic parties which are capable of capturing popular support from the Communists.’ 2. Use our influence to promote Social Democratic Party unity under non-extremist leadership; encourage the Scandinavian labor parties to use their influence to this end. 3. Use our influence to promote a unified non-Communist labor movement within the framework of the SAJ; continue to encourage the Scandinavian trade union organizations, the ICFTU, the International Trade Union Secretariat (ITS), and the AFL–CIO, to use their influence to this end. 4. Seek to reduce the differences between the non-Communist political leaders. B. External Political Affairs 5. Endeavor, on appropriate occasions, to persuade President Kekkonen, and other influential Finnish leaders, that (a) Continued accommodation to the interests of the USSR endangers Finnish independence and impairs Finnish neutrality. (b) Finnish independence and neutrality can be safeguarded only by firmness against Soviet encroachments. (c) As the U.S. has, and will maintain, overall military superiority over the Soviet Union, Finnish independence and territorial integrity is not dependent on the favor of the USSR. (d) Concepts of a neutralized Scandinavia are not in the interests of a free Scandinavia. (e) Finland is vulnerable to internal subversion by international Communism and should take corrective measures while they are still possible. 6. Stimulate the interest of other Western countries in Finland and encourage those with special ties, such as the UK and especially the Scandinavian countries through such regional organizations as the Nordic Council, to assume greater responsibility for inducing Finland to resist Soviet pressure. 7. Continue the information, educational and cultural exchange programs, and promote high level visits between Finland and the U.S. and other free countries. 8. Support the candidacies of qualified Finns for UN positions. 9. Expand and invigorate ties between Americans of Finnish descent and the Finnish people. 10. In the United Nations, continue to encourage Finland to vote for issues on their merits rather than adhere to a rigid neutrality on all East-West issues. C. Economic Affairs 11. In cooperation with other Western European countries, actively promote Finnish affiliation with the OECD, and active participation in the IMF, IBRD, and the GATT. 12. Encourage Finnish trade with Western Europe; specifically, (a) stimulate common Western efforts to reduce the dependence of Finnish export industries on Soviet bloc markets. (b) take steps in the OECD and elsewhere to avoid discrimination against Finnish exports. 13. Consider providing investment guarantees to Finland on a case by case basis as applications are forthcoming from U.S. investors. 14. Promote U.S.-Finnish trade including such steps as: (a) periodically sending trade missions to Finland; (b) participating in Finnish trade fairs; (c) encouraging Finnish participation in U.S. trade exhibitions. 15. Encourage Finland, insofar as it expresses a need for foreign exchange assistance, to seek the necessary financing from Western European countries or international lending agencies, although the Finns should understand that the U.S. would have no objection to their seeking financing in the New York market or to their filing applications with the Export-Import Bank in accordance with that institution’s normal procedures. D. Military Affairs 16. Make available, through sale at reduced prices, military equipment to the Finnish Armed Forces. All sales will be effected on a case by case basis in the light of security classification and availability. 17. Encourage the exchange of visits between U.S. and Finnish military authorities. 18. Demonstrate the power of the U.S. military establishment, and the achievements of U.S. military sciences. 19. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] 20. “Show the flag” regularly in Finland through visits of Naval vessels, military aircraft, demonstration units, and other military organizations. 21. Encourage the build-up of Finnish Defense Forces to Treaty levels. [Here follows Chapter V. Contingencies.] 241. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 Fin. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Moscow, Stockholm, Copenhagen, Oslo, and Reykjavik. Ambassador Gufler left post on April 18. Carl T. Rowan, whom President Kennedy appointed as Ambassador on March 9, presented his credentials on May 21. Helsinki, May 30, 1963, 11 p.m. 375. In call today on Max Jakobson, Chief of Foreign Office Political Section, I raised question of timing and purpose of Kekkonen speech advocating Scandinavian nuclear-free zone (Embtel 373).Telegram 373, May 29, reported on Kekkonen’s initial public proposal for a Nordic nuclear-free zone. (Ibid., POL 15–1 Fin) Pointed out that part Finnish press already emphasizing fact that speech came two days after Khrushchev urged nuclear-free zone in Balkans, and in wake of NATO meeting in Ottawa, and that, barring explanation, some might conclude Kekkonen working one side of street while Khrushchev working other. Emphasized that I asserting this frankly and without instructions from Department because Kekkonen had indicated to me that he wanted avoid US public reaction toward Finland similar to that toward Yugoslavia (Embtel 359).Telegram 359, May 21, reported the substance of Rowan’s discussions with Kekkonen during the presentation of his credentials. (Ibid., POL 17–1 US–Fin) Jakobson made these points: 1. Kekkonen speech totally unrelated any proposal by Khrushchev. Kekkonen had said for some time Finland must express views this subject and had decided during Yugoslavia visit that should be soon. 2. When reports on Nilsson visit to Soviet Union indicated no test ban agreement in sight, Kekkonen decided he must speak. 3. Kekkonen deliberately waited until after Ottawa conference so no one assume he trying influence Denmark, Norway and weaken NATO. Kekkonen and advisers “very aware some might think speech indicated collusion with Russians”. 4. Said speech given with clear knowledge there would be “no tangible results.” 5. Most important, Jakobson indicated, (this very sensitive) was Kekkonen feeling that he had to make it clear that Finland unwilling ever to be repository nuclear weapons for any power. Clear implication was that Kekkonen foresees possibility that, as reaction to MLF, or new Berlin crisis, Soviets might demand Finland permit stationing Soviet nuclear weapons Finnish soil, thus provoking political crisis similar to and perhaps worse than that of 1961. Kekkonen feels that speech gives Russians “advance notice.” Whether speech represents nationalistic shrewdness on Kekkonen’s part, or whether he softening Scandinavia for what we perceive to be “Soviet charm offensive,” I do not pretend know. But believe it wise at this juncture for us to accept Jakobson explanation at face value, barring evidence contrary. Jakobson spoke at length about fact Finland “takes Western friendship for granted” and “perhaps speaks too much about need for Soviet friendship.” He and Kekkonen obviously aware of growing criticism and uneasiness in West. My view that we should show no nervousness, no excess distrust, for period, while giving government chance to explain and show effectiveness its tacks. It essential source be protected.In telegram 233 to Helsinki, June 3, the Department of State replied that it concurred with Rowan’s recommendations and noted that the Kekkonen proposal had received a cool reception from the other Scandinavian states, obviating the need for any formal initiative with Finland by the United States. (Ibid., POL 15–1 Fin) Rowan 242. Letter From Foreign Secretary Home to Secretary of State RuskSource: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Secret and Personal. London, July 30, 1963. My Dear Dean: As you will know, the Prime Minister is making a brief visit to Finland from August 6 to 9. I have been warned by our Ambassador at Helsinki that the Finns may well ask how soon we can supply them with a small quantity—perhaps a dozen—surface-to-air missiles for training purposes. So far as availability in the United Kingdom is concerned, we should be able to supply the Finns with as many second-hand Bloodhound I missiles as they are likely to want some time towards the middle of next year. You will remember that we talked about the supply of guided weapons to Finland in New York on September 27 last yearTheir discussion took place during Home’s visit to New York for the U.N. General Assembly. Home informed Rusk that the Finns had again raised the issue of missile sales. The British would insist on a detailed statement of Finnish plans, but planned to go forward with the sale once the information was analyzed. Rusk restated U.S. concerns, but agreed to a reevaluation of the U.S. position after Finland had made its detailed presentation. (Telegram 549 to Helsinki, September 28, 1962; ibid., Central Files, 760E.5612/9–2862) and in the aircraft between New York and Washington on September 30 before we lunched at the White House.No record of this conversation has been found. You said that what concerned you was the danger that the Finns might get large quantities of these weapons and deploy them as a barrage across Finland. I undertook to see what could be done to avoid this danger and said that if we could get satisfactory assurances from the Finns we should wish to go ahead and sell them some weapons. I understood that you might be prepared to see the matter go through on this basis. I would not have raised this business with you again in the ordinary way. But I am told that at the technical security talks which were held in Washington in December last and April this year your people maintained that United States agreement was required before the release to third countries of components or weapons of British manufacture but deriving from United States basic concepts even when these concepts had subsequently been published. The Bloodhound I would be affected by this since its fuze derives from United States basic information which has in the meantime been published. I should say at once that our people disagree with the interpretation of the relevant agreements which your people maintained last December. It was for this reason that we held, throughout our discussions with you last year over the question of Finnish acquisition of guided weapons, that the technical security angle was no obstacle so far as we could see. Nevertheless, we naturally do not want to ignore the position which your people have adopted in deciding what we should say to the Finns when they ask us when we can supply them with guided weapons. On the other hand, it would, I think, make nonsense of the conditions which, with your views in mind, we attached to our agreement to the Finnish Treaty re-interpretation, if we were now to have to tell the Finns that we could not supply the weapons. Since we asked them to undertake to get at least as many guided weapons from the West as from the East, we would, in effect, be nullifying our agreement in what they would be bound to regard as a very dubious manner. I am advised, moreover, that the security angle is not really relevant. In the first place, a recent appreciation which we have sent to your people shows that the Russians are already equipped to take counter-measures on the frequencies which you use in fuzes similar to the Bloodhound I fuze. Secondly, as I imagine you will have heard, we have now learnt to our dismay that Colonel WennerstromColonel Stig Wennerstrom, a retired Swedish Air Force officer, was convicted in Stockholm of espionage for the Soviet Union on June 12. has passed details of the Bloodhound to the Russians. So even if the Russians had to rely on knowledge of our fuze to work out counter-measures against yours, we should now have to assume that they had obtained this knowledge. If the Finns do ask us what we can do about guided weapons during our visit there early next month, I should very much like to be able to tell them that we are ready to supply them with refurbished Bloodhound I next year. I hope that you will agree that this is important and I trust that you will be prepared to see the matter through if there should be doubts in any quarter.Tosec 4 to Secretary Rusk at Moscow, August 8, reported that an interagency committee recommended approving the sale of missiles to Finland provided the missiles were used to defend larger cities. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 12–5 Fin–UK) Yours ever Alec 243. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 12–5 Fin–USSR. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Moscow, Olso, Stockholm, and Copenhagen. Helsinki, August 20, 1963, 1 p.m. 100. Pass to DIA. Max Jakobson, Chief of Foreign Office political section, has denied categorically that Finland is about to buy Russian missiles of any type. During discussion after dinner at residence, he disclosed that Finland has given British written guarantee that at least half surface-to-air missiles will be bought from them. “It is inconceivable that we would break that agreement,” he assured me, adding that GOF will not wish negotiate with Russians without reading in [from?] British. I raised subject by saying I had heard rumors Finland was eager discuss Bloodhound I with Macmillan and wondered if anything decided in wake of his visit. Jakobson replied that Kekkonen had told Macmillan Finland interested, but short of money, so question in abeyance. I pointed out that money question different with regard Russia and asked state missile negotiations with Soviets. Jakobson stated categorically that no such negotiations underway. I replied I pleased to hear this in view of recurring rumors that missiles deal with Soviets imminent. Said I knew GOF aware that one-sided deal would leave some people feeling they had been duped in agreeing to reinterpretation peace treaty. It then that Jakobson mentioned written guarantees and said I would “wager your life” on fact Finland not cooking up separate missile deal with Soviets. (While Embassy knew of pledge to British, this first word we had had of “written guarantees”. Will check this with British colleague in discussion today.) Discussion with Jakobson [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] investigation both indicate original Air attache report about SA–3 deal completely wrong. Regret any needless excitement there, but known reliability of source prompted quick reaction here. Either top Finn lied to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Air Force contact, or [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] guilty of terribly sloppy intelligence work. Rowan 244. Telegram From the Embassy in Finland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US (Johnson). Confidential. Vice President Johnson visited Finland during a September 2–17 trip to the Scandinavian countries. Helsinki, September 7, 1963, midnight. 163. CODEL Johnson. Vice President accompanied by Ambassador met with President Kekkonen, Prime Minister Karjalainen and Foreign Ministry representatives for over an hour this morning. Embassy view of session well stated by Prime Minister, who told Ambassador at luncheon, “the talks were most helpful. Most useful. President Kekkonen was delighted.” Following is uncleared memcon subject to amendment upon review: Finland’s relations with the Soviets and the West—after brief discussion of Vice President’s program during preceding hours, President Kekkonen stressed his appreciation for President Kennedy’s understanding of Finland’s foreign policy, expressed during Kekkonen’s visit to Washington. He took Vice President’s visit as proof of that understanding. Kekkonen pointed out that even though Finnish Government crisis in progress, it did not inhibit foreign or economic policy discussions since in these fields changes of government had no effect. Vice President stated that Kennedy administration’s most stressing objective was search for world peace and that this was basis of President Kennedy’s comprehension of Finland’s neutrality policy. However, President Kennedy was equally anxious that Finland remain strong in order to defend itself. Vice President stressed US belief that only the strong can be free and independent. Kekkonen agreed with statement but explained that Finland felt question of global war or peace was beyond its competence. Therefore Finland concentrated on building economic strength; it must continue to increase living standards in order that Soviets not overtake it and win Finnish workers to Communist ideology. Unemployment was therefore Finland’s gravest danger—particularly among industrial workers, among whom 10,000 unemployed more dangerous than 100,000 foresters or farmers without work. Vice President reaffirmed President Kennedy’s explicit recognition of Finland’s right to follow policy of avoiding entangling alliances. He stated that US wanted every country to be as free to choose its policy as in US. Although present post-test ban treaty atmosphere was encouraging, progress depended on continued maintenance of our strength. Vice President promised US would remain strong and cautious in pursuit of peace. In return he asked that Finland continue its efforts to avoid entanglements with either side during any period of more relaxed East-West relations. President Kekkonen responded that Finland would continue this policy regardless of whether tension in East-West relations lessened. Finland would maintain its independence in either event. In fact Finland’s determination was so solid that Finns were surprised when foreign statesmen sought reassurance on this point. Vice President pointed out that under type of pressure characteristic of October Cuban crisis it was not easy to forecast how even most confident individuals might react. Kekkonen replied that if Cuba had led to war, all policies and all resolves would have counted for naught. Trade and aid problems—President Kekkonen asked Vice President to bring to attention of American Government question of AID competition with Finnish efforts to sell paper mill machinery to Turkey. He explained Finnish grievance that after three years of negotiation, when Turks were ready to agree to sale financed by a 10-year aid loan, AID by offering 20 year credit at lower interest had broken up negotiation. Ambassador Seppala confirmed President’s statements. Kekkonen continued that in another similar case involving Pakistan, Finland feared repetition of this episode. Ambassador Rowan asserted AID not deliberately trying to undercut Finland. We trying bolster specific sector Turkish economy. Turks had indicated it not really economically desirable take short-term proposal of Finns. Kekkonen stated Finland could not perceive logic in US urging other developed countries to help LDCs and then wasting its own resources by undercutting aid attempts so inspired. Finland would like to take matter up in Washington through Ambassador Seppala and perhaps by sending special emissary to hold talks with US Government. Vice President expressed his willingness to set up such meeting. He stated American policy in case of Turkish paper mill was that issue was for Turks to decide. If Turkey preferred to change from an inefficient government paper mill to privately owned one, that was its privilege. However, Vice President said, whichever choice was made there should be opportunity for Finnish bids to be offered. Kekkonen agreed this policy was reasonable. It might be that Turkish mill matter was too far along to be reversed, but he hoped that discussions could avoid future problems. Vice President then reaffirmed American willingness to discuss matter fully in Washington, which Kekkonen agreed to gratefully. Turning briefly to other trade matters, Kekkonen stated that Finnish trade figures during last two years showed good progress. Vice President jokingly declared that if such successful roving salesman as Kekkonen visited America again, America’s balance of payments might be damaged to such degree we would have to seek Finnish aid. Kekkonen interjected humorously that he hoped this would take place. Vice President expressed US intention to send trade mission to Finland in May 1964 and to study possibility of participation in a trade fair in Finland in September 1964. Kekkonen welcomed this news, pointing out also that during 1961 US share of Finland’s trade rose from seventh place to fifth, surpassing France and Netherlands. Vice President noted that last year US imported $60 million worth of Finnish goods and exported $58 million worth. Vice President also noted that trade is great tool of freedom, explaining that this was why liberal trade policy was essential part of American foreign policy. Protectionism was incompatible with these principles, for which President Kennedy had fought so successfully in last year’s Trade Expansion Act. Post test-ban treaty prospects—Vice President then solicited Kekkonen’s evaluation of Soviets’ attitude since signature of test-ban treaty, paying tribute to Kekkonen’s experience with Soviets. Kekkonen expressed his opinion forcefully that treaty indicated considerable change in political atmosphere in USSR. Adzhubei in his visit to Finland earlier in week had confirmed this also. In Kekkonen’s opinion, Soviet fear of horrible war had forced them to abandon it as tool of policy. Pointing out that the sobering effect of the Cuban crisis on both Eastern and Western leaders, the Vice President asked whether it or the crisis in USSR-Chinese Communist relations had contributed to this change. Kekkonen responded that Cuban crisis had brought Soviet leaders to edge of abyss and they saw they could not continue on prior course. Split with Chinese Communists had helped too. Kekkonen believed turn away from military solutions was fundamental change in Soviet attitude. He quoted Adzhubei as saying Khrushchev had “turned Soviet policy completely around.” Kekkonen was confident Soviets would not use violence against Finland. Therefore, Finland must strengthen its economy to prevent USSR undercutting democracy’s appeal with workers. Vice President reminded him that this entailed also watching constantly to avoid becoming dependent on USSR in fuel supply or in any other field. Kekkonen replied that Finland naturally aware of this. He pointed out that Finland’s trade with Soviet bloc constituted less than 20 percent of total trade. Vice President inquired whether Finnish Communist Party was likely to profit from post-test-ban treaty atmosphere. Kekkonen replied to contrary. Many of non-Communist parties expected to gain more. Finnish Communists had not gained prestige from treaty. In fact, because of Soviet-ChiCom split it had great trouble within itself; only recently had pro-ChiCom old guard been defeated and party brought firmly to Soviet side in this dispute. Kekkonen stated that Soviets never deal with Finnish Government through Finnish Party. Finnish Communists resented this treatment and at recent Party rally someone in the rear had shouted accusation that Khrushchev was toying with workers and dealing behind their backs with non-Communists. As to USSR’s next step after treaty, Kekkonen forecast that Soviets would press for agreement on plan to prevent surprise attacks and for Warsaw Pact–NATO non-aggression pact. He added that German question of course remained on agenda. Asked which treaty Soviets would seek first, Kekkonen said that he could not predict, but he believed they were moving steadily toward both and that if satisfactory arrangements were made in these fields, German question could probably be deferred. On other hand if no progress were made German question would become acute. Questioned by the Vice President about [garble—Sov?] attitude in recent months following Cuban crisis, Kekkonen remarked that Adzhubei had shown great appreciation for President Kennedy. Kekkonen had been surprised at emphasis Adzhubei had given this view. Kekkonen had concluded in view of this circumstance that President Kennedy’s untiring and responsible search for world peace had made great contribution and was finding sure response. Other topics—Vice President commended Ambassador Seppala’s services to US-Finnish relations and congratulated Finnish Government on Finland’s record in the UN. Vice President expressed deep appreciation for warm welcome given him and his party by Finland’s government, people, and press. Vice President concluded meeting by concisely summarizing topics covered and consensus reached, which Kekkonen accepted fully. Rowan 245. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Hilliker and approved in S on October 4. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission. The source text is labeled “Part 1 of 3.” Separate memoranda of conversation dealing with Finnish exports and a U.S.-Soviet high energy accelerator are ibid., Central Files, POL Fin-US. New York, September 1963 Sec/Del/MC/81 SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE EIGHTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York, October 2, 1963, 10 a.m. SUBJECT General (I of III) PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Mr. Grant G. Hilliker Finland Foreign Minister Merikoski H.E. Mr. Ralph Enckell, Permanent Representative to UN Mr. Max Jakobson, Director, Political Affairs, Foreign Ministry The Foreign Minister opened the conversation by referring to his talk with the Secretary a year earlier concerning the Finnish desire for modification of the Peace Treaty to permit acquisition of missiles.See Document 236. The Finnish Government appreciated the understanding attitude of the USG and of Secretary Rusk personally in helping the matter to satisfactory conclusion, through the purchase of air-to-air missiles from the USSR and anti-tank missiles from the UK. The Finnish Government has no present plans for further purchases of this kind, because of its financial difficulties. The Foreign Minister emphasized, however, that the ability to acquire the missiles had a tremendously important effect on morale, and in Finland it was almost more significant than the actual military improvement. The Secretary noted that we had no objection once we were assured that there were no security problems in the technology being transferred by the UK. The use of its own resources was the business of the Finnish Government, but the Secretary mentioned the possible declining significance of certain kinds of weapons, as manned aircraft give way to missiles. The Foreign Minister said that President Kekkonen had been thinking along similar lines. After raising two specific subjects (see separate memoranda of conversation)See the source note above. the Foreign Minister said he wanted to hear the Secretary’s views concerning prospects in East-West relations. He had received the impression during his visit to the Soviet Union in August that Gromyko was optimistic and seriously wanted progress in talks with the West. The Secretary stated that “we stand on the leading edge of important events” but there is no certainty of their direction. They could lead toward a long term detente or to a heightening crisis as a result of Moscow–Peking and East-West tensions. We certainly have no detente as long as the hard core problems of Laos, Viet-Nam, Cuba and Berlin persist. We do have a hunting license for a detente and we are prepared to use it, as we think the USSR is also. The question is whether we are each prepared to move forward on the same subjects or whether we might “occupy each other’s rears”. As examples, the Secretary mentioned both multilateral and bilateral areas open to discussion. He noted that the USSR has not said whether a non-aggression pact would apply to Berlin, and that no real basis for rapprochement in Berlin or in Germany has been found, although the atmosphere has improved. Some points, such as observation posts and bombs in orbit, would be of relatively minor significance but might help to maintain momentum. Among the bilateral subjects for possible US–USSR discussion, the Secretary mentioned trade, although the Soviets do not produce much that we need; a consular agreement, which is now under discussion in Moscow; exchange of commercial air rights; or broadened exchanges in such fields as agriculture, science, medicine, and possibly a joint trip to the moon. The Secretary was dining the same evening with Gromyko and might discuss these as well as Laos, where there is reason to believe the Soviets no longer have decisive influence on the ground, and Cuba where some steady withdrawals of personnel have not eliminated the large number there. In reply to the Secretary’s question whether the recent developments in East-West relations might be the result of long-term or short-term calculation by the Soviets, the Foreign Minister replied that he expected the trend to continue for some time and that his personal hunch was that the Soviet desire for peace is genuine. He contrasted Soviet domestic emphasis on peace with the well-known Chinese Communist position. The Secretary asked whether the Sino-Soviet split had produced internal repercussions among communist groups in Finland. The Foreign Minister replied that if there were any difficulties previously, the split had not been decisive and the communists in Finland were now completely on the Soviet line. Ambassador Enckell noted that there had been some delay, however, in announcing this allegiance. In reply to the Secretary’s question, the Foreign Minister said that Finnish relations with Eastern European countries were developing. He felt that any improvement in the living standard in the Soviet Union would increase desires for personal freedom, tending to alleviate the harshness of the Soviet system both internally and in relation with the smaller Eastern European countries. Nationalism in Eastern Europe was also growing and the Finns were breathing more easily because of these developments. The Foreign Minister added that Finland did not wish to speculate, in terms of its own policies, on the possible effects of the Sino-Soviet split. The Secretary commented that the Soviets and the Chinese Communists were both capable of sudden reversals of policies. The Foreign Minister repeated that he was unable to fathom the reasons for the extreme Chicom position, whether it was purely ideological or the result of other factors. The Secretary concluded that the FM may have found the reasons in his earlier comment about freedom, that the Chinese Communists might be right from the party point of view, in that their system might not be capable of surviving peaceful coexistence. 246. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 Fin. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Gordon and initialed by Rowan. Helsinki, December 13, 1963. SUBJECT Discussion with President Kekkonen PARTICIPANTS President Kekkonen, Max Jakobson, Director of Political Affairs, Ambassador Carl T. Rowan, and Mr. Glenn Gordon, USIS, Interpreter President Kekkonen began by saying that his recent trip to MoscowKekkonen visited the Soviet Union November 29–December 4. served to confirm his views as to the attitude of the Soviet Union toward the Johnson Administration—that is, that it would follow the same line as the Kennedy Administration.President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on November 22. Kekkonen said he assumed that he was at liberty to tell Khrushchev of his discussion with Ambassador Rowan about the views and attitudes of President Johnson,Rowan had discussed the policies of the Johnson administration with Kekkonen on November 27. He reported on these discussions in telegram 302 from Helsinki, November 27. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 US) and that he did so. Khrushchev reportedly was pleased to have Kekkonen’s report, and both Khrushchev and Gromyko emphasized their desire to continue to cooperate with the United States and the West. Kekkonen said that the first thing that impressed him was Khrushchev’s good physical condition. At Novosibirsk in 1961 Khrushchev had seemed ill and fatigued. During this visit he hunted with great vigor and joked almost incessantly. Kekkonen concluded that Khrushchev apparently will be around awhile. Ambassador Rowan said that this was good to hear in as much as we know of no one on the Soviet scene who is certain to be any more reasonable than Khrushchev. Kekkonen said he watched closely when Khrushchev was in the midst of Mikoyan, Kosygin, Malinovsky, Kozlov, Podgorny, and Polyansky and concluded that Khrushchev is in “complete control.” He said Khrushchev joked and talked freely, seeming to hold back nothing. He said Khrushchev appeared to be a man completely secure in his position. Kekkonen contrasted earlier visits when Khrushchev talked at length about Molotov and “the anti-Party group” and felt it necessary to explain at great length his opposition to the Stalinists. This time Khrushchev seemed totally unworried by the anti-Party group. Kekkonen said that for the first time he felt free to question Khrushchev about Stalin, and that Khrushchev talked very freely and frankly. Khrushchev said that during Stalin’s last years the latter was mentally ill and hardly ever left the Kremlin. Khrushchev said that in 1951 he and Mikoyan were on a trip with Stalin when the latter often said, “I don’t trust anyone, not even myself!” Khrushchev said he and Mikoyan later got together and agreed that “those were not the words of a sane man.” Kekkonen also discussed the Sino-Soviet split with Khrushchev who asserted that there is no real ideological difference, not even on the question of peaceful co-existence. But Khrushchev and other Soviet leaders admitted that they are befuddled by the strangely belligerent tone with which Red China states her position. Kekkonen said Red China troubles the Soviet Union “and will continue to do so for a long time.” Kekkonen said his talks with Khrushchev were less directed to current burning political issues than was the case in the past, largely because Khrushchev seemed preoccupied with the coming meeting of the Central Committee. Thus, Khrushchev talked at length about Soviet domestic affairs. Khrushchev said the Soviet Union will abandon the Kolkhoz (collective farming system) and move to a state farm system. Khrushchev said that only the “human factor” prevented him from ordering even more drastic changes. Ambassador Rowan asked if Khrushchev indicated from what sector of the economy he would divert resources for the economic reform programs he recently announced. Ambassador Rowan explained that he was interested in whether the Soviets might of necessity be less interested in an arms race and perhaps a bit more interested in some meaningful steps toward disarmament and world peace. Kekkonen said Khrushchev had mentioned the cost of 42 billion rubles over a period of seven years, and had said that if the West refused to grant the credits for the machinery and other items necessary in the Soviet economic program, the program would go forward because the Soviets would divert resources from their own economy. Kekkonen said Khrushchev did not specify which sector of the economy, but that he stated emphatically that the Soviet Union needed peace in which to get its economy in order and to the point where it could compete more effectively with the capitalistic nations. He said Khrushchev placed great emphasis on scientific education. Ambassador Rowan asked if, in discussing the new Johnson Administration, Khrushchev had mentioned any problem areas where he was particularly concerned, such as Cuba, or Berlin, or if, in discussing the Soviet Union’s need for peace, Khrushchev had given any idea as to the areas in which the Soviets were ready to make new steps toward peace. Kekkonen said Khrushchev had simply indicated that his policy on Berlin had not changed, but had indicated that the Soviet Union was not taking any steps that might precipitate a crisis. Ambassador Rowan said there was considerable confusion in Scandinavia as to whether Khrushchev planned to visit Finland as part of his Scandinavian tour next year. Kekkonen said Khrushchev will probably visit Finland but not when he visits the other Scandinavian countries. He said that when the other Scandinavian countries indicated next June would be suitable, Finland had offered the same time in the interest of Scandinavian solidarity, but that to visit four countries on the same trip apparently involves too much time to suit Khrushchev. Kekkonen said he wished he had more to report, but that his journey turned out to be even more of a hunting trip than he had expected. He said there was less political talk than on any of his trips to the Soviet Union. Kekkonen said that it was interesting to note that his proposal for a Scandinavian nuclear free zone was never mentioned in his talks with Khrushchev and was not even mentioned until the two of them referred to it publicly. He said that both he and Khrushchev apparently felt the matter had been discussed conclusively in the public forum, and that there was no need for them to take it up. Ambassador Rowan said that he had taken note of Kekkonen’s feeling that some circles looked upon him with suspicion for making the proposal. Ambassador Rowan said that his government looked with disfavor upon the proposal, but not because of a belief that Kekkonen had made it with evil intent or because of a desire to do Khrushchev’s bidding. There was reason enough for the United States to disfavor the proposal because it is an unnecessary disturbance of the power balance in Northern Europe. “We can understand and appreciate your making a proposal that you think is in Finland’s interest,” Ambassador Rowan added, “just as I am sure that you can understand our reluctance to see any proposal put forward that would affect Norway and Denmark in such a way as to disturb deeply the situation in this part of the world.” Kekkonen switched back to his Moscow discussions, asserting that “everything seemed to be in order in the Soviet Union” and he found great confidence in the prospect of maintaining peace. “I began to talk about the new Johnson Administration and about any possible changes in the US posture,” Kekkonen chuckled, “then I discovered that Gromyko had just read the US News and World Report article on which I was basing my assessments.” Ambassador Rowan suggested that under those circumstances President Kekkonen might want to join him in a resolution to give up reading newspapers and magazines. “You know that they almost wrote me out of Finland while you were away,” said the Ambassador. “Yes,” said Kekkonen, “and it all prompts me to say that there is never smoke unless there is some fire.” The Ambassador replied that he had every expectation that he would spend a quiet winter by the firesides of Finland, for he knew of no plans of President Johnson to call him to Washington, though press speculation may suggest a recall. Cyprus 247. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Atherton and approved in S on March 11. In a separate memorandum of conversation, Rossides brought up the possibility of a visit by Makarios to the United States. Rusk responded that the United States would defer a reply to this request, pending a study of problems related to the visit, but expressed a desire for a visit at a future date. (Ibid.) Washington, March 3, 1961. SUBJECT 1. United States Foreign Policy 2. Economic Aid to Cyprus 3. Cypriot Commonwealth Membership 4. Cypriot Role in the United Nations PARTICIPANTS Zenon Rossides, Ambassador of Cyprus The Secretary Robert G. Miner, GTI Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., GTI Ambassador Rossides extended congratulations to the Secretary on his appointment, and expressed gratification with regard to the foreign policy positions taken by the new Administration. He considered it essential to adhere to moral principles in international relations, and felt the United States could and should provide moral leadership for the Free World. The Ambassador then stated that he wanted to explain briefly to the Secretary the problems of Cyprus. The London–Zurich Agreements which created the Republic were in many ways divisive.For text of the communique containing the Zurich agreements, see The New York Times, February 12, 1959. For text of the London agreements, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1959, pp. 765–775, or Conference on Cyprus. Documents Signed and Initialled at Lancaster House February 19. Command 680. (London, 1959) This was unfortunate but a fact with which Cyprus had to live. The problems which this caused were compounded by economic difficulties. Archbishop Makarios was a strong and effective leader, but he needed support. Some help would be forthcoming from the United Nations, with which Cyprus had just concluded a technical cooperation agreement.For text of the U.N.-Cyprus technical cooperation agreement, signed February 24 in Nicosia, see 3 UNTS 389. In addition, however, Cyprus looked to the United States for technical and economic aid. In this connection he understood that a proposed Technical Cooperation Agreement between the United States and Cyprus was now awaiting approval in the Department.For text of the agreement, signed in Nicosia on June 29, 1961, and entered into force the same day, see TIAS 4792. The Secretary replied that this matter was well advanced and that we hoped to be able to do something very soon. The Secretary then inquired concerning the status of the Thorp Report on the Cypriot economy.Reference is to the report of a U.N. Economic Survey team, headed by Willard Thorp, provided to President Makarios in December 1960. Ambassador Rossides replied that publication of the Report was expected in the near future. He thought the Report generally a good one, but felt that it overestimated indigenous Cypriot investment capabilities. While there were Cypriots with investment capital, they were reluctant to take the lead. In his opinion, it would first be necessary to obtain outside help in order to encourage Cypriot investment. The Secretary commented that, in his opinion, it was psychologically important for the Cypriots themselves to set the example by investing in their country’s economic future. The Ambassador agreed but said that unfortunately private individuals tended to think first of their private interests. What was needed was to find a middle way, with investment capital coming from both Cypriot and outside sources. Areas in which help was particularly needed, the Ambassador said, were port improvement and the development of water resources. Since Cyprus was basically an agricultural country, development in these fields was necessary in order to expand agricultural production and the facilities for exporting agricultural products. The Thorp Report stated that the water development program could be domestically financed, but the Ambassador doubted that this was possible. In response to the Secretary’s question concerning the status of Cypriot Commonwealth membership, Ambassador Rossides explained the political and constitutional background of the parliamentary decision to apply for membership for a five year period, and opined that Cyprus would soon become a member. During a recent discussion with Prime Minister Macmillan, he had gathered that there were no obstacles to the acceptance of Cyprus as a full Commonwealth member. As the Ambassador was leaving, the Secretary expressed gratification with regard to the Cypriot delegation’s role during the fall session of the General Assembly, to which the Ambassador was his country’s chief delegate. The Ambassador thanked the Secretary and commented that he had been particularly pleased by the United States position when the Congo question last came before the Security Council. 248. National Security Action Memorandum No. 71Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 71. Secret. Washington, August 23, 1961. MEMORANDUM FOR The Secretary of State Having read the Department’s status report on the Cyprus situation,The “Status Report on Cyprus,” August 18, outlined the state of political and economic development in Cyprus during its first year of independence. (Ibid.) I am concerned over its gloomy tone. The inadequacies of the Makarios government, as contrasted with the discipline, energy, and able leadership of the local Communist Party, are most worrisome. Perhaps we need some preventive medicine here to forestall further deterioration of this situation. Shouldn’t we at a minimum push the UK, Greece, and Turkey to take a more forthcoming approach? Moreover, in view of their limited resources, we should carefully review our own policy of relying on these guarantor powers to shoulder the principal share of the Western burden. Since Cyprus’ real estate and strategic location are of considerable importance to us and to our allies, I would be grateful if the Department of State would advise me on what measures would best insure our holding on to it, including whatever use of US resources may be required. John F. Kennedy 249. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Battle) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 71. Secret. Drafted by Coon and cleared by NEA, BNA, GER, and ICA. Washington, September 7, 1961. SUBJECT Proposals for United States Action in Cyprus The enclosed study has been prepared in response to the President’s National Security Action Memorandum No. 71.The paper, entitled “Proposals for United States Action in Cyprus,” is not printed. (Ibid.) NSAM No. 71 is Document 248. After describing certain trends and recent developments in Cyprus, the paper recommends that the United States should assume a more active role in Cyprus than in the past, a role of leadership amongst the Western nations in preserving and strengthening Western interests on the island. One of the principal reasons for recommending this policy shift is the need to retain our strategically important communications facilities. Specifically the paper reports the following courses of action: 1. The Department has asked ICA, on an urgent basis, to explore the possibility of assuming a major role in assisting the economic development of Cyprus, including the possibility of financing one of the three major foreign aid projects in Cyprus’ new First Five-Year Plan. 2. The Department will urge the UK, the IBRD, the IDA and perhaps West Germany to finance other major projects. 3. We plan to negotiate an agreement with the Government of Cyprus regularizing the status of our communications facilities on Cyprus, exploiting the favorable atmosphere engendered by our aid offer. 4. We intend to continue existing and planned United States programs and activities in Cyprus, particularly in the labor field. 5. We plan to continue to consult with the UK, Greece and Turkey, without, however, forfeiting our own freedom of action. L. D. BattlePrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. Melvin L. Manfull signed for Battle. 250. National Security Action Memorandum No. 98Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 98. Secret. Copies were sent to the Secretary of Defense and Director of Central Intelligence. Washington, September 25, 1961. TO The Secretary of State REFERENCE National Security Action Memorandum No. 71) The President approves the program outlined in the State Department’s memorandum on “Proposals for US Action in Cyprus” of September 7, 1961.See Document 249. He agrees that the US should assume a more active role in Cyprus than in the past and desires that the program to this end be pushed vigorously [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to contain and reduce communist strength. He further requests that we impress upon Greece, Turkey and the UK the importance we attach to helping Cyprus and urge them to step up their efforts as well. McGeorge Bundy 251. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.80A/10–761. Confidential. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Nicosia, October 7, 1961, 1 p.m. 188. I had hour’s frank and friendly conversation with Makarios this noon (October 6), first since seeing him prior to month’s leave commencing end of August. During that time several important developments have taken place, including Belgrade Conference,The Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned Nations held September 1–6. commencement of UNGA with unhappy death of Hammarskjold,Hammarskjold died in a plane crash in the Congo during the night of September 17–18. and Syrian revolt,On September 28, Syria seceded from the United Arab Republic. all of which might be expected to have effect on Cypriot attitude toward international affairs. Subjects covered wide range, including these subjects and other reports here and in separate messages. At outset I told Makarios Washington had telegraphed US President Kennedy had decided on increased US aid to Cyprus, but we would be unable to say how much would be available (Deptel 195)Telegram 195, October 3, summarized NSAM No. 98. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.80A/10–361) until there had been an opportunity to study new aid legislation and to consult with Cypriot official. I described this as yet another indication of American interest in Cyprus and said it had been most fortunate there had been UN report and subsequent study by GOC, as reflected in Makarios statement of August 21. Third stage, it seemed to me, was IBRD study which was now beginning.Reference is to the Thorp mission. Because of this sequence of events, GOC had moved long way toward studying and assessing its needs which should thus soon have fruitful results. Makarios expressed great pleasure on learning of President’s decision re US aid and indicated he realized it might take a little time to work out details. He asked whether US assistance would be handled through international consortium, as I had previously informed him, or on bilateral basis. I said I had no new information, but would assume it still true there was better chance of early success of GOC’s obtaining required amounts of capital through international consortium in which USG would participate (septel 399).Not found. At same time, I saw no reason why American contribution to consortium might not be worked out on bilateral basis. I suggested, however, we defer discussion until more information was in hand. Makarios said Kyprianou had been pressing him for approval of latter’s visit to US as follow-up of his conversations with Under Secretary Bowles here re economic assistance (Embtel 107)In telegram 107, August 19, Wilkins suggested an expansion of the U.S. response to Makarios’ request for economic assistance. (Department of State, Central Files, 880A.00/8–1961) and asked me whether I thought Foreign Minister should undertake this journey. In view of Foreign Minister’s earlier conversation with me,Not further identified. I said if Kyprianou should go to UN, it might be useful for him to drop down to Washington for discussion of some of these matters. Makarios agreed in principle, but feared there would be Cypriot criticism on grounds of expense if another Cypriot official journeyed so far overseas and because Cypriot Ambassador was already there. I did not pursue matter further because, while there might be some advantage in building up Kyprianou through visit to UN and Washington, it would probably in long run be preferable to discuss these matters with Makarios on spot. Wilkins 252. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.80A/12–1361. Confidential. Drafted by Coon, cleared by S/S and NEA, and approved by Marcy. Repeated to Athens, Ankara, Bonn, Nicosia, and Paris for Tuthill. Washington, December 13, 1961, 4:30 p.m. 3222. Ref. CW 3004.This telegram, October 3, outlined plans for a more active U.S. role in Cyprus. (Ibid., 611.80A/10–361) Under Secretary McGhee called in UK Amb Ormsby Gore Dec 12, gave him aide-memoireDated December 12. (Ibid., S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 98) stating: USG concerned Cyprus trends, has decided expand its role there, hopes cooperate fully with HMG, GOG and GOT; USG working out expanded aid program emphasizing water development, hopes HMG can also increase effort, e.g. in electricity project; USG intends affirm active support London–Zurich agreements to GOG and GOT and urge them continue urge prudence and moderation on respective Cypriot communities. CW 4858 pouched Dec 13 to addressee postsDated December 13. (Ibid., Central Files, 611.80A/12–1361) transmits text aide-memoire and Dept suggestions re further representations. Ball 253. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 2004. Confidential. Drafted by Brown and approved in S on December 24. The meeting was held at the U.S. Embassy Residence. Kyprianou was attending the conference of Cyprus guarantor powers, which was being held at the same time as the NATO Ministerial Meeting. Paris, December 13–15, 1961 US/MC/7 NATO MINISTERIAL MEETING Paris, December 14, 1961, 7:30 p.m. PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary of State Mr. Brown Cyprus Foreign Minister Kyprianou SUBJECT Economic Assistance for Cyprus The Foreign Minister said that Cyprus needs outside assistance to carry out its five-year development program. It is self-financing about 30 million pounds for the period and needs external aid of about 32 million pounds. Cyprus hopes to be completely self-sustaining in seven to ten years, provided it can get its plan financed and operative. The Secretary said that we have re-organized our approach to aid. We have put the responsibility on our Ambassadors in the field who are equipped to aid new countries explore the sources available to them. We also want to see the new nations turning to the Western European countries, especially towards those who had been associated with them in the past. We do not want our aid to replace that formerly given by others but rather to supplement their assistance. The Foreign Minister said that they were exploring these sources. He did not expect much from the UK. Some assistance has been received from the Federal Republic. There are some pressures in Cyprus, which the Government is resisting, to accept aid from the Soviets, who have already made offers. The Government is confident the US will help, however. It hopes that assistance will be bilateral as well as through a consortium; bilateral assistance from the US will have a significant political impact. The Secretary said we would take account of these suggestions. The attitude of the Bank would be of great importance. If the Cypriot Government convinces the Bank that it has a logical plan, this would affect favorably the attitude of governments. He expressed the hope that the Cypriot people themselves would be seized with the idea of development. It’s a persuasive argument for aid when the people themselves are moving. He asked the order of priorities. The Foreign Minister said that water is the immediate problem. Extensive surveys are needed. Much of the development plan money will initially go into water projects. Later the mines can be developed. Other projects include a new port and the improvement of tourist accommodations. Finally, agriculture must be modernized and perhaps transformed into the production of more exportable commodities. The Secretary said that tourism could be a most profitable resource. He suggested Cyprus try to attract international meetings. We will try to get conclusions soon on assistance. In the meantime, Cyprus should present its plans to the Bank and talk to other countries in Europe, especially DAG members.On December 15, the Cypriot Foreign Ministry issued an official statement regarding the Rusk–Kyprianou meeting that included the statement: “Mr. Rusk assured Mr. Kyprianou that American aid will cover a considerable part of the five-year development plan.” The text of the Cypriot press release was sent to the Department of State in airgram A–110 from Nicosia, December 27. (Ibid., Central Files, 611.80A/12–2761) 254. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 780A.00/1–562. Confidential. Repeated to Athens, Ankara, and Nicosia. London, January 5, 1962, 6 p.m. 2518. British Government seriously concerned over statement January 4 by President Makarios of Cyprus that he would seek amendment certain provisions Cyprus constitution.In the January 4 statement, Makarios stated that he would “disregard or seek revision” of parts of the Cypriot Constitution because their abuse by the Turkish minority was endangering the Republic’s existence. In talk with Ambassador January 5, Jamieson of Central Department said Makarios effort this direction not only illegal in terms basic agreement but could stimulate communal violence in Cyprus. As consequence: 1. UK instructing Embassy Athens see Greek Government and state move by Makarios could provoke crisis reopening Cyprus settlement and possibility invocation treaty of guarantee. UK desires avoid this at all costs. Embassy to ask Greeks to urge moderation on Makarios. 2. Although doubting representations to Turks would be helpful at moment, British Ambassador to urge patience on Turkish Government. UK does not desire, however, raise question treaty of guarantee with Turks at this point. 3. UK Embassy Cyprus will also be instructed urge moderation on Makarios. 4. UK Embassy Washington being instructed review various UK messages with Department and request some parallel US action.In telegram 302 to Nicosia, January 6, the Department noted that the British request for parallel action had been relayed on January 5. The telegram requested the Embassy’s analysis of the internal situation in Cyprus. (Department of State, Central Files, 780A.00/1–562) In telegram 318 from Nicosia, January 8, the Embassy reported that “we doubt that Makarios actually intends press for constitutional revision at this time,” and that the British High Commission shared this judgment. However, both Wilkins and the High Commissioner planned to “counsel moderation” at separate meetings with Makarios. (Ibid., 780A.00/1–862) Jones 255. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 780A.00/1–1262. Confidential. Repeated to Athens, Ankara, and London. Nicosia, January 12, 1962, 8 p.m. 329. Department telegram 302; Embassy telegram 318.See footnote 2, Document 254. I spoke with Foreign Minister this noon re current communal crisis, urging restraint and moderation and saying it seemed to me pending questions could best be resolved once Greek and Turkish Cypriots met again to discuss them. Foreign Minister expressed appreciation of our interest and went on to stress Makarios believed that as President he could not permit obstruction of functioning of state if Turkish Cypriots utilized tax veto provision to force pace of implementation of constitution to disadvantage of Greek Cypriots.The Cypriot Constitution gave the Turkish minority a veto over taxation bills. Makarios was seeking to put into law a bill permanently setting tax rates. The Turkish Cypriots insisted that any tax bill must be on an annual or biannual renewal basis. Makarios had responsibility for Greek Cypriot majority as well as Turkish Cypriot minority. Foreign Minister added Makarios was making efforts to discuss matters with Turkish Cypriots and had recently talked with leader of Turkish Cypriot rebel group in House re tax matters. Foreign Minister thought some Turkish Cypriots now believed they had gone too far and would be more reasonable on additional tax legislation pending in House. Foreign Minister drew distinction between more moderate Turkish Cypriots under Kutchuk and more radical ones under Denktash and Ali Riza, saying Kutchuk had always been helpful, but Denktash and company seemed convinced only hope for Turkish Cypriots lay in separating themselves from Greek Cypriots to widest extent possible. Foreign Minister thought GOT would best be able to persuade Turkish Cypriots to see reason and suggested it would be helpful if US would use its influence in Ankara to this end. I replied that although we were not guarantor power, we wanted to be helpful and were in fact urging restraint and moderation in Ankara and Athens as we were here. Foreign Minister commented that he hoped we might go step further and express opinion on substance of current dispute in support of Makarios petition. GOC was moving as fast as possible on 70/30 and division of municipalities. Present Turkish tactic of forcing pace through tax veto was harmful. Foreign Minister concluded GOT could really help by urging Turkish Cypriot rebel group to abandon opposition and cooperate with GOC. Wilkins 256. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CyprusSource: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0080A/2–762. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Coon; cleared by AID, G, S/S, and NEA; and approved by Marcy. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Washington, February 8, 1962, 7:01 p.m. 334. Ref: Embtels 367 and 368.Telegram 367, February 7, summarized an erroneous press report on U.S. aid to Cyprus. (Ibid., 811.0080A/2–762) Telegram 368, also February 7, warned that the Cypriot press was “beginning to run wild” over the issue of future U.S. aid, apparently based on information provided by Cypriot Government officials in Washington and Nicosia, and suggested means of curbing these stories. (Ibid.) Dept and AID seriously concerned possible implications increasingly exaggerated Cypriot press fabrications re US aid plans. From here it seems buildup popular expectations, in which GOC apparently acquiescing if not actually contributing, likely unless firmly handled henceforth to cause GOC domestic political problems, as well as embarrassing US, as necessarily gradual nature US aid approach becomes public knowledge. Proposed Makarios visit Washington (Deptel 331),Telegram 331, January 2, instructed the Embassy to sound out Makarios about a June visit to the United States. (Ibid., 780A.11/1–262) which we assume you plan discuss with Makarios Feb 9, would presumably further arouse Cypriot expectations when announced unless steps taken to counter. As noted previously, firm USG policy precludes use this visit as occasion for major aid announcements. Dept’s preliminary thinking is that if situation develops to point where it seems probable visit unaccompanied by major aid handout would cause popular disillusion sufficiently serious endanger US-Cypriot relations, we might be forced in interest such relations regretfully to consider deferral invitation. Appreciate your comments. Suggest you convey our concern to Makarios at Feb 9 meeting, noting particularly that figure of £20–25 million without any basis whatsoever, is misleading Cypriot public, and is likely embarrass both GOC and US. Not for us to advise Makarios how to handle own press but would hope for some official statement setting record straight while noting continued US intent aid Cypriot development in significant way. As you know, not one alleged “factual” statement in Eleftheria article as summarized Embtel 368 has any basis in fact. Department reserving decision whether call in Rossides pending account your talk with Makarios.In telegram 377 from Nicosia, February 9, Wilkins reported that he had met with both Makarios and Kyprianou in an effort to control misinformation. Both men promised to “try to calm the situation.” (Ibid., 811.0080A/2–962) Rusk 257. Telegram 391 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cyprus Washington, March 31, 1962, 10:28 a.m. [Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780A.00/3–3162. Secret; Priority. 2 pages of source text not declassified.] 258. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 780A.11/4–762. Confidential. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Nicosia, April 7, 1962, 9 a.m. 454. Deptel 397.Telegram 397, April 5, reads: “We are inclined believe inclusion ranking Turk in Makarios official party for Washington visit would not only be appropriate but might be useful contribution to badly needed improvement communal relations on island. If you agree, please ensure Makarios made aware our views through whatever means you consider best.” (Ibid., 780A.11/4–562) I discussed question of Turkish representative with FonMin and VP Kutchuk in February, but it has not come up since then either in talks with Greek and Turkish Cypriot officials or with representatives of three guarantor powers. We have thus concluded Turkish Cypriots were going along with present arrangements and that for us to raise issue during recent communal crisis would have involved US in dispute. Situation has, however, been improving during past few days and I will pass word to Makarios through Georkadjis that communal relations might be further benefited if higher ranking Turk such as Plumer could accompany him to US.In telegram 460, April 10, Wilkins reported that Makarios declined to include a Turkish Cypriot in his delegation on the grounds that the visit was not “official in the sense that it was not for negotiation,” but would include a ranking Turkish member of the Cypriot Embassy in the official party. (Ibid., 780A.11/4–1062) Wilkins 259. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2115. Confidential. Drafted by Talbot and approved by the White House on July 2. Separate memoranda of this conversation on Cypriot communal problems and the EEC are not printed. (Ibid.) The President and Archbishop also met on June 6; see Document 260. Washington, June 5, 1962. SUBJECT Meeting Between The President and Archbishop Makarios PARTICIPANTS The President Mr. Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Mr. Fraser Wilkins, Ambassador to Cyprus Mr. William S. Gaud, Assistant Administrator for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, AID Archbishop Makarios, President of Cyprus H.E. Spyros Kyprianou, Minister of Foreign Affairs H.E. Zenon Rossides, Cyprus Ambassador Mr. Alseddin Gulen, Counselor of Embassy of Cyprus Aid The President then turned to the subject of aid, saying we are eager to help Cyprus, although our balance of payments problems and our defense requirements impose heavy burdens upon us. We are now spending $3 billion for defense, one-half of which goes to NATO. We also have the problem of obtaining sufficient money from Congress to do what we would like to do. He hopes that European nations will assume an increasingly larger share of the aid program. He understood that in Cyprus the problem had been partly one of a lack of proper planning and that the Archbishop might feel we had been rather slow. He then asked Mr. Gaud to summarize the aid situation as he saw it. Mr. Gaud said that he believed the Archbishop would agree that there is a very satisfactory understanding between the Archbishop on the one hand, and our Ambassador and Mission Director on the other, as to our aid program and problems. Our program consists primarily of PL 480 and Technical Assistance—much of the latter in the planning field. Steps are underway to move from planning into projects and we are ready to examine whatever projects the Cypriots develop and see whether we can help with them. The Archbishop declared that water was the main problem. There had been a delay in deciding what to do in this field, but he hoped he would soon be ready to move. He was not looking for any radical solution. He is thinking of changing the island’s legislation so as to nationalize water and control pumping. A geological survey is needed, decisions must be reached as to where dams should be built and experimental drilling is in order. He hopes that projects in this and other fields will be ready for discussions soon. The Archbishop then stated that he was optimistic about the future of Cyprus. He hopes to make the island less dependent on agriculture by developing appropriate industries. An oil refinery and a fertilizer plant are now under discussion. Tourism is growing and the necessary accommodations—such as a new Hilton Hotel in Nicosia—are in prospect. The President stated that it would be a fine thing if desalinized water could be produced at a commercial rate. The Archbishop agreed and pointed out that the British are putting up a plant in their base area. It is his understanding that at the present time, water can be produced at rates appropriate for drinking but not for irrigation. He has resisted the efforts of some experts who have tried to convince him that he should build several desalinization plants near the sea. He prefers to wait and see if the British plant succeeds. Ambassador Wilkins suggested that the Office of Saline Water might take another look at Cyprus and see what, if anything, they thought could be done along this line. The President agreed that this might be desirable. 260. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Secret. Drafted by Talbot and approved by the White House on June 25. The meeting was held in the White House. Washington, June 6, 1962, 3:15 p.m. SUBJECT Meeting Between The President and Archbishop Makarios PARTICIPANTS United States The President Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary, NEA William S. Gaud, Assistant Administrator, AID:AA/NESA Fraser Wilkins, Ambassador to Cyprus Cyprus Archbishop Makarios, President S. Kyprianou, Foreign Minister Zenon Rossides, Ambassador to the United States A. Gulen, Counselor of Embassy The President opened with the comment that he knew our people had been speaking with the Archbishop’s government about establishing a VOA transmitter in Cyprus, and he hoped the Archbishop would be able to consider the suggestion sympathetically. Archbishop Makarios replied that personally he would like very much to approve the request. However, he must consider seriously the political implications. There were some fears that if the Government of Cyprus agreed to this proposal some other countries would no longer view it as being non-aligned. Apart from that one fear, he would like to have the installation in Cyprus “especially as I have been told that it would be established in my own region.” With a twinkle he added that this might be the main reason that would weigh in the balance when he came to a decision. The President thanked him for his willingness to weigh all the factors, adding that, as he had said in their previous session, he appreciated the Cypriot hospitality to our other communications on the island, without which we would be in difficulties with our communications farther east. The President and the Archbishop agreed to the text of a communique to be issued at the conclusion of their talks.For text of the communique, see Department of State Bulletin, June 25, 1961, p. 1011. The Archbishop observed that he had had good talks in the morning with Secretary Rusk and Mr. Fowler Hamilton.Memoranda of Makarios’ conversations with Rusk and Hamilton are in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2115. The latter had taught him that in economic assistance matters the United States too knew how to remain “uncommitted.” Mr. Gaud reviewed the conversation between the Archbishop and Mr. Hamilton, who had discussed the various kinds of aid relationships. He thought everything was now on the tracks, including an assurance that we will do something about the water problem. The President expressed himself as pleased with the Secretary of Labor’s statement at luncheon that a labor leaders’ exchange program has been arranged between Cyprus and the United States.Apparently a statement made to President Makarios by Secretary of Labor Arthur Goldberg during the luncheon at Blair House hosted by the President. A free and active labor movement contributes not only to the welfare of its members, but also helps society generally. The Foreign Minister mentioned in this connection that the Government of Cyprus regarded the establishment of a social insurance program as very important. He noted that the question of getting foreign assistance for this program had been raised with the AID officials. Ambassador Rossides added that the Government of Cyprus was also very much interested in having an American University established in Cyprus. He pointed out that in their view it would bring a useful Western influence into Cyprus and would have a beneficial effect on the local community by bringing Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots into the same classes. He said that students might also be brought from neighboring countries to attend classes. In response to a question by the President, Ambassador Wilkins commented that this was a complicated matter that would need exploration before we could decide what could be done. Some had suggested that consulting the American University in Beirut might be useful. The President agreed that this might be a good thing to do. Before the Archbishop left to meet with Senators and Representatives on Capitol Hill, he and the President exchanged expressions of warm satisfaction that the Archbishop had come to this country and that they had opportunity for friendly and useful talks. As the meeting broke up President Kennedy instructed Mr. Talbot and Mr. Gaud to pursue the questions of possible American help to the social insurance scheme and the American University scheme to an early decision, so that the Cypriots would get one answer or the other and not be left long in suspense. 261. National Security Action Memorandum No. 169Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 169. Secret. Washington, June 28, 1962. MEMORANDUM FOR The Secretary of State The Secretary of Defense The Director, USIA The Director, CIA The Administrator, A.I.D. SUBJECT Maintaining Momentum of Makarios Visit The President desires that we take full advantage of the momentum generated by the recent visits of President Makarios and other high-level Cypriot officials. In NSAM 98Document 250. last September he endorsed the State Department’s Proposals for US Action in Cyprus which called for development of an aid program that would give us “the key role” in assisting Cypriot economic development. He realizes that the inexperience of the Cypriot Government has hampered this effort and that it is difficult to find as yet development projects suitable for loan support. However, with the prospect of an improved Cypriot effort following President Makarios’ return, he would like to see our program take definite shape just as soon as feasible. We should also do all we reasonably can toward aiding and encouraging the Cyprus Government to cope with its serious Communist problem. Specifically, the President is anxious that we give the Cypriots answers as quickly as possible to suggestions they raised during President Makarios’ visit—particularly on assistance to their proposed social insurance program, a possible American university in Cyprus, and water development. Will you therefore report to him by 13 July what progress you feel we have made as a result of the visit and what follow-up steps we are taking to get our aid program moving? McGeorge Bundy 262. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 169. Secret. Drafted by Coon and cleared by Bergesen and Talbot, AID, and USIA. Two annexes, “Progress Report on U.S. Economic Programs in Cyprus” and “USIA Plans for Expanded Cyprus Programs,” are not printed. Washington, July 13, 1962. SUBJECT Results of the Makarios Visit; Maintaining the Momentum it Generated REFERENCE NSAM 169 of June 28, 1962Document 261. We believe the Makarios visit strengthened our prestige and influence in Cyprus and furthered specific U.S. objectives for the island. The goodwill the visit generated has, in our opinion, improved our prospects for continued undisturbed access to our communications facilities. Makarios returned to the island convinced of the need to act on our VOA proposal and asked the Cypriot Council of Ministers for a decision. The prospects for early approval seem good. During the visit we were also able to persuade Makarios of the need for more effective Cypriot planning for economic development, a basic requirement for the strong US aid program we expect to mount during coming months. In more general terms, the visit served as a public affirmation of our intention to play an active and constructive role in Cypriot affairs, a policy first enunciated in NSAM 98 of September 25, 1961.Document 250. This intent has now been recognized and gratefully accepted by all sectors of the Cypriot public except the communists. As a result, we believe our prestige and influence in Cyprus are at an all-time high. Vital U.S. interests—our communications facilities, the need to counter the communist threat, and preservation of peaceful relations between the Greek and Turkish communities—require us to maintain our influence at a high level. For this purpose our most immediately applicable instrument of policy is our economic aid program. We believe this program is developing into an effective means of advancing both short term and long term U.S. objectives on the island. Annex 1 summarizes recent progress toward giving tangible shape and substance to our aid program, as well as further steps we propose to take during the next several months. As to the specific projects discussed during the visit and cited in NSAM 169: AID is providing technical assistance in the field of water development and is considering a loan for heavy equipment to be used in part for the Cypriot water program. We have indicated the improbability of our being able to fund their social insurance project but are implementing our commitment to provide technical assistance for it. An AID expert has completed a preliminary investigation in Cyprus of the possibility of establishing an American-sponsored educational institution. His principal conclusions are that any such effort should initially be on a modest scale, and further study is necessary. AID is currently reviewing the proposal and consulting private foundations and educational institutions, preparatory to discussing the matter with the Cypriots in more specific terms. USIA has increased the scope of its Cyprus program recently and has assigned first priority to that program for any augmented appropriations available to the Near Eastern area operations of the Agency in FY ’63. (See Annex 2) A major facet of our present policy in Cyprus is to encourage other Western countries and international lending organizations to contribute more actively toward building up a dominant Western presence on the island. The IBRD, with our encouragement, has offered substantial amounts of loan capital for the Cypriot economic development program, and the West Germans have, on their own initiative, committed themselves to a sizable aid program. During the past year we have consulted frequently with the Governments of the Guarantor Powers (the UK, Greece and Turkey) on our common problems and objectives in Cyprus. We believe this consultation has contributed to the fact that the Greek and Turkish Governments are now consulting regularly with each other and cooperating closely on Cypriot affairs, and in particular are in complete agreement on the need to support the existing constitutional framework. Given the continuing impasse between the two communities on various constitutional issues, this cooperation between Athens and Ankara is most important. We intend to explore further with the Greek, Turkish, and British Governments, as well as with appropriate Cypriot leaders, ways and means by which our joint influence can be brought to bear to create areas of agreement between the two communities and to discourage efforts of some Cypriots to upset the existing constitutional order. Two of the aid projects we are currently beginning to implement—the police training program and the labor program—are specifically designed to increase Cypriot capabilities for resisting communist subversion. On the diplomatic level, we intend to continue our efforts to persuade President Makarios and other Cypriot leaders to pursue more active anti-communist policies, following up the President’s remarks on the subject during the visit. While we cannot count on any sudden and radical stiffening in Makarios’ policies in this regard, we hope that our efforts will have a significant cumulative effect over coming months. Already there are signs the Cypriot Government is planning increased support for the anti-communist wing of the labor movement. The Central Intelligence Agency is submitting a separate memorandum which deals with certain other plans and actions directed against the communist threat in Cyprus. William H. BrubeckPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. George Anderson signed for Brubeck. 263. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–JO/9–362. Secret. Repeated to Ankara and Nicosia. Athens, September 3, 1962, 5 p.m. 308. CODEL Johnson. Following is summary of conversation between Vice President and Makarios at Government House 6:45 PM August 30.Vice President Johnson visited Cyprus August 30–31 during a 5-nation tour of the Mediterranean and Near East. Memorandum prepared by Ambassador Wilkins and Bowling. Also present were Ambassador Rossides, Komer and Foreign Minister Kyprianou. Mrs. Johnson was present during latter part of conversation only. In course greetings and exchange of compliments, Makarios referred to his visit to Washington as greatest event of his life, and expressed gratitude to and esteem for President Kennedy. VP praised GOC for way in which it was handling its development program, recalling how it had arranged for UN group headed by Dr. Willard Thorp to come out here and formulate suggestions for a program and how this step had been followed by an International Bank survey group. VP continued that we continued to stand ready to help with technical assistance and development loans. He wished Cyprus well citing Makarios visit to US as Presidential guest and VP’s return visit to Cyprus. Vice President noted both US and Cyprus were new countries and thus had many similar problems. Makarios said that Cyprus was greatly honored by Johnson’s visit and that GOC, although inexperienced in receiving State guests, in fact VP was first, was making every effort to make his short stay a happy and memorable one. Makarios continued that although they had perhaps set out in the right way on their development program he personally thought they were moving too slowly and that they must pick up speed. Makarios made no requests for any specific American aid. Vice President noted danger of growing Communist threat for next election in 1965, and suggested need for Makarios to organize a non-Communist party, reminding Makarios of success Communist tactics in other countries. Makarios spoke at some length about political parties in Cyprus to the effect that only left was organized, in AKEL, the Communist Party, and PEO, the left wing labor movement. The right wing, he said, was not organized, in fact each Greek was a political leader of his own political party as was case in Greece. Makarios said he could not lead a political party, in response to VP’s question, because he was of the Church and was President of Cyprus, and that he must be above politics—but added that his successor might well come from a political party. Makarios said that when John Clerides of the Orthodox Right had run for President against him in 1959 he had had Communist support and had commanded 33 per cent of the vote in the Greek Cypriot community. At same time Makarios did not think that all of this 33 per cent were true Communists but merely temporary followers of a well organized party and that, in fact, Communist strength was decreasing. What was important, Makarios said, was that the Cyprus development program move forward so that the general public would see the benefits flowing from the present regime. Vice President commented that situation seemed to be one which should be watched with great care because, as had been the case in some other countries, the democratic leaders had wakened one morning and found that the Communists had taken over. VP said we would regret such a development in countries which were our friends. Makarios closed his eyes, nodded, and said another party might be formed some day, but there was plenty of time before the next elections. Vice President mentioned VOA negotiations now in progress, bringing out economic benefits accruing to Cyprus and value of permitting world to hear unbiased news and facts. Makarios replied that matter would be considered by the Council of Ministers before he departed for Commonwealth Conference in London on September 9 and a decision reached. He said he must consider this from two aspects: economic and political. He would not now discuss economic side in detail except to say that he understands that the US cannot help Cyprus as much as Cyprus would like. On political side he said he had doubts of effect which VOA station might have on Cyprus non-aligned policy. He described Cyprus as extreme “right wing” of neutralist states. Other neutral nations would no longer regard Cyprus as neutral, he remarked, and Cyprus feels that it can be more effective on the international scene and of help to the US with whom its true bonds lie, than if it became merely another member of the Western bloc. He asked if Vice President did not think that Cyprus should be non-aligned for this reason. Vice President replied that US wants only friendship and progress of Cyprus but failed to see how providing facilities for broadcasting the truth could damage Cypriot interests. Makarios said definition of difference between truth and propaganda was matter individual interpretation. Said he himself doubted that VOA agreement would be consistent policy non-alignment. Wilkins added that Ceylon, which was generally considered more neutral than many, had only last spring signed a new VOA agreement and also that a VOA station in Cyprus would be called an IBS or an International Broadcasting Service station consisting of medium wave for Cyprus and short wave for us which might be heard in Cyprus but could not be understood because it would be in Eastern European, Central Asian and South Asian languages and the programs would not indicate that the programs were coming from Cyprus but from Washington through an Eastern Mediterranean station. In this context, he said, a station in Cyprus will have no real effect on Cyprus non-aligned policy. Vice President, seconded by Mr. Komer, emphasized decision could not be delayed for long, because US had other opportunities obtain sites in the area, although we prefer Cyprus. Makarios said all points made by Vice President were of interest and assured Vice President he would give careful consideration to the matter during the coming week. Robert Komer at suggestion Vice President briefly stated US policy re Chinese representation urging support by Cyprus for continued seating of GRC and opposition to admission of Red China. Makarios said he pleased state that Rossides as UN Representative had instructions follow US lead on Chinese representation question. Labouisse 264. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–JO/9–362. Secret. Repeated to Nicosia. Athens, September 3, 1962, noon. 307. JODEL. Following is summary record of conversation between Vice President and leaders Turk Cypriot community August 31 at office Vice President Kutchuk. Summary prepared by Bowling and cleared by Vice President. Also present were Denktash, President Turkish Communal Chamber, Min Defense Orek, Min Health Meyera, Min Agriculture Plumar, Ambassador Wilkins and Komer. The Vice President expressed his pleasure at being in Cyprus and his appreciation over welcome given him by Cypriot people. Kutchuk presented VP memorandum on position Turkish Cypriot minority (will be forwarded by pouch)Transmitted to the Embassy in Rome for the Johnson delegation as unnumbered telegram from Nicosia, September 13. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2149) stating he felt VP was a real friend and that he would do what he could for Turk Cypriot minority if he understood facts. He turned to other Turk leaders to present Turk Cypriot views orally. Min Defense went over recent historical background Cyprus, pointing out Turk Cypriots had given up their goal of partition and wanted make concept bi-communal Cypriot nation work, while Greek Cypriots had apparently not given up their goal of union with Greece. He said Turk and Greek communities had made agreement to work together, and rules of their cooperation in Cypriot nation, agreed to by both, were embodied in provisions Constitution. Turk Cypriots wanted apply those rules, he claimed, but Greeks unfortunately refused implement vital elements Constitution to which they had agreed; this puts the Turkish community in very serious position. Min Defense said Constitution obviously gave Vice President important role in determining foreign policy, but Makarios proceeded make public declarations basic foreign policy of neutrality and non-alignment without consulting Vice President. He complained of interminable delays in formation Cypriot Army. Min Defense ended by saying Turk Cypriots wanted US to understand their position and assist them. Denktash said Turk Cypriots agreed 100 percent with VP’s remarks and speeches on importance of independence and integrity of Cyprus. He stated solution communal problem necessary prevent further spread Communism in Cyprus. He added that to his surprise and horror, he had just discovered that even Turk Cypriot community had been penetrated by Communists. A vital Turk Cypriot community is an essential obstacle to the spread of Communism in Cyprus, he said. The Greek majority, he claimed, keeps pushing constantly on rights of Turk Cypriots, who feel selves being gradually maneuvered into a corner. Denktash warned that if Turk Cypriots should find themselves hopelessly cornered and deprived their rights, they might react in blind desperation with unpredictable consequences. As years go by, said Denktash, the two communities will under good conditions slowly draw together in one Cypriot community. Until that time, he warned, basis of government in Cyprus must be bi-communal, not centralized in a Greek-dominated central regime. He complained of failure central government implement separate municipalities, 70–30 ratio in civil service, and alleged reduction central revenues to Turkish education, alleging Greek Cypriots wanted communal chambers to be forced levy heavier taxes in order reduce their standing and support. Denktash said Greek Cypriots refused entertain plan for national university. Wilkins said GOC had not yet made a decision on this subject. Denktash also asked for US aid to be channeled through communal chambers rather than through central government. He claimed only such aid now was school food programs. Vice President asked Ambassador Wilkins about this and Wilkins said it was true because education alone was officially in hands communal chambers instead of central regime. VP said US cannot act like Russians and attempt impose our solutions on problems independent nation no matter how much we might sympathize or not sympathize with one side of a problem. VP promised read Turk Cypriot memorandum and have responsible US officials study it carefully. VP promised that the US would continue to see that all US aid to Cyprus was utilized fairly and without communal discrimination. VP ended by saying “your kind of people are our friends”. Denktash returned this sentiment on behalf Turk Cypriot community and affirmed VP visit had given Turk Cypriots new heart and determination to make the Republic work and progress. Labouisse 265. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 780A.00/10–862. Secret; Niact. Nicosia, October 8, 1962, 5 p.m. 222. Minister of Interior Georkadjis mentioned [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] in conversation today that discussions were now taking place which would lead to new Cypriot right-wing political party, but that matter would probably not jell until Makarios approved. We have had similar information from other sources. Georkadjis expressed hope that we would continue to support this concept in conversations with Makarios as President Kennedy did in June and Vice President Johnson did in August. We shall so do here. In view of these developments, we also recommend that proposed letter by Vice President Johnson to MakariosThe Department of State transmitted the draft text of the letter in telegram 195 to Nicosia, October 5. In the letter Johnson noted the U.S. commitment to aid Cyprus and the Cypriot Government’s agreement in principle to establish a USIA relay station, but advised Makarios that Congress would be unwilling to pay the sum requested by his government since the price was well out of line with the prices paid for other stations. (Ibid., 811.0080A/10–562) contain, as recommended earlier today (Embtel 216),Not printed. (Ibid., 780A.00/10–862) support for formation of right-wing political party.In telegram 198, October 9, the Department of State instructed the Embassy: “You authorized support discreetly in talks with Makarios concept of anti-communist Greek-Cypriot political party. VP’s letter, however, will not refer to this issue, since if leaked it could give opposition and others grounds for pressing charge U.S. interfering in internal Cypriot affairs.” (Ibid.) Wilkins 266. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0080A/10–1362. Confidential. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Washington, October 13, 1962, 9 a.m. 234. Embtel 228;Telegram 228, October 11, reported on official and press reaction to the publication of a memorandum on economic assistance by special envoy Chester Bowles. (Ibid., 811.0080A/10–1162) Deptel 798 [198].See footnote 3, Document 265. Makarios told me this morning that in addition to press reports on Mr. Bowles’ memorandum on American assistance,In this memorandum, Bowles proposed ending aid to states lacking the “compassion, organization and will” to effectively utilize U.S. aid. A summary of the memorandum, with extensive quotations, was published in The New York Times, October 8, 1962. In telegram 233 from Nicosia, October 13, Wilkins reported that Makarios had complained that Bowles’ comments on the Cypriot economy failed to take into consideration Cyprus’ less than 2 years of existence and the progress it had made in that period. Wilkins had responded that Bowles’ views were personal, not an expression of U.S. policy. (Department of State, Central Files, 811.80A/10–1362) there was another subject which disturbed him. He referred to New York Times article of early SeptemberThe article appeared in The New York Times, September 9, 1962. which reported on Vice President Johnson’s visit to Middle East and his conversations with Makarios. Makarios read excerpts touching on Makarios’ attitude re Communism and formation of right-wing political party and said that this account hardly did justice to his views and to what he was trying to do here. Makarios continued that he had been trying to counter international Communist activities in Cyprus and was preparing way for 1965 elections in Cyprus. Gist of Makarios’ argument was that many Cypriot Communists were merely paying lip service to party and left-wing labor union for present benefits and that since they were supporting current GOC policies, it was preferable to retain their cooperation than to risk factions and possibly armed clashes within Greek Cypriot community. Makarios was convinced that Cypriot Communists did not now pose any serious threat here and that if danger should subsequently develop he would utilize any means to resolve matter. Makarios said: “There is no doubt about my anti-Communist views. At same time I must make use of them now and concentrate on making new Cypriot Government work and getting economic development program under way. I cannot risk dissension within Greek Cypriot community, but I will crush Communists if they try to take over our democratic republic.” He said, for example, that former EOKA fighters continue hell-bent to attack Cypriot Communists with force, but that he had with difficulty restrained them in interests of peace in Cyprus. Makarios commented re right-wing political party that we in US had well-established democratic system with educated electorate and only two political parties; Cyprus did not have well-established democratic system and many of its people were unsophisticated politically. It was true Communists were organized; at same time it was too early similarly to organize right wing because, as in Greece, every Cypriot wanted to be political leader. Makarios feared that instead of one right-wing political party there might be two or more. “What if one of them were called ‘party for union with Greece’? Could I disavow such a party or such a policy?” Makarios added that it would be difficult for him as President and as Archbishop to engage directly in political affairs. For time being it was preferable to handle matter indirectly until Cypriot politicians themselves were conscious of need for single organization in opposition to left-wing grouping. Makarios thought that this development would not take place until eve of 1965 elections. I recalled that, during conversation with Makarios last June, President Kennedy had referred to Mao’s reliance upon organization for successful political control and that Vice President Johnson had said that preparation for political elections could not be delayed until last moment. I said that I would make known to Washington his analysis of local situation and his judgment as to how it could best be handled. Meanwhile we could continue to watch situation and work together. Wilkins 267. Editorial Note On December 30, President Makarios released a press statement asserting that constitutional provisions regarding separate municipalities were unworkable and that the Government of Cyprus would assume all the legislative and administrative functions previously performed by the separate municipalities. The Embassy commented: “Unpublicized but secretly welcome by-product of expiration of law re municipalities is removal Communist mayors from Larnaca, Limassol and Famagusta. Commie Deputies, who urged extension of separate municipalities, now expected to join Greek-Cypriot Deputies in vote against extension in order avoid public alignment with Turkish Cypriots. Turkish Communal Chamber passed a law December 29 to assure extension Turkish municipal councils, in case municipalities law is allowed to expire. Greek-Cyps charge this law unconstitutional—fact which they expect to undermine Turkish-Cyps ability exercise authority and collect taxes in their communities. While Greek-Cyps say only economic pressures will be exerted on Turkish-Cyp community and violence is not likely, situation can be expected grow tenser and more volatile.” (Telegram 300 from Nicosia, December 31; Department of State, Central Files, 780A.00/12–3162) 268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CyprusSource: Department of State, Central Files, 780A.00/1–763. Confidential. Drafted by Bowling; cleared by Bracken, RPM, and BNA; and approved by Grant. Also sent to Ankara, Athens, and London and repeated to Istanbul. Washington, January 9, 1963, 8:19 p.m. 276. Ankara tel 738.Telegram 738 from Ankara, January 7, reported that Turkish Foreign Office representatives had expressed concern about the hardening of positions by Greek and Turkish Cypriots and warned that Turkey would support the Turkish Cypriot position. (Ibid.) Department is concerned lest current dispute between Cypriot communities develop into serious conflict between hardened and irreconcilable positions. Such conflict could afford opportunities for expansion communist power in Cyprus, endanger Greek and Turkish Governments and seriously weaken NATO. We continue to believe that prospect of politically viable Cyprus lies not in inflexible constitutional provisions nor in solutions imposed from abroad but in pragmatic adjustments of relations between two communities and gradual development of Cypriot rather than communal interests and values. We believe at present that any effort by either party to draw us into dispute should be politely but firmly rejected. We feel that belief on part either community that it has solid foreign backing will discourage compromise and encourage extremism. It appears that efforts at solution should concentrate on informal negotiation between communities and ad hoc, though perhaps awkward, accommodations. To the extent either party uses formal legal procedures, positions will probably harden. Thus Greek Cypriot action in legally dissolving municipalities and Turk Cypriot reliance on letter of London–Zurich agreements cannot be constructive in long range. For Nicosia: Avoid indications undue U.S. concern. Counsel moderation and mutual adjustment to leaders both communities. Continue report developments, emphasizing temper of rank and file two communities. For Ankara: Indicate to GOT our sympathy for difficult position in which GOT has been placed, and our hope that GOT will exercise its influence on Kutchuk to end that he will continue seek ad hoc compromise with Makarios. Report any indication GOT considering formally invoking right as Guarantor Power to intervene directly, through calling Guarantor Power conference or otherwise. For Athens: At convenient opportunities, continue counsel GOG to urge Makarios to seek solution with Kutchuk. Emphasize our feeling that a viable future for Cyprus depends to great extent on common sense and moderation these two leaders, and that any successor to Kutchuk would probably be less receptive to moderate pragmatic adjustments. For London: You may inform British that while we feel formal consultations between guarantor powers would be counterproductive at this time, Britain, as a guarantor power, has unique opportunity consult at length very informally with Turkish and Greek Governments. Such consultation, we hope, would be based on general considerations outlined above and would assist in obviating adoption of hard uncompromising position in either Athens or Ankara. Rusk 269. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in GreeceSource: Department of State, Central Files, 780A.00/1–1463. Confidential. Drafted by Coon, cleared by NEA, and approved by Grant. Repeated to Nicosia, London, Ankara, and Istanbul. Washington, January 15, 1963, 7:08 p.m. 624. References: (A) Embtel 691 rptd Nicosia 41, London 21, Ankara 47.Telegram 691 from Athens, January 14, reported that Foreign Minister Averoff had expressed concern that the Cyprus situation was becoming dangerous and stressed the Greek Government’s desire for a moderate solution and its efforts to restrain Makarios. Averoff urged the United States to restrain Turkey. (Ibid.) (B) Ankara’s 769, rptd Nicosia 46, London 95, Athens 79.Telegram 769 from Ankara, January 14, reported on increased Turkish concerns regarding Cyprus and warnings from Foreign Office officials that Prime Minister Inonu would completely back the Turkish Cypriot leadership. (Ibid., 780A.00/1–1363) We welcome Averoff’s frankness in communicating his views on Cyprus situation and are encouraged by his continued emphasis on need for both communities exercise moderation and realism in efforts work out compromise solution current problem over municipalities. We believe position you took with Averoff in para 7 reftel was proper one,The relevant part of paragraph 7 reads: “I told Averoff we do not wish to become involved in situation, as we considered this a matter for parties to work out.” Labouisse added that the United States would urge all parties to “take a moderate approach.” and do not at this time wish suggest further points you might make with him. FYI: We recognize situation may soon develop to point where effective prosecution US interests in area will require us come out in support of specific approaches toward resolution of dispute, instead of restricting our role to counseling moderation. However, we still hope latter stance may, by discouraging Cypriots from expecting outsiders to bail them out, contribute critical margin necessary to get Cypriots solve problem themselves. Much depends on GOT position, as well as events and current talks in Cyprus; we are awaiting further information from Ankara and Nicosia. Averoff’s proposal for one year extension old municipalities arrangement strikes us as having merit, but we prefer refrain from endorsing it, or other possible approaches, either with Averoff or with other interested parties, pending basic decision as to whether our present stance continues be viable. End FYI. Rusk 270. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 780A.00/1–1663. Confidential. Nicosia, January 16, 1963, 4 p.m. 323. Vice President Kutchuk asked me to call this morning, saying he wanted to tell me about recent discussions re question of municipalities. Kutchuk had with him his Under Secretary Muftizade, who reviewed talks which had resumed following Makarios’ return from Turkey last November. Muftizade also gave me copies of relevant documents. Kutchuk said he had made courtesy call on Makarios yesterday. They had discussed his recent visit to Ankara, but neither had mentioned question of municipalities, contrary to local press reports this morning which speculated that talks had been resumed and new proposals put forward. Kutchuk and Muftizade said that Turkish Cypriots during recent conversations had sincerely tried to find solution, within Constitution, by agreeing to joint boards and at same time maintaining separate municipal councils. This was essence of agreement immediately before Christmas, but Makarios had subsequently insisted there could be no separate municipal councils, and had endeavored to place blame for breakdown of talks on Kutchuk by saying he had withdrawn his consent. Fact was Kutchuk had never given consent to abolishment of separate councils. Turkish Cypriot public opinion would not accept this change at this stage. Kutchuk and Muftizade said that Makarios’ insistence on abolishing separate municipal councils and thus unilaterally changing Constitution illustrated his policy since independence. Makarios had from beginning believed that Turkish Cypriots had gained excessive privileges under Constitution and did not intend to let them have them. Makarios had also not permitted full implementation of provisions relating to civil service, taxation and Cypriot Army. Greek Cypriot officials had not withdrawn, as promised, civil service cases pending before Constitutional Court, nor had Public Service Commission functioned fairly. Turkish Cypriot rights relating to foreign affairs and executive power were being set aside. Turkish Cypriots were convinced that if they compromised with Makarios on municipalities, it would represent first legal breach in dike of Constitution which would thereafter be undermined and swept away. Kutchuk and Muftizade said they were anxious to discuss all of these matters with Greek Cypriots, but had found Makarios and other Greek Cypriot officials basically unwilling fully to carry out provisions of Constitution. They planned, however, to await return to Cyprus of Glafkos Clerides, as they had more confidence in him and as they believed he might be able to develop new proposals within scope of Constitution. They thought it might be advisable first to discuss other unsettled issues and leave municipalities until last and thus arrange some sort of package deal. Kutchuk and Muftizade said they had yesterday discussed these matters with British High Commissioner, who had told them Makarios was still opposed to separate municipalities, but would not for time being interfere with administration of Turkish Cypriot municipal councils. British High Commissioner had favored, they said, their plans for awaiting Clerides’ return and discussion of other matters prior to making further proposals re municipalities, and had said he would explain Turkish Cypriot attitude to Greek Cypriot Ministers. Kutchuk said they hoped that we also would support Turkish Cypriot views. I said that we had all along counseled moderation and restraint on both sides in reconciling differences of opinion and that it would seem still to be possible to find some compromise for municipalities within framework of Constitution. It also seemed to me that as several years had elapsed since drafting of Constitution, their subsequent experience might make possible practical changes without undermining the whole. We in US, for example, had found it necessary to make ten amendments to our Constitution not long after its adoption. I was not suggesting that they give up important rights, but that there might be adjustments which would be acceptable for good of all. I was glad to hear they stood ready to resume talks with Greek Cypriots, and expressed belief that, with Clerides’ assistance, they would be able to find some accommodation. Wilkins 271. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Athens, Nicosia, and London. Nicosia, February 7, 1963, 11 a.m. 359. Vice President’s Special Assistant Muftizade told me last night that Kutchuk and other Turkish Cypriot leaders were surprised and dismayed by press reports yesterday (Embtel 358)Dated February 7. (Ibid.) that GOC might withhold pounds 400,000 annual Grant to Turkish Cypriot communal chamber unless municipalities issue was resolved. Muftizade attributed this warning directly to Makarios as other details in press report about meeting with Kutchuk could only have come from him. Kutchuk would not now meet with him again as threat of this kind would make it politically impossible to justify to Turkish Cypriots further discussion with Makarios. Muftizade was at loss to understand why Makarios was creating this new roadblock and could only surmise Makarios was not prepared to compromise. I asked Muftizade if they had completed their study of Clerides’ revised proposals (Embtel 355)Telegram 355, February 5, reported that a Makarios–Kutchuk meeting on municipalities failed to achieve any progress and that Clerides had provided the Turkish Cypriots a paper detailing Makarios’ proposals. (Ibid.) A copy of these proposals was sent to the Department of State in airgram A–1821 from London, February 15. (Department of State, Central Files, POL–Cyp) and hoped Denktash would still be meeting with Clerides to discuss them, even if Kutchuk did not wish to. Muftizade at first said this also would not now be possible for some time, but after discussion agreed Clerides’ revised proposals had many advantages and although Makarios’ last tactic made further discussion difficult, it would be wise to move ahead with additional talks. Wilkins 272. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Athens, Ankara, and London. Nicosia, February 13, 1963, 4 p.m. 372. Deptel 311, Ankara’s 930, Embtel 366.In telegram 311 to Nicosia, February 12, the Department of State requested comments on telegram 930 from Ankara. (Ibid.) Telegram 930, February 9, reported Foreign Minister Erkin’s proposals for a Cyprus solution together with his appeal for U.S. intervention. (Ibid.) Telegram 366 from Nicosia, February 12, reported that Greek Government representatives in Cyprus were urging U.S. intervention to broker a solution. (Ibid.) I believe US intervention Cyprus municipalities issue at this time would offer no new prospects for agreement, as we lack leverage and it might provide excuse for further delay in resolution of problem. Reasonable basis for agreement, after necessary modifications, appears presently available in Makarios’ proposals of last March as subsequently modified, which offer prospect of guarantees which should accord Turkish community substance, if not form, of what they desire. I doubt Makarios will now accept lengthy continuance separate Turkish municipal councils, even with addition of joint municipal boards. Key will be whether GOT allows Turkish Cypriots sufficient negotiating flexibility. This connection, I believe it important that all three guarantor powers, especially Athens and Ankara, who know best how to influence their communities here, should through continuing close consultation coordinate their efforts in Cyprus to encourage agreement on reasonable compromise solution. Turkish Ambassador Ozkol reportedly discussed substance of municipalities issue on several occasions recently, especially in three-hour session with FonMin Kyprianou February 11. There is also prospect of informal talks between House President Clerides and Turkish Communal Chamber President Denktash during Vice President Kutchuk’s visit to Germany. I consider our most effective action is to continue to counsel moderation, restraint and accommodation within spirit, if not letter, of Constitution in interest of all concerned lest situation deteriorate with risk of violence. Wilkins 273. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Athens, Nicosia, London, Istanbul, Paris, and Rome. Ankara, February 14, 1963, 7 p.m. 953. Paris pass SHAPE POLAD for information. Rome pass CINCSOUTH POLAD for information. Embtel 930.See footnote 1, Document 272. GOT’s growing concern with consequences Cyprus municipalities dispute reported reference telegram and its position on dispute and ramifications thereof have been reported Embtel 851Telegram 851, January 29, reported the views of the Turkish Government on the Cypriot municipalities question. (Department of State, Central Files, 780A.00/1–2963) and previous. Purpose this message is clarify political basis for GOT position. GOT has reacted strongly to possible termination Turkish municipalities primarily because it considers such move threat to principle of inviolability Cyprus constitution and London–Zurich Agreements. Turks’ view, reiterated to us on many occasions, and stated categorically by Foreign Minister Erkin during recent GNA debates on foreign policy, is that if infringement or deviation from constitution is once allowed it will open door to proposals and pressures for further changes, thus undermining whole carefully balanced Cyprus structure. Fundamental underlying concern is that breakdown GOC structure would lead to Enosis with Greece. Consequences, they believe, could be disastrous not only for Cyprus but for Turk-Greek relations and NATO solidarity. Also relevant to understanding GOT attitude is importance which Foreign Office officials have always attached to developing climate confidence between Greek and Turk Cypriot communities. Now appears that as result Makarios handling municipalities question GOT has lost much of faith it may have had in his assurances good intentions toward Turk community. Would be mistake interpret GOT position of moderation and patience as sign of weakness. Since May 1960 revolution GOT has based its Cyprus policies on full support and respect for London–Zurich Agreements and has refrained from attempting exploit problems Turkish Cypriots for domestic political purposes. On contrary when feelings have begun rise here, e.g. following bombings of Bayraktar Mosque, GOT has taken hand in keeping them within bounds. However, this does not mean that GOT views Cyprus with decreasing importance but simply that GOT has tried to follow what it believes to be correct, consistent policy on Cyprus. Moreover, difficulties and vulnerability present coalition government vis-à-vis its various domestic opponents impel it resist any attempt undermine rights and guarantees afforded Turkish Cypriot community by agreements and constitution. GOT sincerely wishes avoid serious trouble between Cypriot communities, yet government has probably concluded that to acquiesce in concessions on constitutional principle involved in municipalities question might well cause it insuperable difficulties with GNA, press and public opinion. Recent consideration Turk foreign policy and Foreign Office budget in GNA has clearly demonstrated GNA solidarity on Cyprus policy, and criticisms confined generally to demands for tougher line implementing that policy. Thus, given Prime Minister Inonu’s determination make present coalition work because alternatives seem fraught with uncertainty, we assume he will exert strong effort prevent Cyprus becoming potentially serious issue for his government. What may therefore appear as rigid GOT attitude on municipalities question is product of conviction necessity maintaining Cyprus constitution coupled with sense self-preservation on part coalition government. Hare 274. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Confidential. Drafted by King, cleared by GTI and BNA, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Athens, Ankara, and Nicosia. Washington, February 16, 1963, 10:34 a.m. 4387. Cyprus municipalities dispute has reached a point where we feel we must supplement our present policy of counseling moderation with more positive action. We fully agree that any direct US approach to the factions in Cyprus would be counterproductive and would saddle us with problem for indefinite future. On other hand, UK is in peculiarly strategic position as Guarantor Power with abiding interest in island and with significant influence on parties concerned. In past few days British have demonstrated willingness to involve themselves more deeply in question by approaches to Turks in London and Ankara and to factions in Cyprus. However, indications are that their approach is too piecemeal and is not having desired effect. We note that GOT and GOG positions are remarkably close although neither seems fully aware of this (Erkin position reported in Ankara’s 930 to Dept;See footnote 1, Document 272. similar position described by Pilavaki, in Athens’ 808 to Dept,Telegram 808 from Athens, February 13, reported on discussions with the Greek Foreign Office on developments in Cyprus. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp) as possibly providing basis for negotiation). Formal tripartite consultations might promote a common position but are undesirable because they would formalize positions in propaganda arena, leave less room for maneuvering, reduce possible areas of compromise, etc. We believe US–UK estimate of situation now basically in accord. We feel time has come for British consistently push informal approach in all three capitals. We want British to emphasize to Greeks and Turks similarities their present positions and guide them to common stance and coordinated 3-power pressure on Cypriot communities. We are calling in a senior British Embassy officer, probably on Tuesday, to urge this course of action.The demarche was made on February 20, when Assistant Secretary Talbot met with British Counselor Killick. In the course of their discussion, Killick stated that his government was concerned by apparent Turkish intransigence and by its control over the Turkish Cypriot negotiators. A memorandum of their conversation is ibid., POL Cyp. Embassy London should, if it agrees, make a similar approach to CRO. If British demur, we will offer to join them in their approach to Greeks and Turks or, if necessary, tell them we will make the approach ourselves and ask for their support. At same time, we are asking Ambassador Labouisse to utilize his return to Athens to point out to GOG closeness its position with that of GOT. Request comments from both action and info posts.Telegram 3190 from London, February 18, endorsed the suggestion of prompting the British Government to take more decisive action, but also noted that the United Kingdom already was active in both Athens and Nicosia. (Ibid., POL 18 Cyp) Telegram 376 from Nicosia, February 18, endorsed the proposed action but stressed the need for leaving the United Kingdom with the greatest possible latitude. (Ibid.) Rusk 275. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Athens, Nicosia, and London. Ankara, February 20, 1963, 4 p.m. 983. Deptel 728.Printed as telegram 4387 to London, Document 274. Embassy’s assessment of municipalities issue as seen by GOT set forth in Embtel 953.Document 273. We continue believe approaches to GOT to be effective must be within framework of what GOT conceives to be its basic interest in matter. While GOT has conditionally accepted idea of integrated municipalities as eventual development (Embtel 930)See footnote 1, Document 272. it does not want be rushed in getting there, and FonMin Erkin has shown strong unwillingness preside over liquidation Turk municipalities near future. On other hand, believe GOT can live with present situation, even though it lacks legal foundation valued by GOT. Therefore, if way can be found persuade Makarios go slow on what Turks consider harassing tactics, breathing spell should ensue during which it may be possible bridge difference in Turk and Greek positions on length of period separate municipalities should continue operate before turning over all authority and functions to committees of coordination. Since USG now involved in sensitive Jupiter–Polaris negotiations with GOT we do not believe this is the time for us to push Turks on Cyprus problems. On other hand Embassy sees value in encouraging UK attempt close gap GOT and GOG positions on Cyprus municipalities as prelude to coordinated three-power pressure on parties to dispute. Judging from our conversations with UK charge here, he seems have better understanding of GOT policy and basic underlying factors, and approach through British might have something of catalytic effect at this time. Hare 276. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Athens, Ankara, and Nicosia. London, February 23, 1963, 2 p.m. 3261. Deptel 4477.Telegram 4477, February 21, reported the substance of the February 20 Talbot–Killick discussion. (Ibid.) See footnote 3, Document 274. We met yesterday with Crowley of CRO and Jamieson of FonOff to discuss Cyprus situation. They had report Talbot–Killick conversation including suggestion promoting informal bilateral talks between GOG and GOT designed to achieve coordinated approach to respective Cypriot communities. In course two-hour review Cyprus situation, following points emerged: 1. HMG is gratified at Department’s initiative and will welcome any assistance which USG feels able to give to resolve municipalities dispute. 2. HMG has serious doubts, however, that any GOG–GOT talks are likely to be constructive step to advance settlement municipalities dispute. In HMG’s view, crux of problem lies in GOT and Makarios’ attitudes. 3. Re proposed GOG–GOT talks, Jamieson expressed doubt they likely soften GOT’s rigid position. He recalled that when municipalities dispute first developed, Erkin wrote to Averoff suggesting they meet in Istanbul or Alexandropolis to discuss problem in context “gentleman’s agreement” reached during Zurich Accord as preliminary to tripartite meeting. Averoff told UK Ambassador Athens he knew of no such “gentleman’s agreement” and never replied to Erkin’s proposal. Nevertheless, in British view, GOG has consistently hewed to constructive line and has endeavored, thus far successfully, to keep current municipalities dispute out of Greek politics. British are fearful that GOG–GOT talks will quickly degenerate because of existing tensions between two countries most recently prompted by (a) abrupt GOT action in proclaiming twelve-mile limit, (b) unresolved Maritza case, and (c) GOT attitude toward Patriarchate. Sour taste left by these issues likely carry over to Cyprus talks and, in HMG view, could force GOG introduce municipalities issue into Greek politics, which British believe would be retrogressive step. Moreover, GOG’s influence on Makarios very limited. 4. Latest GOT position known to HMG is that reported Embtel 3257.Telegram 3257, February 22, reported that the Turkish Government was taking a hard line on the Cyprus issue. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp) Jamieson recalled GOT suggestion possible need of guarantor powers hold informal tripartite talks (Embtel 2987).Dated February 6. (Ibid.) HMG sees “grave objections” to this since whatever disguise may be given them, they are still likely be viewed as talks under treaty of guaranty. Instead, HMG believes effort should be made to persuade GOT remain quiet for time being to enable Greek and Turk Cypriot communities to arrive at solution. Jamieson pointed out that if solution acceptable to Turk Cypriot community can be developed, especially if it contains reasonable safeguard such as willingness scrap joint councils after one year if they prove unsuccessful, this should go long way make it palatable to GOT, Turkish Parliament and public. In this connection, any help which Department believes US Ambassador in Ankara can give to restrain GOT from curbing Turkish Cypriot community’s efforts to work out fair settlement with Greek Cypriots will, in HMG’s view, be most helpful. We recalled USG currently engaged in delicate negotiations with GOT which might make direct US pressure in Ankara re Cyprus problems somewhat difficult (Ankara’s 983),Document 275. but agreed put British suggestion to Department. 5. Re Makarios, HMG remains deeply concerned at his flippant and provocative attitude. When UK/HICOM in Nicosia saw Makarios last week to tax him on his attitude, Makarios apparently quite unrepentant but did agree take no further steps to implement unified municipalities scheme pending further talks with Kutchuk. Crowley suggested that any help US Ambassador in Nicosia might give in stressing to Makarios need for a “statesmanlike” approach to delicate communal relations problem will be greatly appreciated. If Department willing have US Ambassador Nicosia approach Makarios along these lines, Crowley suggested consultations between Ambassador Wilkins and UK/HICOM Clark to determine how they may best work in concert. 6. HMG suggests that any “coordination” of UK–US initiatives re Cyprus municipalities dispute be done in London. Jones 277. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Athens, Nicosia, and London. Ankara, April 1, 1963, 1 p.m. 1170. In general review of pending problems Saturday, FonMin Erkin said was particularly troubled by recent sttements of Makarios (Nicosia 441)Dated March 28. (Ibid.) which seemed to make it clear that, if decision of Constitutional Court was not favorable to Greek point of view, Makarios would disregard it. Erkin said he was at loss understand how such things could be said in light of existing formal agreements. With reference to municipalities Turks had made specific proposal which would have end result of accomplishing what Makarios seeking. Turks know this and made proposal deliberately with that knowledge in mind but what they must insist on is that procedure be such that existing and solemn agreements not be violated. To do otherwise would be enact “first act of long tragedy”. That Turk apprehension in this regard well founded, said Erkin, was substantiated by Makarios’ own reference in another part of his press statement to fact Greeks in Cyprus cannot have other than Greek conscience, which seemed be just another way of saying that Enosis remains objective. Was Makarios deliberately trying drive problem to point of desperation which could lead to use of force? It seemed fantastic. But what are Turks to think? Then, speaking very seriously but unemotionally, Erkin said he was at complete loss know what to do in this situation and felt only recourse was to turn to us for advice and assistance. All he was asking was that agreements be respected. He couldn’t believe that was asking too much since it is merely recognition of basic principle of international relationships. I replied would report to my government with view eliciting any thoughts which might be helpful. But in meantime I would observe that we had, of course, been following matter attentively with view encouraging parties reach agreed solution and we had felt at one time recently that some progress being made toward narrowing issue re municipalities. In circumstances I was distressed hear GOT felt recent Makarios statements had made situation even more difficult than before. However, I had word of counsel, which was that, if GOT felt Makarios statements excessive, thing to avoid would be to reply in kind. To do so would merely escalate problem to greater degree of difficulty and would also not reflect favorably on position of reasonableness which GOT asserts be its purpose. There is sometimes temptation in such circumstances to resort to tit-for-tat tactics but to do so usually self-defeating. Erkin expressed agreement, saying he was conscious of desirability of maintaining dignified posture but added this difficult, noting bitter anti-Turk campaign now being carried on in Greek press as contrasted calm being preserved here. In this connection, he said there had been plan for visit of Greek journalists to Turkey last fall which had been postponed till March 28 only to have it cancelled at last minute on ground Greeks did not feel it appropriate come to Turkey at time when their press so aroused. “What”, asked Erkin, “can we do in such a situation?” I then asked Erkin if there had been any developments toward discussion of these problems with the GOG. Erkin said that there had not and that his proposal to meet Averoff was still without reply. As contrasted pondered nature rest of conversation, this was said with distinct bitterness. I then noted that proper communication would seem be part of problem since, for instance, we had report from our Embassy Athens that Averoff had publicly expressed appreciation for release Greek fishermen in replying press criticism (Athens 948).Dated March 22. (Ibid., POL 33–4 Gr–Tur) Erkin said this interesting news to him and he only wished might have been possible for GOG say as much to GOT. Comment: Although this is a many faceted problem which defies simplified solution, it would appear that there is one factor in it which can be segregated as being constantly and needlessly noxious. This is tendency of Makarios personally to take positions and make statements which not only exacerbate situation here by confirming worst suspicions of Turks but also seem to be in clear conflict with policy of moderation which GOG reportedly endeavoring exert. If this correct, would seem that this particular problem is of type which might be approached as thing in itself. Problem is who is going to bell the cat. Hare 278. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CyprusSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by King; cleared by GTI, UNP, NEA, L, and BNA; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Ankara and repeated to Athens, London, and USUN. Washington, April 4, 1963, 7:49 p.m. 371. Ref: Ankara’s 1170 and 1184 to Dept; Nicosia’s 438, 441, 443, 444, 446, 447 and Toaid 313 to Dept.Telegram 1170 is printed as Document 277. Telegram 1184 from Ankara, April 2, reported on Turkish reaction to Makarios’ March 31 speech commemorating the 1954 uprising against British colonial rule and suggesting his commitment to eventual enosis. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp) In telegram 438 from Nicosia, March 28, the Embassy reported that Turkish Foreign Minister Erkin’s talks in Rome apparently were a critical factor in Makarios’ decision to take a tougher stance on both the municipalities issue and possible Turkish intervention. (Ibid.) Telegrams 441 and 443 are not printed. (Both ibid.) In telegram 444, March 29, Wilkins reported on his discussions with Turkish Cypriot leaders. (Ibid.) Telegram 446, April 1, transmitted the text of Makarios’ March 31 statement commemorating the 1954 uprising. (Ibid., POL 17–4 Cyp) In telegram 447, April 2, Wilkins reported on his discussions with the British High Commissioner in Cyprus. (Ibid., POL 18 Cyp) Telegram Toaid 313 has not been found. We agree that recent Makarios statements unhelpful in both content and timing. In absence clear-cut evidence his immediate motives, it not possible to tell whether he reacting to Erkin’s talks in Rome, attempting placate die-hard pro-enosis elements among backers, or trying to exacerbate situation to point that Cyprus question is in effect reopened, presumably to his advantage. We conclude Makarios’ long-term objective is not union with Greece but rather elimination or neutralization those provisions London–Zurich agreements and constitution which in effect circumscribe sovereignty of Republic. Among these would be most of special guarantees for Turkish community and intervention rights of Guarantor Powers. We assume that his recent statements and in fact all his actions relating to communal matters are designed to carry out this ultimate objective while maintaining his position and strength on island. Makarios appears prepared make move toward objective whenever he feels attitudes of interested powers will let him get by with it. In this frame of mind, he may interpret US and UK counsels of restraint and moderation as evidence of reluctance to reopen issues, become further involved, or see problem escalate. Furthermore, he cannot fail be aware of US and UK concern over current tensions between NATO allies Greece and Turkey, of which Cyprus problem one part. Consequently, he may feel he can with reasonable impunity take hard or defiant line with island Turks and Ankara, and in final analysis rely on UK and US keep GOT off his neck for sake of peace and quiet. He also appears confident he can always refer issue to UN and receive wide support uncommitted and neutralist nations in his struggle against outside (i.e., Turkish) intervention (Nicosia’s 447). In our judgment, Makarios’ ability to utilize UN instrumentalities and to mobilize support in UN would be decisively influenced by circumstances in which possible Turkish intervention might arise. In general, without making any final judgment re merits of case, we feel there would probably be a good deal of sympathy and support for Makarios in UN where members would have reserved attitude re intervention of other powers, regardless of provisions of Treaty of Guarantee. Makarios may believe, therefore, that referral to UN, or (more probably) threat to do so, would impel UK and US exert pressure on GOT to be “reasonable”, i.e., to give him what he wants. From US viewpoint, he is mistaken in this belief, but perhaps present sensitive period not appropriate time to make point. (We believe Turkish attempt at direct military intervention most unlikely even though in last analysis intervention not involving recourse to force would not be meaningful. Move against Cyprus by Turkish military might mean clash with Greece and might also bring down great pressure by interested outside powers. This does not mean, of course, that GOT will not continue hint darkly at possibility such intervention when it considers such a tactic useful.) With regard to immediate problem rising from recent Makarios statements, we consider Embassy Ankara and Embassy Nicosia have fielded question in best possible manner in contacts with Turks. Embassy Nicosia: Ambassador, at his discretion, should utilize appropriate opportunity make following points to Makarios: 1. We having great difficulty finding anything in his recent statements which makes contribution toward solution problem. On contrary, coming on eve Constitutional Court decision, statements appear even to sympathetic outside observer as deliberately provocative. 2. We forced reaffirm our view re continuing validity London–Zurich agreements and constitution, although we realize that all constitutions subject to gradual changes in interpretation based on experience and general consensual acceptance by citizenry. 3. We assume, if Constitutional Court rules against both Greek and Turkish recourses and Government assumes responsibility municipalities administration, Government will attempt forestall critical Turkish reaction by making it publicly clear this is interim measure to provide local authority while efforts find permanent solution continue. 4. We note with great concern that communal differences have reached point where program as sensible as development bank jeopardized. Not only have Greek and Turk differences succeeded in postponing availability US and German aid funds earmarked for bank but actions will discourage inflow of badly needed foreign investment as well as return of Cypriot money from abroad. 5. We believe a future Cyprus in which two large communities remain at daggers drawn, immobilizing all initiatives for progress, spells nothing but hardship and sorrow for all Cypriots. A Cyprus in which one-fifth of the population is effectively denied a voice in determining national destinies would be equally tragic. It is task of true statesmanship to avoid these dead ends and build a true Cypriot nation. As Makarios must be aware from his sojourn in US, we Americans know from bitter experience of century ago that all must be willing compromise cherished objectives within flexible framework of constitutional democracy or national tragedy is inevitable.In telegram 454 from Nicosia, April 5, Wilkins reported that he had met with Makarios and delivered the demarche outlined here. Makarios downplayed the differences between the two communities and underlined his plans to seek a negotiated solution. (Ibid.) On April 25, the Cypriot Constitutional Court held that both the Greek Cypriot Municipalities Boards and the Turkish Cypriot Municipal Councils were unconstitutional. On April 26, President Makarios stated that the Court’s decision required immediate action in order to continue the provision of basic services. He announced that he would meet with Vice President Kutchuk on April 27 to seek a solution that would lead to the restoration of former unity and cooperation. Embassy Ankara: Ambassador may wish follow up subject with Erkin by pointing out when suitable occasion arises that US regards London–Zurich settlement (including Cyprus constitution with, of course, its provisions for amendment and change) as still valid. At your discretion, GOT may also be informed of general nature of our approach to Makarios, including content of first and second points outlined above. Has Erkin considered a letter to Makarios along lines his “formula”, as follow up to Makarios’ visit to Ankara?In telegram 1227 from Ankara, April 9, the Embassy reported that Erkin, while expressing gratitude for U.S. efforts, was suspicious about Makarios’ objectives. (Ibid.) Ball 279. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Secret; Operational Immediate; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Nicosia, Ankara, and London. Athens, April 27, 1963, noon. 1100. 1. FonMin Averoff has advised me that the letter to Makarios referred to in Embtel 1049,Telegram 1049, April 17, reported on discussions between Labouisse and Averoff on the range of Greek foreign policy problems. During the conversation, Averoff reaffirmed the Greek Government’s desire to induce Makarios to moderate his behavior. (Ibid.) has been delivered. 2. I have been informed by reliable source that letter, which appeared to have been three or four pages in length, was friendly but firm. General line reported to be somewhat as follows: 3. GOG is prepared to continue to help Cyprus to reach reasonable solution, as in past, but if Makarios should seek to force revision of Constitution, Greece and Cyprus must then go separate ways. Greece has always honored its signature and will continue to do so. It can never subscribe to doctrine of unilateral revision of international agreements. Grave dangers lie in such a course. Much emphasis is placed on bearing of Cyprus problem on Turkish-Greek relations, and importance preventing further deterioration those relations. It is said that unilateral action could lead not only to aggravation tension in Greek-Turkish relations, but also to deterioration position of Patriarch. Letter warns that GOG is so strongly committed to avoidance extra-legal action that, if necessary, government is prepared go before public with statement upholding London–Zurich agreements. Letter acknowledges government realization such a public stance will pose most serious internal problem in Greece, but states that if pushed to extremes, it is prepared to submit question to people either through new elections or plebiscite. 4. Averoff believes his letter has made deep impression on Makarios who “turned white” when he read it. It is Averoff’s opinion that Makarios had every reason to believe Greeks are not speaking idly and that Makarios will realize GOG is deadly serious. 5. Averoff feels strongly that, following action of Constitutional Court, time is ripe to exert further pressure on Makarios “to work something out.” He therefore urges that US and UK make immediate demarche to Makarios. Averoff does not want to approach British personally and he prefers we not quote him to British. He considers time of the essence if Makarios is to be steered into sensible course. He hopes we will act this week end and, if possible, persuade the UK to do likewise. 6. I reminded Averoff that we had been counselling moderation for a long time. He expressed his appreciation this fact but replied that it was most important at this moment, following the Court action, to press Makarios again. 7. I shall appreciate receiving Department’s reaction ASAP as I shall be seeing Averoff again shortly. Labouisse 280. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CyprusSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Secret; Operational Immediate. Drafted by Schott and King, cleared by BNA and S/S, and approved by Cottam. Also sent to Athens and repeated to London, Ankara, and Tehran for the Secretary. Washington, April 28, 1963, 5:50 p.m. 409. Athens’ 1100 to Dept; London’s 4246 to Dept; Ankara’s ed Secto 4; Deptel 371 to Nicosia, 851 to Athens; Nicosia’s 454 to Dept.Telegram 1100 is printed as Document 279. In telegram 4246, April 28, the Embassy in London reported that it had conveyed the substance of Averoff’s note to the Foreign Office. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp) In ed Secto 4 from Ankara, April 26, Secretary Rusk commented that the Averoff letter was a “conscientious and serious effort” to bring Makarios into line, undertaken despite political risks. (Ibid.) Telegram 371 is printed as Document 278. Regarding telegram 454, see footnote 2 thereto. 1. Athens’ letter to Makarios appears to be mature statesmanlike declaration GOG’s respect for rule of law and demonstration its determination do all possible, even at risk being attacked by political opposition, to persuade and pressure Archbishop into adopting similar responsible outlook and to minimize Cyprus as bone of contention with GOT. GOG willingness lay its own future on the line to clear up Cyprus problem could be pivotal step in improvement Greek-Turkish relations. It represents move of major significance, and calls for appropriate response and support from other interested parties, including US. For Athens 2. You may indicate to Averoff that we commend GOG initiative and support GOG approach. 3. Inform him of our plan make general demarche to Makarios along lines indicated below. 4. We endeavoring influence UK go along. We believe, however, Averoff should also personally contact British Ambassador Athens and attempt directly elicit UK support. In our view and from our experience, UK as fellow guarantor power and NATO ally of Greece more likely respond favorably to GOG request than if unilaterally approached by us in behalf GOG. For Nicosia 5. You should arrange see Makarios to provide effective support requested by Averoff. Inform British colleague before making call and coordinate your approach with any he may be authorized make. 6. Avoiding any mention our knowledge existence or contents GOG letter, you should make clear to Archbishop we feel Constitutional Court decision provides unique opportunity move toward permanent legal solution vexing municipalities problem which has for too long diverted energies both Cypriot communities from pressing problems of economic and social development. 7. Reaffirm our view, as expressed to him on April 5, that London–Zurich agreements and Constitution have continuing validity and that necessary changes can be accomplished through agreement both communities based on mutual trust and confidence. Ball 281. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Nicosia, April 30, 1963, 5 p.m. 500. I had appointment to see Makarios this morning to discuss various economic matters and took advantage of opportunity to discuss question of municipalities along lines of Deptel 409.Document 280. I emphasized that now that Constitutional Court had handed down its judgments, there was new opportunity to solve this issue for political and economic benefit of Cyprus. I also reiterated our continued belief in validity of London–Zurich agreements, subject to changes which reasonable men on both sides might find necessary, as had been case with our own Constitution. Makarios said he appreciated spirit which motivated our interest and that he had been endeavoring, following Court decision, to calm situation and to put forward new proposals (Embtel 496),Telegram 496, April 30, transmitted the text of Greek Cypriot proposals regarding municipal reorganization. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp) but that Turkish Cypriots had returned them and were insisting that communities be completely separated. Makarios regretted this action because experience had shown administration could not in practice be completely separated and that Article 173 of Constitution did not require that this status be permanent. Makarios said that he nevertheless still planned to meet with Kutchuk this afternoon to discuss matter and to ascertain whether Turkish Cypriots had any suggestions of their own as to how matter might be resolved. If present proposals were not acceptable, best solution might be to request House temporarily to give GOC responsibility for day-to-day administration of municipalities until such time as final solution was worked out. I said I thought Makarios was on right track in endeavoring to calm situation and in making constructive proposals, and that at this stage it was important Greek and Turkish Cypriots continued to meet and discuss matters. I added that as I had occasion myself to talk with other Greek Cypriot leaders and especially with Turkish Cypriot leaders, I would urge them to move forward. Earlier today Kutchuk asked me to call this afternoon, at which time I shall urge him to continue talks with Makarios and other Greek Cypriots and to solve this present problem which started out as of minor importance and has now been blown up to unreasonable proportions.In telegram 502, April 30, Wilkins reported that Turkish Cypriot leaders were proposing a mix of common and separate administrative institutions. They claimed to be ready to negotiate but feared the Greek Cypriots did not really desire a solution. (Ibid.) Wilkins 282. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CyprusSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Confidential. Drafted by King; cleared by IO, BNA, NEA, and GTI; and approved by Talbot. Also sent to London, Athens, and USUN and repeated to Ankara and Ottawa for the Secretary. Washington, May 23, 1963, 8:14 p.m. 463. Ref: Nicosia’s 573 to Dept, 192 to Athens, 110 to London, 161 to Ankara.Telegram 573 from Nicosia, May 21, reported Makarios’ pessimism over the possibility of a compromise solution to the municipalities issue. (Ibid., AID (US) 15–8 Cyp) 1. Dept views with growing concern Makarios’ apparent developing idea that solution certain of his basic problems may lie in appeal to UN. We aware he has mentioned this possibility before but interpreted it as vague thought on his part to threaten referral in order to render UK and Greece more amenable his point of view. Now he may be seriously contemplating use of UN, perhaps as result (1) recent Averoff and Canellopoulos statements before Greek parliament (Athens 1151 to Dept)Telegram 1151 from Athens, May 11, reported that Averoff had suggested that Greece might request revision of the London agreements. (Ibid, POL Cyp–Gr) to effect GOG might ask for changes in governing treaties or Constitution through negotiation, and/or (2) exaggerated and illusory notion, engendered by Amb Rossides during recent consultations Nicosia, of backing GOC might expect in UN. 2. We realize any eventual Makarios appeal to UN might be framed in indirect manner which could impose necessity difficult judgments and choices on US and UK as well as Greece and Turkey, and which might elicit wider UN member response than more straightforward question of sanctity of treaties, etc. 3. However, Dept feels it highly desirable promptly disabuse Makarios of preconception, which we consider dangerously erroneous, that any Cyprus appeal to UN would have backing, sympathy or even acceptance by US; we feel strongly that solution current aspect communal problem can and should be found in Cyprus by Cypriots. We suspect also that Greece, when chips are down, would be guided in its reaction to GOC attempt elicit its support for appeal to UN by considerations more important to it than Cyprus, i.e., relations with Turkey, UK and US, position within NATO and Common Market, etc. 4. We believe it desirable therefore have early separate approaches to Makarios by British and ourselves to provide him clear knowledge UK and US attitudes in this regard and to give him possibly more realistic view UN scene than he is likely to get from Rossides. For London 5. You should elicit CRO and FonOff views approach described above and attempt obtain agreement that UK HICOM Nicosia will make similar demarche. Inform British we will make approach in any event. For Athens 6. Further information or comment on Averoff and Canellopoulos statements referred to above would be most useful in attempting analyze GOG thinking this issue and foresee its possible plans. At your discretion, you may wish informally alert responsive level GOG to US lack of sympathy for UN involvement in any aspect Cyprus situation and, if possible, learn if GOG would be willing discourage Makarios from any plans in that direction. Suggest you coordinate with UK Ambassador. For Nicosia 7. In May 21 conversation,Wilkins reported on his conversation with Makarios in telegram 573, May 21. (Ibid., AID US 15–8 Cyp) Makarios may have been throwing out idea of possible appeal to UN to test US reaction before moving further with plans. It important, therefore, he be fully alerted as soon as possible to our thinking. Suggest, at early appropriate occasion, and after consultation with British HICOM Clark, you convey to Makarios substance US attitude as indicated first sentence paragraph 3 above. FYI: In your presentation you might wish avoid implication we overly concerned this matter and simply inform Archbishop of facts of life. End FYI. For USUN 8. FYI. Would be useful if US and UK dels would consult and provide Dept with your assessment re above. Line taken in this tel is designed to discourage GOC from bringing matter to UN. We appreciate fully that Cypriots could refer matter to UN in such a way as to mobilize substantial support for UN third party intervention. We wish emphasize our belief that discussion with Rossides would not be helpful at this stage, but would appreciate having any indication you may be able to obtain discreetly regarding any steps he may be taking. Ball 283. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Nicosia, June 6, 1963, noon. 642. Pass AID. Toner and I called on Makarios this morning for further discussion of several economic matters. At close I commented that it was heartening to observe economic progress which Cyprus was making and expressed hope similar political progress would soon be made. Makarios said that, as matter of fact, he had been preoccupied with other questions and there had been no new political developments in past few days. He himself had not discussed political matters either with his Greek Cypriot Ministers nor with Turkish Cypriots. Makarios added, however, that he was still considering, as he had told me during our last conversation (Embtel 573),See footnote 1, Document 282. how to resolve Cyprus’ current political difficulties. Makarios said that he had reached conclusion in his own mind that it would be necessary to revise Cypriot Constitution. He had, however, not as yet decided what timing and procedure would be for revision. Many articles of Constitution were unamendable; consequently careful consideration would be required as to when and how revision should be handled. Makarios also observed that there were varying interpretations with respect to Treaty of Guarantee. Some thought it meant guarantor powers could intervene in Cyprus. He did not agree with this interpretation. He did not think Cyprus could be described as independent country if other countries had right of intervention and had their troops stationed in Cyprus as Greece and Turkey did. British bases in Cyprus were different matter as they were subject of separate bilateral agreements. Makarios added that he would prefer to become member of NATO rather than be guaranteed by Greece and Turkey. I said I was disappointed to learn that there had been no further political talks between Greek and Turkish Cypriots in recent days. I said that following my last conversation with him I had seen several Turkish Cypriot leaders and had urged them to continue earlier talks.In telegram 610, May 30, Wilkins reported on his efforts to press both sides to renew talks. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp) I said they had discussed current questions in reasonable way and had agreed to get in touch with Clerides. I added that it seemed to us solution to political difficulties could best be found in direct talks between Greek and Turkish Cypriots. It seemed wiser to approach matter in this way than by adopting some more radical approach, such as reference to UN. I made it clear, in line with Deptel 463,Document 282. Cyprus could not expect US support if it embarked on this course. Makarios replied that it seemed to him time had come to revise Constitution and Treaty of Guarantee. There no longer seemed any real possibility of solution through direct talks between Greek and Turkish Cypriots. Although he had reached this conclusion, he had not as yet decided when to go about it or how to proceed. Cypriot Constitution would not, in any event, be subject which could be considered by UN, although other matters, such as Treaty of Guarantee, might be. He hoped by next week to summarize on paper his thoughts regarding present and future of Cyprus and would give us copy. It seems clear from this analysis by Makarios and Kyprianou’s earlier remarks (Embtel 638)Dated June 5. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 2 Cyp) that Greek Cypriots have become frustrated by their inconclusive discussions with Turkish Cypriots during past six months and as result are now considering other ways of finding solution to current problems, such as reference to UN and to guarantor powers. I nevertheless pressed Makarios very hard to continue direct talks with Turkish Cypriots as sounder method of tackling these problems and as one which would avoid complications which would arise in calling for revision of London–Zurich agreements. Wilkins 284. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Nicosia, June 21, 1963, 1 p.m. 693. Verbatim text. Embtels 642 and 681.Telegram 642 is printed as Document 283. Telegram 681 is not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyp) Following memorandum from Makarios labelled confidential was handed to Ambassador Wilkins just before his departure this morning. Comment will follow. Begin text (unnecessary words omitted): At time when agreements establishing Cyprus State were signed in London in February, 1959, it was more than obvious that number of provisions of those agreements would create difficulties in functioning of state, constituting at same time sources of friction between Greeks and Turks in Cyprus, with grave consequences affecting relations between Greece and Turkey. In course of conference in London—at which UK, Greece and Turkey participated—Archbishop Makarios had then expressed serious reservations with regard to certain provisions contained in agreements and, in fact, proposed some amendments, which were not, however, accepted. In his desire to see end to bloodshed, on one hand, and on other hand to see Cyprus attaining independence, he had finally decided to sign agreements, upon which Constitution of Cyprus was subsequently based. Since independence, it has become abundantly clear that certain constitutional provisions are unworkable in actual practice, as for example provision with regard to separate municipalities in five main towns of island. Other provisions, one, for example, requiring separate majorities for enactment of taxation legislation, create many obstacles in smooth running of state and seriously hinder government’s efforts to apply sound policy of economic development. It might, perhaps, be argued that constitutional provisions in question have been devised in such manner as to provide certain safeguards to Turkish minority. It should not, however, be difficult to find other ways and means of safeguarding interests of minority, without necessarily hindering efforts for progress of people of Cyprus as whole, and without creating permanent sources of friction between Greeks and Turks. Anomalous state of affairs, created as result of various internal difficulties arising from Constitution, is made even worse by so-called Treaty of Guarantee and Treaty of Alliance. Mere existence on paper of those treaties is in itself source of danger, although no one could successfully argue that those two treaties might serve any useful purpose at all. Furthermore, these treaty arrangements are in direct conflict with very essence of true independence. Any attempt by any one or other three countries to intervene would unavoidably lead to very serious situation in Cyprus, with great possibility of wider conflict between Greece and Turkey. Any interference by other countries in internal affairs of Cyprus must be considered as completely unacceptable. Argument might be advanced that Turkey is interested in fate of Cyprus for military reasons of its own, due to geographic proximity between two countries. In view of Greek Cypriot leadership, Turkey’s concern, whether genuine and legitimate or not, might be met by other and perhaps more effective arrangements. There is no doubt that certain provisions of Constitution of Cyprus should be revised. Question which arises is what procedure should be followed in order to meet situation. Greek Cypriot leadership have come to conclusion to raise officially question of revising Constitution, and for this purpose they will approach others concerned. It would have been very good thing indeed if all interested parties would acquiesce such revision. But if, on other hand, it were to prove impossible to have consent of others, then Greek Cypriot leadership will proceed with revision of Constitution, employing internationally accepted democratic methods and procedures. In such case, it is contemplated that people would be called upon to elect special representatives to Constitutional Assembly, which would be entrusted with task of effecting necessary amendments to Constitution of the state. Before, however, final decision is taken on procedure to be followed, opinion of highly qualified constitutional experts will be sought. Whatever line that may have to be pursued, one of main objectives should be not to allow Cyprus to continue to be bone of contention between Greece and Turkey with unavoidable repercussions within and outside island. End text. McKiernan 285. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to London, Athens, and Ankara. Nicosia, June 27, 1963, 11 a.m. 712. Embtels 693, 696.Telegram 693 is printed as Document 284. In telegram 696, June 24, the Embassy reported that Greek Cypriot officials had stated that only Wilkins had received a copy of Makarios’ memorandum outlining the President’s “current thinking.” The Embassy commented: “We find it difficult to accept at face value this explanation of Makarios restatement of extreme Greek Cypriot revisionist demands and threat of unilateral action.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 18 Cyp) Discreet soundings with Greek Embassy and UK HICOM have produced no indication they have copies President Makarios’ memorandum on amendment of Constitution and new arrangements to replace Treaties of Guarantee and Alliance. Thus, while memo appears drafted also for ultimate UK and Greek consumption, GOC may be seeking initial reading from us before passing memo to others. Basic purpose of memo appears to be inspire US and perhaps UK apply pressure on Turkey and Turkish-Cypriots to accept less radical proposal of House President Clerides (A–560)Airgram A–560, June 14, forwarded Clerides’ proposals together with an Embassy analysis. (Ibid., POL 15 Cyp) for joint committee on constitutional amendment. Basis of information here, however, there is little likelihood Turkish-Cypriots or GOT will agree to either Clerides or Makarios proposal for constitutional revision. Although memo has appearance of trial balloon, we believe it reflects genuine Makarios determination bring about modification pres-ent situation partly to resolve practical problems and partly to build useful record which will unite Greek-Cypriots behind Makarios in 1965 elections. In talk with Ambassador (Embtel 680),Telegram 680, June 19, summarized the main points of discussion at the Wilkins–Makarios meeting that day. (Ibid., POL 1 Cyp) Makarios appeared discouraged over impasse and casting about for way out. If Turkish-Cypriots refuse discuss constitutional amendment, as we expect, next step, a Cyprus request for “opinion of highly qualified constitutional experts”, might form basis for appeal to UN or World Court. Makarios might consider such new forum could suggest fresh approach to solution, possibly relating to rules of procedure and terms of reference for constitutional assembly. Critical remarks in memo about Treaties of Guarantee and Alliance may appear give undeserved importance to this aspect of Cyprus situation but may reflect Makarios’ concern over possible physical Turkish intervention to counter specific measures he may have in mind. “More effective arrangements” may involve concentration of guarantor responsibilities in UK, as FonMin Kyprianou suggested earlier (London’s tel 4719).Telegram 4719, May 23, reported on British approaches to Makarios and the British Government’s judgments of his objectives. (Ibid., POL 18 Cyp) Makarios action in presenting memo to us alone faces us with dilemma: if we withhold comment GOC might be given some encouragement move forward with drastic course of action; if we seek discourage such action, we will become involved more deeply in Cyprus communal question, tending to confirm in Cypriot minds oft-stated allegation that we take the part of Turkish-Cypriots in these matters.In telegram 5 to Nicosia, July 2, the Department of State commented that it regarded the Makarios memorandum as a “briefing paper” and would avoid making any comment on its contents. (Ibid.) McKiernan 286. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CyprusSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 Cyp. Confidential. Drafted by King; cleared in OC, INR, BNA, and GTI; and approved by Bracken. Repeated to London, Athens, and Ankara. Washington, August 15, 1963, 5:57 p.m. 74. Nicosia’s A–45 of Aug. 2 and A–52 of Aug. 9.Airgram A–45, August 2, reported on Makarios’ July 28 speech calling for the withdrawal of the Treaty of Guarantee and public reaction to his statement. (Ibid., POL Cyp) Airgram A–52 reported Greek Cypriot maneuvers designed to pave the way for constitutional revision and abolition of the Treaty of Guarantee. (Ibid., POL 15 Cyp) We agree Embassy’s view that Makarios’ current campaign constitutes maneuver pressure U.S. into coming off fence and expressing support Greek-Cypriot position vis-à-vis constitution and treaties. Appears also that Makarios may be attempting plant idea of differences between certain Guarantor Powers or between U.S. and U.K. re Cyprus problem, possibly for public consumption on island or possibly on theory allegations may become reality if repeated often enough. He may also hope create state of affairs where he could offer guarantee our access to telecommunications facilities in return for forthright U.S. support Greek-Cypriot position. Our views on validity constitution and treaty continue same as Ambassador expressed to Makarios in April 1963 (Embtels 454, 500).Regarding telegram 454, see footnote 2, Document 278. Telegram 500 is printed as Document 281. We continue convinced solution overall Cyprus problem lies in patient piecemeal solution specific problems such as municipalities issue and that this possible achieve on island if both sides willing exercise moderation. We against any attempts by-pass Guarantor Powers or involve U.S. or U.N. We will resist any possible blackmailing tactics re facilities, and do not consider that recent press campaign should alter present plans re facilities arrangements. Likely that any specific U.S. reaction to present Greek-Cypriot pressures, other than most routine continuation our past admonitions re restraint, could lead eventually to greater U.S. involvement (as sought by Makarios) and could embarrass us in relations with Guarantor Powers. When Ambassador sees Makarios he may wish in his discretion express mild surprise that Archbishop, who knows U.S. position so well, would permit press use his good name in attempts give credence to misstatements and misconceptions re U.S.-Cyprus relations. Rusk 287. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyp. Secret. Repeated to Ankara, London, and Nicosia. Athens, August 16, 1963, 9 p.m. 276. 1. In talk with Prime Minister Pipinelis today, he said that, although some may think Cyprus situation is relatively quiet, he considers it most serious. In his view, there could be an explosion at any time. Accordingly, he had sent message to Makarios to effect that Greek Govt understood the problems facing Govt of Cyprus and realized that it would be necessary at some time to have some constitutional amendments. The message stated, however, that Greece would not recognize “coup” or unilateral action by Cyprus and that any constitutional changes must be done through agreement of all interested parties. (I asked Pipinelis whether his govt was prepared for a meeting of the guarantor powers. He replied that he could not say definitely but that he personally thought it was the only sensible way.) 2. According to Pipinelis, Makarios replied to his message saying that the Makarios statement about constitutional changes had been “misinterpreted”; all Makarios was doing was to appoint committee to study legal problems, etc. and that he had no intention of any “coup” or unilateral action “at least before next year.” Pipinelis added that, in view of the explosive nature of the Cypriot problem, it was well for the other parties in interest not to assume that the situation was quiescent and that they could safely wait “until next year.” (Pipinelis made it clear that he was not asking US to do anything but merely wanted to inform me of his personal views.) 3. Pipinelis then discussed matter of Greek-Turkish relations and said he believed that, through quiet step-by-step actions, much could be done to improve those relations. He mentioned that he had been able to work out with Erkin an exchange of letters (“long held up because of a foolish failure to agree on wording”) which enabled work in the Evros River region to go forward. He said that the most difficult outstanding case (other than Cyprus) had to do with the proposed Turkish territorial waters legislation. Here again he stated that he felt progress had been made. Two days ago he had sent to Ankara a proposal for a joint consortium relating to the fishing rights in the waters between the Greek islands and the Turkish coast. In his discussion with Erkin some time ago at the airport here, Erkin had indicated that he considered joint consortium as a desirable approach. According to Pipinelis, Erkin has also agreed to put a provision in the territorial waters legislation postponing six-mile extension of fishing rights for two years. “This would leave plenty of time for Greece and Turkey to work out their mutual problems.” 4. Pipinelis said that through arrangements such as these he hoped it would be possible to establish a new atmosphere of confidence which would tend to make the solution of the crucial Cyprus problem easier. 5. Pipinelis’ optimism re Greek-Turkish relations was reflected several days ago by Turkish charge in call on DCM. charge spoke in similar vein of progress being made on problems raised by territorial waters legislation (which he predicted would be passed in about two months’ time) and commented that Cyprus remains the only problem between Greece and Turkey capable of engendering serious difficulties. Labouisse 288. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Athens, Ankara, and London. Nicosia, August 27, 1963, 3 p.m. 130. I saw Makarios this morning for first time since returning to Cyprus from US. During past three or four weeks Makarios has made number of statements touching on difficulties flowing from Constitution and treaties indicating need for change. Press has seized upon these statements for wide speculation. This morning I found Makarios relaxed and confident that Greek and Turkish Cypriots would eventually be able solve their current problems. He was doubtful, however, if Turkish Cypriots or Ankara would be willing to make any arrangement right now. For this reason Makarios thought he might be forced to take unilateral action, but believed Turkish Cypriots would in end see merit in his suggestions for changes and accept them. I commented that I thought he was on wrong track in handling matter in this way, adding that it would seem wiser quietly to make some arrangement behind scenes with Turkish Cypriots and with Ankara. I also said that it seemed to me recent statements to press made it more difficult to make such arrangement as they hardened attitudes. I recalled our support for continuing validity of Constitution and treaties, as stated last April and subsequently (Deptel 74),Document 286. subject to normal change by agreement between parties. I also said that on my way back to Cyprus I had stopped off briefly in London, Athens and Ankara and had heard many observers in each capital express belief that Greek and Turkish Cypriots would yet find solution among themselves.Wilkins’ talks were reported in telegram 655 from London, August 8 (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 Cyp), telegram 245 from Athens, August 12 (ibid., POL Cyp), and telegram 198 from Ankara, August 14 (ibid.). I suggested to Makarios that he have another talk with Kutchuk and also arrange conversations with Turkish officials in Ankara. I strongly urged that such talks be held without publicity. Possibility of success would thus be increased. Makarios was dubious if Turks were now in mind to talk, but said that he would discuss matter with Clerides who was returning in few days and would find some way of probing situation with Kutchuk and with Turkish officials in Ankara. I strongly urged Makarios to make sincere effort along these lines. I believe I made some headway this morning in persuading him to make another quiet effort with Turkish Cypriots and with Ankara, but Makarios is firm believer in using press for purpose of negotiation; consequently it remains to be seen how far he will go in seeking quiet talks with Turkish Cypriots and with Ankara. Wilkins 289. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Cyp. Confidential. Drafted by Bowling and approved in S on October 2. The source text is labeled “Part I of II.” A second memorandum of conversation dealing with U.S-Soviet relations is ibid. New York, October 1, 1963, 12:30 p.m. SecDel/MC/61 SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE EIGHTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York—October 1, 1963 SUBJECT Situation in Cyprus PARTICIPANTS American The Secretary of State John W. Bowling, NEA Foreign H.E. Feridun Erkin, Foreign Minister of Turkey PLACE USUN, New York Foreign Minister Erkin opened the conversation by describing a talk he had arranged the day before with Cypriot Permanent Representative Rossides, at Rossides’ request. Rossides attempted to assure Erkin that the current actions of President Makarios did not mean that the constitutional guarantees of the Turkish Cypriots were in question. Erkin told Rossides that Turkey had signed the London–Zurich agreements in the firm belief that they would be thoroughly and solemnly implemented. Turkey considered the London–Zurich agreement to be a sui generis document, recognizing the existence of two communities on Cyprus, and believing it to be a good and feasible instrument for the attainment of the welfare and happiness of all the people of Cyprus. Turkey had found, unfortunately, that this spirit was not shared by “others”, who appear determined to destroy the agreement and reduce the Turks to the status of an ordinary minority left helpless under the Greek majority. A symbol of this conflict, said the Foreign Minister, is the municipalities question. It is not a question of perpetual partition of the municipalities, but rather a question of good will and mutual confidence. Turkey feels that the sooner the Greek Cypriot leaders are able to create the necessary degree of inter-communal confidence, the sooner the partition of municipalities can be ended, at which point no one could be happier than Turkey. Unfortunately, the Greek Cypriot leaders, rather than acting to create confidence, had abruptly served a three-months ultimatum to the Turkish community on the municipalities question. Greek Cypriot leaders have apparently forgotten the principles of London–Zurich, and are openly talking of a unilateral revision of the Constitution, and of Enosis. The Foreign Minister noted that he had at several times been forced to act publicly and privately to keep the Turkish minority in Cyprus from exacerbating the situation. The Government of Greece appears to share Turkey’s basic outlook and has several times attempted with little success to warn Greek Cypriot leaders of the probable consequences of their folly. The Secretary asked if the Greek Government had done this publicly; the Foreign Minister replied in the affirmative. The Foreign Minister went on to say that Turkey had addressed remonstrances to the Cypriot Foreign Minister, but he had replied that communal problems were a matter of domestic concern to Cyprus. The Secretary asked how serious is Greek Cypriot talk of Enosis. The Foreign Minister replied that it is difficult to say, and that much of it may be only lip service to an outworn idea. However, the Foreign Minister continued, the creation of a Republic of Cyprus based on a simple political majority would in a mystic way represent Enosis to many Greek Cypriots, since Enosis has facets other than simple political union. The Secretary asked if the Constitution provided for amendments and if it was an integral part of the London–Zurich accords. The Foreign Minister said it had no provision for amendment and that it was an integral part of the London–Zurich agreements. The Secretary asked for Erkin’s comments as to the time factor involved, noting that the Greek Cypriot leaders are threatening to take further steps soon. The Foreign Minister replied that he was not certain, but quoted Makarios to the effect that the Cyprus Revolution is a continuing process and that its objectives will soon be attained. The Secretary asked about the British attitude, and Erkin replied that the British had made repeated representations to Makarios in favor of the existing relations between the communities and warning against unilateral changes. The Secretary noted, and the Foreign Minister agreed, that the Greek Government had been a moderating influence. The Secretary asked who had any real influence over Makarios, and Erkin said that while House Speaker Clerides was the only other really important figure in the Greek Cypriot community, it was apparent that no individual possessed any real influence over Makarios. The Secretary remarked that Makarios had not been completely frank with U.S. officials during his American visit. Erkin said Makarios had been described to him by a leading Greek statesman only two weeks ago as an example of the worst type of politician. During Makarios’ visit to Turkey in November he had made a flat promise that on his return he would speak at length with Turkish Cypriot leaders, and had broken his promise without even an apology. He has no intention of creating a spirit of confidence in Cyprus, and rather wishes to create confusion, on which he thrives. Erkin suggested that U.S. aid to Cyprus might be withheld to pressure Makarios into adopting a more sensible communal policy. The Secretary replied, and Erkin appeared to agree, that such action, even if otherwise deemed desirable, would allow Makarios to turn to the Bloc and thumb his nose at the U.S. and the West. Erkin went on to say that he had never mentioned partition of the island as a solution, since he realized the hardships and difficulties which would be involved. However, if compelled by circumstances, Turkey would have to fall back on partition as the only way to save the Turkish minority. Replying to a question by the Secretary, Erkin said that partition would require mass movement of population. He added that Turkey didn’t want partition, and that he was not proposing it; Turkey wanted a continuation of the existing Constitution of Cyprus. Erkin recalled that Makarios had accused the Turkish Cypriot leadership of misusing its prerogatives. Turkish leaders had assured him that they wanted to make Cyprus survive as a bicommunal state, and that they would be happy to exert influence on Turkish Cypriots who misused their prerogatives, if Makarios would provide details. The Secretary asked what the effect of joint representation by the three guarantor powers would be. The Foreign Minister replied that this would be a grave step which is not justified by events so far. The British Government, which advises calmness and continued negotiations, might not be willing to go so far, and any Greek Government which participated would face extremely serious domestic problems. The Secretary promised to talk with Lord Home about Cyprus and to look into the Cyprus problem with particular reference to U.S. policies and plans. 290. National Security Action Memorandum No. 266Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 266. Confidential. Copies were sent to the Secretary of Defense and Director of Central Intelligence. Washington, October 17, 1963. MEMORANDUM FOR Secretary of State SUBJECT New Action Program for Cyprus The President is concerned over reports that we may be headed for trouble in Cyprus. He feels we should do all we can in cooperation with the Guarantor Powers to prevent a showdown between the Greek and Turkish communities. He would like the Department of State to provide him by 28 October with its recommendations on what measures might be taken to this end. McGeorge Bundy 291. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Nicosia, Athens, and London. Ankara, October 20, 1963, noon. 498. Talbot, Jernegan and I called on PriMin Inonu and Deputy PriMin (Acting FonMin) Feyzioglu separately yesterday morning. Both devoted most of their remarks to Cyprus. PriMin went into less detail, but it was clear both wanted to impress us with importance they attach to question and firmness Turkish position. Essence of presentation was: 1. London–Zurich agreements and Cyprus Constitution represented compromise hammered out with great difficulty and involving sacrifices all concerned. 2. Turkey could not contemplate any revision. Turkish popular reaction to any change affecting Turkish minority would be “volcanic” and no Turkish Govt, present or future, could possibly stand against this reaction. 3. Makarios and Greek Cypriots were not attempting execute provisions of Constitution in good faith. During Archbishop’s visit to Turkey, he had hinted at need for Constitution changes; Turks had tried gently but firmly to impress on him impossibility of such action, but this evidently had failed to change his attitude. 4. If London–Zurich agreements and Constitution were not upheld, only alternative would be partition of island, which would be tragic return to bitter conflict prior agreements. Strain on NATO Alliance both in this region and generally would be most unfortunate. 5. Greek electoral campaign introduced special dangers. Cyprus issue would figure in it and undesirable statements would undoubtedly be made for local political purposes in Greece which would have serious repercussions here. 6. Turkey attached special importance to role U.S. could play in influencing Cypriots and guarantor powers. Talbot expressed our continuing concern over Cyprus situation and our desire that it be worked out among the parties. Urged that Turkey should remain in close and continuing consultation with other guarantors. On this point, Inonu asserted Greece and Britain could not act freely and impartially because of special relationship of each to Cyprus. This emphasized importance of U.S. role. When Talbot suggested Turks should not oppose all change in Cypriot Constitution and pointed to demonstrated advantages of flexibility U.S. Constitution, Feyzioglu replied firmly that, while certain modifications might be made in due course, Turkey could not possibly agree to modifications of those constitutional articles which London–Zurich agreements excluded from amendment process. (At lunch afterwards, Secy General Bayramoglu said it would be impossible for Turks and/or Turk-Cypriot [garble] talk on basis of constitutional changes but that talks between two communities on island could well be undertaken if they were directed toward interpretations and means implementation of constitutional provisions in dispute. Added that if it seemed desirable guarantor powers could be brought into such discussions, always provided fundamental constitutional changes were not involved.) Comment: This approach by Turks unusual largely because of high level and intensity. Believe intervention of PriMin probably caused by concern over repercussions likely to be caused by imminent Greek elections. Hare 292. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Read) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 266. Secret. Drafted by Bracken and cleared by G/PM, BNA, S/P, M, L, NEA, G, CIA, and the Department of Defense (ISA). Washington, October 28, 1963. SUBJECT NSAM No. 266: New Action Program for CyprusDocument 290. National Security Action Memorandum No. 98, of September 1961,Document 250. approved proposals for United States action in Cyprus. The action proposed was primarily along economic lines in an effort to lessen communal tensions and enhance the chances for a settlement of Greek-Turkish-Cypriot differences through cooperation in Cyprus’ economic development. As a result of the measures taken by the United States, the United Kingdom, various European contributors, as well as the Cypriots, the economy has strengthened. However, the relations between the Greek and Turkish communities have deteriorated in the process of putting into practice the provisions of the Cyprus Constitution and some of the unusual guarantees given the Turkish minority at the time of the Cyprus settlement in 1959. More direct political action is required to alleviate the worsening situation. The enclosed memorandumNot printed. notes the recent deterioration of the Cyprus situation and points to the strong possibility of communal violence in 1964. It recommends that the United States adopt a new course of action designed to avert a breakdown of order on Cyprus and the consequent strain on relations between Greece and Turkey, to stabilize the Cyprus Government as a deterrent against increased Communist influence, and to ensure favorable conditions for the maintenance of our important communications facilities on the island. On October 21, the British gave us the details of a new approach they will carry out in the near future.The British plan was transmitted in telegram 1973 from London, October 21. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 Cyp) Their plan restricts itself to efforts to promote new negotiations between the Cypriot communities based on “fair and reasonable” Greek-Cypriot proposals, to persuade Turkey to consider reasonable suggestions for constitutional change and to arrange a subsequent informal meeting of representatives of the Guarantor Powers and the Government of Cyprus to approve the changes negotiated by the Cypriots. Our approach serves, therefore, as a fallback position to the British plan. In specific terms, the United States approach proposes: 1. The Department will urge the United Kingdom to call on Greece and Turkey to agree to a three-power approach to Cyprus President Makarios and Vice-President Kutchuk, with an assurance of United States support. 2. The three-power approach will require the Cypriot leaders to reaffirm support of the London–Zurich agreement and the Cyprus Constitution. 3. The approach will require that the municipalities dispute be settled by the establishment of separate town councils as specified in the Constitution but with the understanding that the separate councils will be superseded by joint municipalities after a test period. 4. The three-power approach will also in effect revise the London–Zurich agreement to allow the two communities to use normal amendment procedures in the case of two presently unamendable but highly contentious articles of the Constitution. Benjamin H. ReadPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. Grant G. Hilliker signed for Read. 293. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyp. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Nicosia, November 4, 1963, 3 p.m. 260. Deptel 193 (paragraphs 6 and 7).Telegram 193, November 1, authorized a more active U.S. role in the crisis and commented on the British plan for resolving the Cyprus issue. (Ibid.) We continue doubt Makarios would be willing join with Kutchuk in public statement as proposed in paragraph 4 of US Plan of Action.See Document 292. For Makarios it would mean reversal of all he has been saying in recent years and, to him, would be politically impossible (Embtel 251).Telegram 251, October 30, reported that Makarios was unlikely to respond favorably to the British approach. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyprus) Establishment of time period for municipalities under Article 173 is now but one of several goals Makarios seeks in revising Constitution. Placing this article, as well as others, under Article 132 would not attract Makarios, as two-thirds of Turkish Cypriots in House would still have to approve changes, which means six Turkish Cypriots could block revision. Makarios will accordingly be unwilling to make proposed political statement for advances which are of no real advantage to him. Principal changes desired by Makarios are 1) unification of municipalities within definite time period, 2) no separate majorities for tax measures, 3) small army or none at all, 4) civil service employment on more rational basis, 5) elimination of Vice President’s veto powers, 6) consolidation of judicial system, and possibly 7) elimination of communal chambers. Cancellation of Treaties of Guarantee and Alliance is also desired. At same time, Makarios is realistic and knows formal changes in Constitution and treaties to this broad extent will be unacceptable to Turks. Makarios will accordingly, in my opinion, pick up Clark’s suggestion of “interpretations” of ConstitutionThe British plan called for both sides to reach a mutual agreement on the interpretation of the Constitution that could “after some years” be accepted by both as constitutional amendments. (Telegram 2913 to London, November 6; ibid.) and will in end be content with unification of municipalities and limitation on tax measures. Makarios would, I think, be willing to make public statement with Kutchuk with respect to these interpretations of Constitution. If Makarios does not pick up Clark’s suggestion of interpretations, I believe he will continue to move toward consultation with guarantor powers and, if no progress is made, calling of Constitutional Assembly as indicated in his memorandum to us of last June (Embtel 693),Document 284. in which event Makarios’ minimum demands would be greater. Greek Cypriots will continue opposed to present treaties, but will realize difficulty of “interpreting” them and will be willing to let them stand for time being if changes in Constitution could be made. Wilkins 294. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyp. Confidential. Repeated to Nicosia, Athens, and London. Ankara, November 6, 1963, noon. 577. Deptel 384.Telegram 384 to Ankara, October 24, reported that the British had provided the United States with a copy of its action plan and instructed U.S. Embassies to coordinate their activities with British officials, providing all requested support to the British effort. (Ibid.) London for Jernegan. 1. Embassy has reviewed proposed U.S. action plan for Cyprus and endorses orientation toward checking Makarios’ plans for unilateral moves while attempting give him something of what he wants. 2. Six months ago GOT would obviously have been pleased and relieved if ways could have been found induce Makarios legalize de facto separate municipalities. However, as FonMin Erkin has just told Ambassador (Embtel 570),Dated November 5. (Ibid.) they no longer issue for GOT since statements by Makarios and other Greek Cypriot leaders in interim have confirmed long-standing Turk fears that Makarios would now begin pressing openly for ultimate objective of abolition Treaty of Guarantee and revision Cyprus Constitution. Therefore, we do not believe that belated willingness by Makarios legalize separate municipalities would at this stage suffice restore GOT’s faith in his good intentions. Moreover, severe restrictions on GOT’s maneuverability arising from new situation are compounded by domestic considerations. Relative weakness of coalition government and of any visible successor makes strong Cyprus policy political “must”. Believe it most unlikely, therefore, that GOT would agree kind of public statement contemplated by U.S. plan which might be exploited by principal opposition party and press as offering unpardonable concession to Greek Cypriot ambitions. 3. Appears to us that GOT trying be reasonable on Cyprus question, where it realizes it has nothing gain but much to lose if situation turns sour. It will, however, continue insist on putting horse before cart and expect see some concrete evidence good faith on part Makarios before it prepared make concessions. We believe FonMin Erkin accurately summed up GOT position when he told Bristish Ambassador Allen GOT not opposed to discussion between Greek and Turk Cypriots and if Makarios acted like President of state with two communities instead of leader of only one community, two communities could settle differences and even agree some modification of Constitution (Embtel 554).Telegram 554, November 11, reported that Erkin had told Hare that the Cyprus problem had escalated from a question of municipal government to a “broad attack on the Constitution” not simply by Makarios but also by Clerides. Erkin added that Inonu agreed with this analysis. (Ibid., POL 15 Cyp) 4. Surest way open to Makarios demonstrate good faith toward Turks would be give all constitutional provisions fair and uninterrupted test over reasonable period time. In meanwhile, believe would be difficult persuade GOT at this stage agree to anything more than quiet undertaking consider possible constitutional modifications after period of full implementation Constitution. Latter would permit development mutual confidence and good will between two communities which GOT holds essential to any real progress on Cyprus problems. Within this framework GOT has indicated would be willing for Greek and Turk Cypriots discuss and agree on how disputed constitutional provisions might best be implemented (Embtel 498).Telegram 498, October 20, reported on Talbot’s talks with senior Turkish leaders. (Ibid., POL 15–5 Cyp) Such discussions might in fact lead to minor operational adjustments and prepare way for formal constitutional changes at later date. 5. Meanwhile we encouraged by interest expressed Cypriot Turk Deputy Halit Ali Riza in Clerides’ idea for quiet, informal Greek-Turk meeting to review whole Constitution (Nicosia’s A–173).Dated November 1. (Ibid., POL 15–5 Cyp) If something tangible should come out of such consultation we believe we would be in good position urge GOT accept results as step forward. Hare 295. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyp. Secret. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Nicosia, November 26, 1963, 3 p.m. 295. Embtel 288.Telegram 288, November 19, reported on a discussion between Wilkins and Kutchuk in which Kutchuk stated that he was ready to consider Greek Cypriot proposals for institutional change but would reject “out of hand” any document presenting them as amendments to the Constitution. (Ibid.) Makarios told me this morning he had virtually completed memorandum listing approximately ten constitutional provisions which required amendment, together with argumentation supporting need for change. Makarios said he planned to send memorandum to each of guarantor powers with copy to Dr. Kutchuk for his information. Makarios added that memorandum would deal only with Constitution and not with Treaties of Guarantee and of Alliance, as it was his view that other powers could not intervene in Cyprus. Makarios also planned to hand us copy of memorandum and thought it would be ready to be sent by end of this week. Makarios hoped that Dr. Kutchuk would study memorandum and would later be willing to negotiate and that guarantor powers, as well as we, would be willing to speak with Ankara whose ties with Turkish Cypriots were close. I commented that, as Archbishop Makarios knew, we had long favored direct talks between Greek and Turkish Cypriots and would welcome fair and reasonable Greek Cypriot proposals which would resolve present difficulties. I suggested that they not be put forward as amendments, but as suggestions for improving functioning of Constitution. I added we understood UK had urged Makarios proceed in this way and that we strongly supported British views.In telegram 282, November 15, Wilkins reported on his conversation with High Commissioner Clark on Clark’s discussions with Makarios. (Ibid., POL Cyp) Makarios replied that he would do his best to keep situation calm and that he was giving careful attention to question of wording. At same time he was convinced that amendments or improvements in Constitution were required and that if Turkish Cypriots, with backing of Ankara, refused, it would be necessary to seek changes in other ways. I again said it would seem far wiser for Greek and Turkish Cypriots to reach agreement, and was confident that if fair and reasonable Greek Cypriot proposals were forthcoming friends of Cyprus would be more able to urge their acceptance by others. Wilkins 296. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CyprusSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyp. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Bracken and Schott and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Athens, Ankara, and London. Washington, November 27, 1963, 8:01 p.m. 225. Ref: Nicosia’s 295.Document 295. Deputy PM VenizelosVenizelos was a member of the Greek delegation attending the funeral of President John F. Kennedy. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on November 22. made following points on Cyprus problem during recent contacts with Department officers: 1. He said it was essential make some amendments to Cyprus constitution and indicated GOG has British support. He had spoken to Inonu and Erkin here in Washington in general terms about Greek-Turkish problems and will see latter again at NATO meeting and when guarantor powers meet in Paris. Venizelos asked that we contribute finding solution. Makarios envisages matter as question of negotiation amend certain articles constitution while simultaneously making some concessions to Turks. In response we reiterated our interest maintaining good Greek-Turk relations and stable Cyprus and hoped GOG would talk with GOT and UK. Emphasized hope for solution through negotiation between parties directly involved. 2. British Embassy Washington informed of general pitch of Venizelos statements. 3. For Nicosia: We commend points made your response Makarios plans disclosed reftel. Seek early opportunity inform Makarios we are greatly disturbed at his constant references to “amendments” of constitution. Our reading of situation is that presentation of such a memorandum to guarantor powers as stated would stop GOT and Turk-Cypriot cooperation before it got started and that ultimately he needs this cooperation to solve problem. 4. For Athens: Venizelos’ several references in Washington conversations to amendments also cause concern. We believe he has misread British support for his position. Rusk 297. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyp. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Nicosia, November 30, 1963, 1 p.m. 304. Cypriot FonMin asked me to call at noon today and handed me copy of memorandum entitled “Suggested Measures for Facilitating the Smooth Functioning of the State and for the Removal of Certain Causes of Intercommunal Friction”. Kyprianou said Makarios had given memorandum to Kutchuk this morning and had [at that] time outlined its principal points. Kyprianou added Kutchuk had not, of course, had opportunity to read it but his preliminary reaction had been “very bad”. Kutchuk had, however, said he would study it and would need about a week. Kutchuk had been accompanied by Muftizahde and for time being Kutchuk plans to go over it alone with him and not to discuss it with other Turk Cypriots. Kyprianou also said Makarios had tried to persuade Kutchuk changes in Cypriot Constitution were required and there was no real reason to delay. Possibility of change of basic laws was acceptable in most countries. Makarios had also made point, in effort to persuade Turk Cypriots to move toward change, that it was much more difficult for him politically to recommend changes than for Turk Cypriots. Reason was Makarios would be trying to improve Constitution and thus committed to its support. Attitude reflected by these moves would not be appreciated by Greek Cypriots who favored union with Greece. Kyprianou said copies of memorandum were being handed to reps of guarantor powers for information this morning. No request for four-power meeting was being made as Cyprus considered matter internal question but British planned to urge favorable consideration upon Turkey. It was hoped that other guarantor powers would lend such support to proposals as they saw fit. Kyprianou added that Turk Amb’s reaction had been favorable when he had received and run through memorandum this morning. I expressed hope that Kyprianou memorandum was not at this stage being made available to press and steps would be taken to prevent leaks. Kyprianou said it was being very closely held although correspondents were aware of meetings which Makarios and he had this morning and were pressing for information. I also asked Kyprianou if Greek Cypriots were making any efforts to explain their points of view to Turk Cypriots in addition to more formal meeting between Makarios and Kutchuk this morning. Kyprianou said he could see considerable merit in this suggestion and would get in touch with Muftizahde whom he knew well and spell out Greek Cypriot rationale for change. Kyprianou also said he would now leave for Paris on December 8 for various annual international meetings. There were no plans to discuss Greek Cypriot memorandum at these meetings but Kyprianou anticipated informal talks might take place. Kyprianou planned to stop off in Athens for few days enroute as he had not yet had chance to meet Papandreou and Venizelos since formation of new Greek Cabinet. He had no plan to discuss memorandum with them but assumed it will arise during talks. Highlights of text of memorandum are being sent by separate telegram. Argumentation, which is rather lengthy, will follow by pouch December 2. Our own comment and any local reaction will be sent early next week.The Embassy in Nicosia transmitted the highlights in telegram 305, November 30. (Ibid.) The Embassy commented on the proposals in airgram A–212, December 2. (Ibid.) Our preliminary reaction is that memorandum is well-reasoned legal document with some minor advantages for Turk Cypriots. We hope that Turk Cypriots will take advantage of it for discussion and negotiation but their attitude toward constitutional change as expressed up until now makes it seem unlikely. Wilkins 298. Telegram from the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 Cyp. Confidential; Priority. Also sent to Nicosia and repeated to Athens, London, and Istanbul. Ankara, December 7, 1963, 11 a.m. 705. Embtel 700—Cyprus.Telegram 700, December 6, reported that the Turkish attitude regarding the Cyprus question was stiffening. (Ibid.) Foreign Minister Erkin telephoned just before dinner last night to say that Cabinet discussion on Cyprus had resulted in decision reject Makarios proposals definitively and publicly at this time. In fact, he was in process preparing public statement that effect. I observed this news very disappointing because, irrespective of nature proposals, Foreign Minister’s previous decision to study carefully and reply specifically had seemed wisest course. Erkin replied this had been considered by Cabinet but rejected because it would be considered evidence of weakness. Unclear at this point as to position in which this reversal leaves Erkin since he has had ground cut from under him on issue on which he had not only made decision but committed himself to both British and ourselves. Also interesting note that strong personal feeling of Inonu was probably a, if not the, deciding factor in action taken since Erkin told me previous day in connection conversation reported reference telegram that Inonu had been quite wrought up in discussing Cyprus question and had felt situation possibly developing to point where partition could again become active issue. Finally, this regretfully goes to prove warning which has repeatedly been given of danger of putting pressure on GOT in time of political strain. Perhaps this merely coincidence in present case but result same. Text Erkin statement reported separately.In telegram 707 from Ankara, December 7. Its operative portion reads: “Since it is impossible accept such a proposal for opening of discussions on these documents which guarantee vital rights and interests of Turk Cypriots, Council of Ministers has decided to reject it.” (Ibid., POL Cyp) 2 Hare 299. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Cyp. Confidential. Drafted by Greene on December 13 and initialed by Jernegan. Washington, December 12, 1963. SUBJECT Cyprus PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Turgut Menemencioglu, Turkish Ambassador Mr. Ilter Turkmen, Counselor of Turkish Embassy NEA—John D. Jernegan GTI—Myles L. Greene Ambassador Menemencioglu came in on instructions from Ankara to discuss GOT views on the current situation in Cyprus. He opened the conversation by tracing recent events revolving around the proposals made by Archbishop Makarios to Vice President Kuchuk. He tied this to the Cypriot crisis of the 1950’s which he explained in terms of Greek and Turkish public opinion developing extreme opinions and dragging their respective Governments into similar positions. The GOT wants to avoid a repetition of this now. The Ambassador said his Government had known that Makarios was about to present some thoughts, but had no idea they would go as far as these proposals. The proposals skip over incidentals and go to the heart of life-and-death issues involving Turk-Cypriots. First among these is the veto power. This is particularly important as a safeguard against communist strength on Cyprus, a subject which President Kennedy had referred to in his conversation with Foreign Minister Erkin last June.President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk met with Foreign Minister Erkin and Ambassador Menemenciouglu on June 1 from 9:45 to 10:10 a.m. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book) No memorandum of conversation has been found. Other critical proposals made concerned the army and police. All of this had been put forward purposely by the Archbishop at a time of Cabinet change in Turkey. Makarios failed to understand that any Turkish Cabinet would have precisely the same reaction as the Inonu Government. Ambassador Menemencioglu reviewed the Makarios visit to Washington in June 1962. It was his impression that Makarios had been disappointed by the firm USG statements to the effect that present communal arrangements on Cyprus must remain unchanged. He continued that of course the GOT would be pleased to cooperate in making the implementation of present arrangements easier, but neither the GOT nor Turk-Cypriots could consider changes in the arrangements themselves. He hoped the USG could urge moderation on the Archbishop. Mr. Jernegan replied that the USG had, in fact, been urging moderation on all parties concerned in the present dispute. We too had been surprised at the sweep of the Makarios proposals, but we do not share the GOT view on the impossibility of studying and replying to the proposals. We have been slightly hopeful over reports that Kuchuk will take some time before making a reply. We very much regret the quick public reply from the GOT. At the very least, the GOT could have refrained from making any comment. The Ambassador said the GOT had no choice but to reply. For one reason, there are no real Cypriots, only Greek-Cypriots and Turk-Cypriots, and the Turkish Government must, as certainly the Greek Government would also do, speak up for its fellow nationals. Once Greek Foreign Minister Venizelos commented saying the proposals were entirely an internal Cypriot affair, the GOT had no choice but to give its own views. In reply to Mr. Jernegan’s question about possible points that might be discussed, Ambassador Menemencioglu replied that there is the question of joint community arrangements. Above all things, however, Turk-Cypriots could not accept the Makarios proposals as an agenda for any kind of discussion. Mr. Jernegan then commented that it would be best for all if Kuchuk would at least reply by listing points that he would be willing to discuss. The Ambassador said that might be possible. Then in reply to Mr. Jernegan’s question, he said the only way to get the Cyprus situation back to something resembling a balance was for Makarios to accept the fact that Cyprus is an exceptional place requiring exceptional governmental arrangements. The heart of such arrangements is the present minority guarantees, without which the situation would be most grave. In further discussion of a reply to the Makarios proposals, Mr. Jernegan commented that it would be a most serious error if Kuchuk submits a flatly negative reply. Not only would this harm the international image of the Turk-Cypriots, but it would also give Makarios an excuse for more extreme future steps. The Ambassador agreed with both of these points, adding that perhaps Kuchuk might reply by listing issues that fall short of the life-and-death category. He then repeated his request that the USG speak up with Makarios on the need for moderation. Mr. Jernegan concluded the conversation promising that we would continue to do all that is possible to urge moderation on all parties. This would be done within the limitations placed on us by the fact that prime responsibility rests with the guarantor powers. This particularly refers to the United Kingdom, whose present efforts toward a solution of the Cyprus problem we are prepared to support. 300. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 Cyp. Confidential. Rusk was in Paris December 13–18 to attend the NATO Ministerial Meeting and in London December 18–19 to meet with British officials. London, December 18, 1963, 7 p.m. Secto 40. Cyprus FonMin Kyprianou accompanied by Pelaghias called on Secretary at 12 noon, December 18, at Embassy Paris. After initial expression of condolence over death of President Kennedy, entire conversation centered around proposed amendments Cyprus Constitution. FonMin said Makarios had made proposals for constitutional changes not to deprive Turkish minority of its rights but to remove division of Greek and Turkish communities. Makarios had some hopes for negotiation but now Turkish Government has rejected his proposals. Meeting in Paris of Greek, Cypriot and Turkish FonMins appears still scheduled for Friday, December 20. Its purpose is to discuss the Treaties of Alliance but FonMin expected constitutional proposals also to be discussed. Turkish Government rejection is not a favorable indication for success. Secretary glanced over constitutional proposals provided him by FonMin and observed that against background of Zurich agreement these appear to be fairly far-reaching changes. FonMin denied this saying four or five of the thirteen items benefit Turkish community. Purpose of proposals he reiterated is merely to remove divisive elements. FonMin said troublesome aspect of problem is inclusion of outsiders. Matter has become internal political issue in Greece and Turkey. To solve Cyprus problem once and for all, one of two possible alternatives indicated: 1) union with Greece or 2) independence within British Commonwealth cutting alliance with Greece and Turkey. He said Greek and Turkish alliances were merely sources of friction. Troops maintained in Cyprus cannot defend the country and can only turn possible internal conflicts into broader ones. Greek and Turkish forces should leave and UK remain. Secretary asked if this could be worked out between the two communities in Cyprus. FonMin replied only problem is Turkish Government. Greeks will agree and UK is favorable. If Turkish Cypriots refuse to negotiate dangerous situation will develop. Secretary pointed out if changes made by agreement no one could object; if attempt made carry out changes without agreement explosive situation would be created. FonMin said independence should be real independence. People of Cyprus should decide for themselves. Greeks make up 82 percent of population and matter should be decided by “democratic means”. FonMin went on at some length on theme that proposed constitutional changes would remove division in communities, in legislature and judiciary. Fact that proposal moderate demonstrated by opposition of extremists who desire union now with Greece. Although there is interest in union with Greece, FonMin maintained “Commonwealth solution” best. Secretary said US feels that the two communities should work out this problem in the first place and then the guarantor powers. In response to FonMin’s request US intervene with Turks to persuade communities to negotiate, Secretary said US does not need this additional problem. We hope moderation will prevail and a way be found to continue negotiation. Violence should be avoided. Secretary asked FonMin to keep Ambassador Wilkins informed. US primary concern is that whatever comes out of this be worked out by agreement. FonMin said “on personal basis” he would like Secretary to give thought to “wider solution” for Cyprus. Secretary was noncommittal. He said FonMin would have no trouble with US with whatever was worked out by negotiation and agreement. Rusk 301. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 Cyp. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Nicosia, December 22, 1963, 11:59 p.m. 341. This afternoon Acting British High Commissioner and I together had separate talks with Makarios and Kutchuk. We each stressed deep concern of our two govts re recent incidents. We made points suggested by Washington and LondonIn telegram 247 to Nicosia, December 21, the Department of State informed the Embassy of the British desire for a joint representation to Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders with the aim of restraining both the police and Turkish rioters in the aftermath of violent clashes between members of the two communities that resulted in five deaths. The Department of State instructed Wilkins to coordinate his demarche with the British High Commissioner. (Ibid.) emphasizing situation was being followed with close attention because of threat to Cypriots and our own countrymen alike. We especially hoped that Makarios and Kutchuk would find immediate ways of calming situation. By chance we saw Kutchuk first and found him extremely pessimistic. Both he and Muftizadhe described recent developments as new steps in Greek Cypriot plan to alter Constitution and treaties. Kutchuk said Greek Cypriot police had for some time been harassing Turk Cypriots at night and that Greek Cypriot Minister of Interior had been irresolute and biased in his reporting to Makarios and in his handling of events. Kutchuk said he had persuaded Makarios to issue joint call for moderation and restraint and to make joint visit to scene of one altercation. He had also suggested quick setting-up of commission of inquiry which will be considered by Ministerial Council tomorrow morning. Kutchuk said he would continue to urge moderation and restraint but was uncertain how long he could control his people in face of continual Greek Cypriot provocation. Makarios was serious and objective stressing that facts re various incidents were incomplete, contradictory and exaggerated and it seemed to him incidents were isolated and unconnected although he admitted some of minor developments might have been retaliatory. Minister of Interior had been asked to ascertain facts soonest and to instruct Greek Cypriot police to restrict themselves to outskirts of Turk Cypriot areas and not to act in provocative way. Makarios said he had agreed with Kutchuk on desirability of joint Greek/Turk Cypriot police patrols and commission of inquiry. There might be some legal question in way of establishment of commission but he favored it and would urge it in Council tomorrow. Makarios hoped that measures along foregoing lines would be helpful in bringing down tension and restoring peace. Makarios also added that because of high state of tension he would not now move forward as quickly with his plans for constitutional change. I took this reference to mean that he would slow up carrying out plan for changing Constitution which he outlined by memo last June and to which he has alluded from time to time in subsequent conversations. I said it seemed to us preferable to work out solutions with Turk Cypriots through discussions and that it still seemed to me that changes could be effected within framework of Constitution. Makarios doubted, however, it would be possible to move forward in this way as interpretations or understandings of constitutional provisions would not, he believed, be sufficiently binding. Renewed clashes broke out this evening as I finished drafting preceding account of conversations with Makarios and Kutchuk. These reports are fragmentary but seem to indicate grenade and gunfire in several areas. Further message will follow as soon as we have clear information.Wilkins reported on subsequent developments in telegram 342, December 23. (Ibid., POL 25 Cyp) We have no reports any Americans are endangered. All were asked yesterday to stay out of crowded areas and remain quietly at home. Wilkins 302. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 Cyp. Confidential; Immediate. Passed to the White House and repeated to Athens, Nicosia, and London. Ankara, December 23, 1963, 4 p.m. 758. Foreign Minister Erkin (who returned last night) asked me come in urgently see him at 2:15 PM today. Said he had several “very fruitful” conversations with Venizelos in ParisTheir discussions took place during the December 20 meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the guarantor powers on Cyprus issues. in which mutually recognizing that break on Cyprus would mean disruption of otherwise constructive Greek-Turk relationship, they had come to agreement that effort should be made by both parties in Cyprus to work out difficulties under constitution at this stage in thought that unreasonable to declare constitution unworkable until honest effort made apply it. In consequence Venizelos had given assurance he would send message that effect to Makarios and make clear he would stand with Erkin if Makarios refused compliance and Erkin had given similar assurance with reference Kutchuk. Kyprianou was present at one of meetings in which this policy laid out. As consequence Erkin had left Paris greatly reassured only to hear on return of serious disorders which had taken place and as result of which he summoned by Inonu to headquarters of Turkish General Staff to discuss what to be done in light of rapid deterioration in situation and increasing danger to Turkish community. Erkin said he had first suggested consultation as provided by treaty but Inonu felt this would be too slow to meet possibly imminent holocaust and felt should proceed forthwith to intervention. He accordingly instructed Erkin so propose to British and Greek Governments through their Ambassadors here and also make same request of USG through me. I said distressed hear GOT had reason believe situation so serious as call for such extreme action but, if that its evaluation, understood approach to British and Greeks as guarantors under treaty. What I did not understand however was basis on which we being approached since our only status in matter hitherto had been as friend of all concerned trying be helpful. Erkin acknowledged this was the case and would have to leave it to us how approach matter. Formalities aside, it was opinion of GOT that our participation could be decisive even if only on token basis. Further than that he did not feel he could go. Comment: I gathered that Erkin realized he was making unusual request but that he was acting under orders which he did not feel able question. Hare 303. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in TurkeySource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 Cyp. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Bowling, cleared in G, and approved by Talbot. Repeated to Athens, London, Nicosia, Paris Topol, Rome, and USCINCEUR. Washington, December 24, 1963, 10:51 a.m. 548. Paris pass Burns and James. Rome for Burris. For Ambassadors. Ankara 766 to Department, repeated Athens 73, London 129, Nicosia 74.Telegram 766 from Ankara, December 24, reported on Hare’s meeting with Erkin during which Erkin stated that Inonu demanded that attacks on Turk Cypriots cease and held Makarios responsible for the violence. Erkin also stated that Turkey resented U.S. efforts to restrain it from the use of force. (Ibid.) 1. Check immediately with UK Ambassador who should by now have received detailed HMG proposal including tripartite appeal GOC and community leaders and offer good offices. 2. Inform Erkin USG and UK have quite different reading from that of GOT on events in Cyprus. We believe hostilities not planned by either side, that leadership both communities making genuine effort halt fighting, and that armed underground organizations both communities are out of control. Extremists on both sides accuse leadership of other side of plotting attacks. 3. Inform Erkin USG as sincere friend Turkey and of people both communities on Cyprus urges GOT to contribute to calm on island and consult with other guarantor powers. With permission UK Ambassador you may state HMG even now ready present urgent action plan, and that Duncan Sandys will arrive Nicosia in few hours. 4. Responsible leadership both communities even now making desperate efforts stop fighting. GOT should act to help this leadership through exercise of its own high sense of responsibility to re-establish peace and order. 5. All addressees support new British diplomatic initiative as you deem most effective. Rusk 304. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CyprusSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 Cyp. Confidential. Drafted by Bowling and approved by Talbot. Also sent to Ankara, Athens, London, and Istanbul and repeated to Rome, Paris Topol, and USCINCEUR. Washington, December 24, 1963, 5:56 p.m. 553. Turk Ambassador Washington December 24 requested see Assistant Secretary Talbot. Stated he calling on urgent instructions; described worsening situation Cyprus, emphasizing alleged merger of police units with EOKA organization and attacks on Turk Cypriot women and children. Described pressure Turkish public opinion on GOT as increasing; thanked US for helpful actions thus far; asked USG do everything necessary restore situation. Talbot replied that USG shared GOT concern over violence in Cyprus and would continue be helpful in any way possible. Talbot pointed out primary responsibility of Cypriot communities and special role of guarantor powers, congratulated GOT for participating in tri-partite cease-fire and good offices appeal just announced, and emphasized necessity GOT staying in line with other Guarantor Powers. Turk Ambassador, noting he now departing from his instructions, said real element of pressure was that Turkish armed forces would act with or without civilian government. Talbot said both US and UK are convinced that leaders both communities in Cyprus sincere in deploring bloodshed and seeking cease-fire. Turk Ambassador appeared mildly skeptical re Makarios but did not argue point. Rusk 305. Telegram From the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 Cyp/NATO. Secret; Flash. Received at 9:33 a.m. Passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, CIA, and the White House and repeated to Nicosia, Ankara, London, Athens, and Rome. Paris, December 25, 1963, 2 p.m. Polto 881. Reference: Topol 847.Topol 847, December 2, instructed Finletter to coordinate his actions with those of the British NATO Representative if Turkey announced the withdrawal of some of its forces from NATO. (Ibid.) NATO Council meeting held this morning 1015. Turkish Perm Rep read long statement divided in two parts: 1) information as to current situation in Cyprus indicating Turkish community in danger of massacre by Greek Cypriot community (all this later contested by Greek Perm Rep) and 2) information on intention of Turkish Government to act unilaterally by sending Turkish NATO-assigned forces to Cyprus, if tripartite action by guarantor powers proves unable to control situation. The firmness of the Turkish Perm Rep’s warning that unilateral action might be taken by Turkish forces was ominous. British and Dutch Perm Reps spoke to me privately of their concern lest Turkish statement implied that decision to intervene unilaterally had already been made or was at least under most serious consideration. Sentiment of whole Council was strongly for moderation by Turks and expressed firm hope tripartite action would be successful. Acting SYG summed up firm NAC consensus that all members expected Turks would inform NAC before taking any unilateral action. Turkish Perm Rep said he would report this desire of NAC to his government. Because of precipitate action in calling meeting Council was not aware of NAC resolution of 14 December 1956For text of the December 14, 1956, NAC resolution, see Department of State Bulletin, December 31, 1956, pp. 981–982. which decided that disputes between NATO members not capable of settlement directly be submitted to good offices procedures within the NATO framework and recognized the duty of member governments and of SYG to bring to NAC’s attention matters threatening solidarity of Alliance. Suggest that if situation worsens you may want to consult with UK as to whether they wish to invoke this Council procedure and, if so, whether you wish to support it. Have informed UK Perm Rep of this 1956 resolution. Council agreed that if today’s meeting became known to the press they would be told merely that Council met to hear a report on situation in Cyprus. SecGen requested delegations to remain accessible in the event further emergency meetings are required as situation develops. In view of possible further NAC action, request Department and all addressees to Paris USRO. Finletter 306. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CyprusSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 Cyp. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Bowling and cleared by Johnson and Talbot. Also sent to Ankara and Athens and repeated to Rome, London, Paris Topol, and USCINCEUR. Washington, December 25, 1963, 10:15 a.m. 258. Paris pass Burns and James. Rome for Burris. For Ambassadors. UK has, according US Embassy London, called in Greek and Turk Ambs London and proposed joint military intervention Cyprus soonest, conditional on invitation from Makarios. Intervention would be under UK command and at least at first be confined to military units now on island. [2 lines of source text not declassified] Embassies Athens and Ankara authorized provide full support to British initiative, after consultation UK colleagues re tactics. Embassy Nicosia authorized cooperate fullest extent in persuading Makarios issue invitation, but should consult with UK re timing, which apparently will depend on speed of GOT and GOG acceptance UK proposal. Rusk 307. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 Cyp. Confidential. Received at 2:52 p.m. and relayed to USUN; the White House; the Office of the Secretary of Defense; the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force; and CIA. Repeated to Athens, Nicosia, and London. Ankara, December 28, 1963, 1 p.m. 795. Embtel 792.Telegram 792, December 28, reported on Turkish reaction to the Government of Cyprus’ request for a U.N. Security Council meeting on the island’s future. (Ibid.) Immediate reason for meeting with FonMin Erkin was reported in reftel but he also commented further re more long-range aspects of problem and asked this be reported to Department as background. In brief, he said that as actual violence has ebbed in Cyprus there is developing a deep and grim anger in Turkey and a despair and apprehension among Turkish Cypriots leading to inexorable conclusion that reestablishment of necessary degree confidence among two communities and return status quo ante impossible. Turks now coming to conclusion that Makarios real purpose is to make life so unendurable for Turks that they will be forced leave unless more effective arrangement made to assure equitable status. (In this connection Erkin noted report that Turk police in Cyprus not being paid and that Makarios threatening retaliatory action against them. This GOT would not tolerate.) Indicating his general agreement this line of thought Erkin recalled that only way Greek-Turkish enmity transformed to friendship in twenties had been by extreme measure of transfer population. Now confronted by similar situation and, if Greek-Turkish friendship not to be tragically lost, will be necessary have recourse to “radical” solution. What form it might take frankly not yet clear to him. Partition comes to mind but he had counselled responsible Turkish journalists not to stress for fear partition might become public fixation and prevent proper consideration some other possibly preferable solution. Resolution of this longer term problem, said Erkin, will be difficult and “explosive” and he expressed hope we would keep open mind and avoid premature conclusions. Only specific thing he could now say was that break down of confidence so great that necessary continue tripartite responsibility for maintaining security until new solution reached. Hare 308. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United NationsSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 Cyp/UN. Confidential. Drafted by Moffitt; cleared by Talbot, NEA, and UNP; and approved by Cleveland. Repeated to Nicosia, Athens, Ankara, and London. Washington, December 28, 1963, 3:56 p.m. 1777. Cyprus SC Meeting. 1. Dept hopes adjournment of meeting with your statement that further discussion be held “if and when” SC members deem it appropriate will make it possible avoid another session. We recognize this may depend on developments in Cyprus. 2. Following is guidance re US role in any further meetings: (a) UK, Greece and Turkey have treaty responsibilities. We look to UK to take lead to keep debate in constructive channels. Dept is in touch with British both in London and Washington to make this clear. (b) US should take back seat during debate but should discreetly seek keep discussion in moderate key, particularly when in chair. (c) We assume, however, it will be necessary for US to speak. Our statement should not discuss merits of Cypriot complaint against Turkey or of background issues which brought on recent communal violence, but should stress need for those concerned to work out their differences. In this connection we should call particular attention to existence of consultation machinery under Treaty of Guarantee to which all four parties are signatory. That Treaty calls on GOC to respect provisions of Cyprus Constitution and provides that, in event any breach of treaty, Govts of Greece, Turkey and UK shall consult with view to making representations or taking necessary steps to ensure observance of Treaty provisions. Treaty provides further that, should concerted action by three guaranteeing powers not be possible, “each of the three guaranteeing powers reserves the right to take action with the sole aim of reestablishing the state of affairs established by the present treaty.” In replying to Cypriot complaint, Turks may invoke this provision to justify their overflights Cyprus territory and ship movements. (d) Greek Cypriot strategy is abundantly clear. They want involve UN in Cyprus problem. As Rossides indicated at meeting last night, Greek Cypriots would like an SC Res calling on parties (i.e. Turkey) refrain from threat or use of force in Cyprus situation. Greek Cypriot leadership has for past year or so hinted they might refer their difficulties with Turk Cypriots and Cyprus Constitution to UN. Makarios has since independence 1960 assiduously cultivated Afro-Asian group with view in part to developing support for Greek Cypriot position on constitutional problem. In recent months Greek Cypriot leaders have been propounding doctrine that revision of Constitution is internal matter and that Treaty of Guarantee and provisions of London–Zurich Agreement infringe Cypriot sovereignty and right of self-determination. Rossides touched on these points in his statement last night. Greek Cypriots thus far frustrated in their desire amend Constitution by Treaty of Guarantee and by London–Zurich Agreement. Basic provisions of Constitution taken from London–Zurich Agreement and can be changed only with consent all parties to those agreements. We feel Greek Cypriots hope to leap-frog treaties by involving UN in Cyprus question and by invoking right of self-determination and claiming infringement of sovereignty. While USG has urged leaders both Cypriot communities sit down together in effort resolve their differences, and has in recent weeks been supporting a British effort to this end, we would not want do anything to abet Greek Cypriots in their efforts bypass treaties which made Cypriots a nation. (e) We believe it likely Soviets, and possibly Ghana, will support Greek Cypriots in SC. Communist party in Cyprus, which is essentially Greek Cypriot, has strongly supported Makarios in his efforts to amend Cyprus Constitution. Soviets might also see opportunity improve their position in Cyprus and sow discord between Greece and Turkey with implications for NATO solidarity. (f) We would hope SC by consensus and without formal resolution would take note of consultation machinery under Treaty of Guarantee and urge all parties employ this machinery in effort resolve Cyprus problem. Harriman 309. Telegram From the Embassy in Cyprus to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 25 Cyp. Confidential. Passed to the White House; the Office of the Secretary of Defense; the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force; CIA; and USUN and repeated to Ankara, Athens, and London. Nicosia, December 31, 1963, 5 p.m. 423. As cease-fire arrangements are progressively improved, there is more and more speculation as to political future of Cyprus and attitude not only of guarantor powers, but also US, USSR and UAR. I have had talks with Lebanese, Chinese, Italian, French, Israeli and Greek Ambs. I have not seen Brit HICOM lately as he has been out of running with bad throat part of time and tied up with Sandys in meetings at other moments, but I have been in touch with his deputy. Turk Amb has generally been inaccessible, although I spoke with him by phone. It is commonly believed that Republic of Cyprus has been dealt deep wound which it will be difficult, if not impossible, to heal. Some believed after Christmas that Makarios’ political position within Greek Cypriot community had been weakened because he agreed to cease-fire before Greek Cypriot forces had achieved their objectives and because he agreed to ask UK to come back and command tripartite group supervising it. This view may still be heard, but has been partially replaced by comment that present situation proves Makarios has been correct all along in calling for changes in Constitution and treaties and is now more than ever justified in moving ahead to revise them. Recent statements by Makarios, Kyprianou, Kutchuk and Denktash are cited in evidence that old order has been severely damaged. Greek Cypriots’ remarks are interpreted as continuing to call for amendment to Constitution and dropping of Greece and Turkey from Treaties of Guarantee and of Alliance. Turkish Cypriot remarks are read as calling for partition although we believe Turkish Cypriots might settle for autonomy with more effective guarantees, such as larger Turkish military contingent. Most observers do not see how these divergent views can be reconciled. Political discussion, much less meeting of minds, between Greek and Turkish Cypriots is presently unlikely in view of prevailing tension accompanied by charge and countercharge here and elsewhere. Many observers suggest that guarantor powers should again take up this problem as they did in 1959. Others suggest UN or US or combination of all of these. In past US has been charged, without foundation, of favoring Turkey. During recent violence this Greek Cypriot myth was again heard. More recently, however, rumors from Athens that American Sixth Fleet was in Aegean and would prevent Turkish invasion of Cyprus have appeared and American name is again in better standing. In past few days, there have been some press comments that Cyprus should seek assist-ance from USSR. This may be Soviet or Communist “fishing in troubled waters” or it may be prompted by Makarios who is prone to make use of press and if true may be designed to pressure Turks. Greek Cypriot leadership has still not welcomed Greek Cypriot Communists into fold. It did not, for example, arm them or make use of them in recent fighting, although Communists must have pressed hard to be included in hope of washing away stigma that they stood aside during fight with British several years ago. UAR Amb has called on Makarios two or three times during past few days. UAR may be trying to get back into Makarios’ good graces; Makarios would listen because he still would like to have Arab support at UN. Cyprus’ political future on eve of new year is thus far from clear, but with consolidation of cease-fire and gradual calming of passions, Greek and Turkish Cypriots may think about this future more rationally. I would hope that, instead of turning to radical solutions, such as partition which might lead to movement of population, they would maintain unity of Cyprus by moving toward some form of federation. Turkish Cypriot call for partition might be countered with suggestion that Turkish Cypriot community be allowed to manage its own affairs for time being, with help whenever possible from central government, and that this set-up continue until there is time for further discussion as to political future of Cyprus. Separate municipalities, for example, have been functioning in this way without geographic division of areas since 1958. Wilkins Greece 310. Airgram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 881.10/3–1261. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Palmer and Berger. Athens, March 12, 1961. G–508. Ref: Embtel 1509.Telegram 1509, February 7, discussed the alternatives available to the United States in its efforts to arrive at a settlement of the Greek bond issue. (Ibid., 881.10/2–761) 1. Probably most difficult question which will arise during CaramanlisKaramanlis was to visit Washington April 17–20. visit is pre-war debt problem and related issue of DLF loan freeze. Following comments supplement refuel and our earlier messages. 2. With most Greeks in pre-electoral mood, chances of negotiating bond settlement before elections are practically nil. Already decisions on other problems far less controversial are being postponed and Caramanlis will make no move which might conceivably cost him votes. Any attempt by U.S. to push through settlement before elections could only fail; moreover, public knowledge (which inevitable in Greece) of such an attempt could only lead to further acrimony. 3. I continue believe in general validity Embassy’s appraisal (Embtel 526, August 31)Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 881.10/8–3160) of Caramanlis’ Govt’s behavior in last summer’s negotiations, i.e., that last minute demand for “most favored debtor” treatment, coupled with simultaneous withdrawal of DLF application for highway financing, was made with foreknowledge it would cause collapse of negotiations. I believe it would be poor tactics for U.S. Govt. at this time to view with favor Greek demand for “most favored debtor” treatment. Not only would they continue delay settlement for domestic political reasons, but it would be counter to Greek character if they did not view such a gesture as one of “softness” which could later be exploited through further endless rounds of negotiations like those of the last two years. The time may come when it might be advantageous for the U.S. bondholders to be in a position to offer some concession in Greece’s direction, e.g. bondholders might be willing withdraw their “standard clause” which probably not very meaningful in case of Greece. However, any gestures on our part should, if made at all, come only after Greeks show evidence they genuinely want a settlement by making a reasonably firm offer to conclude an agreement along the lines almost-agreed with U.S. bondholders last August. 4. I suggest Caramanlis be told when he is in Washington that basic U.S. attitude remains unchanged regarding importance attached to debt settlement and that we expect this matter will be taken up immediately after Greek elections as a matter of first priority action. If Caramanlis is especially insistent on need for statement about availability DLF financing, Dept may wish indicate that DLF would examine loan applications submitted for purely private projects. Whether we should then expedite such examinations, or drag our heels, can be left for later decision and would depend on all circumstances, i.e. nature of loan request, date of Greek elections, etc. Briggs 311. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 336, CF 1836. Secret. Drafted by Marcy and approved in B on May 5. Washington, April 18, 1961, 11:30 a.m. SUBJECT Bond Problem PARTICIPANTS Constantine Caramanlis, Prime Minister of Greece Evanghelos Averoff-Tosizza, Greek Minister of Foreign Affairs Christian K. Palamas, Director General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Alexis S. Liatis, Ambassador of Greece Gorge W. Ball, Under Secretary of State G. Lewis Jones, Assistant Secretary, NEA Howard R. Cottam, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic and Regional Affairs, NEA Ellis O. Briggs, Ambassador to Greece Robert G. Miner, GTI Oliver M. Marcy, GTI Following a discussion of the Greek 5-year program and related problems,A copy of the memorandum of conversation on this subject is ibid. Mr. Ball said there was one further question which he wished to raise. This had occasioned us and the Congress some concern. It was, of course, the question of the pre-war bonds. We were very sympathetic towards the Greek position, and did not wish to be rigid in our own. We recognized that the issue caused the Prime Minister some political problems, but Mr. Ball felt that he should say that it also occasioned political difficulties for us as well. He hoped that there would be some way to give assurances to the bondholders that the problem would be solved. At this point Ambassador Liatis asked whether Mr. Ball meant assurances to the bondholders: would such assurances be made public? This could be very dangerous. Mr. Ball responded that there was no necessity that such assurances be made public. It would suffice were they to be made to Mr. Munro. Mr. Caramanlis then commented that, since the question had been brought up, he would like to make it clear that there was no question of the Greeks having refused to settle. Up to 1950, Mr. Ball should understand, Greece had experienced ten years of devastating war and emerged almost totally prostrate, and now found themselves in the position of being pushed to ask the Germans and Italians—the very nations which had visited such devastation on Greece—for assistance. The Prime Minister then proceeded to explain the Greek position. In 1950 Greece had just emerged from the guerrilla war. There followed four years of political and economic instability: only in the last five to six years had the Greek Government been able to devote its energy to bringing order to the situation. In other words, during the period when European countries were able to use American assistance to rebuild their economies, the Greeks were forced to spend all they received on the war with the Communists; when it came their turn to rebuild, American assistance, and specifically the Marshall Plan, was fading away. Notwithstanding, since 1953 and 1954, they had taken four or five initiatives to try to come to agreement. All the Greeks asked were conditions which were politically acceptable. In a country which had suffered such devastation in the common Western interest, this was extremely difficult. No Greek had received a penny in indemnity for loss or damage to his private property, or indeed for loss of life. It is not easy first to settle foreign indebtedness, before investing in development projects designed to raise the country from prostration. There was no lack of will on the part of the Greek Government to do so. We must, however, remember that not only had Greek lives and property been destroyed without compensation during the war, but the entire economy was shattered with all savings, bonds completely lost with no prospect of reimbursement. Against such a situation, any settlement must be very carefully presented from the psychological point of view. Notwithstanding, two years ago the Greeks made another effort. They had started out to offer $4 million per year to service the bonds, and had ultimately agreed to $7 million; but then the bondholders had interjected a proviso to the effect that they should receive the benefit of any more favorable settlement reached with any other creditor by the Greeks. The Prime Minister had, quite rightfully he believed, asked that this cause be reciprocal. He had in mind the Communist countries, for example Rumania. It would put his government in a completely untenable position to have such countries receive more favorable treatment at the hands of the United States. The Prime Minister made the point that he was operating within a democracy, albeit a poor democracy. If the Bulgarians or the Yugoslavs received more favorable treatment, he was required to explain it. He noted, for example, the temporary settlement reached between the bondholders and the Yugoslavs, asserting that they had received better terms than those offered the Greeks. At this point Mr. Averoff interjected the Yugoslav-French agreement, where the Yugoslavs received “far better” treatment. Virtually 95% of the Yugoslav capital indebtedness had been written off. Mr. Caramanlis continued that, to the simple-minded Greek, it was impossible for him to explain why the United States was treating non-allies, neutrals, and even enemy countries such as Rumania, better than its ally, Greece. The political side was of much greater importance to the Prime Minister than the economic; he couldn’t care less if it cost him $1 million more or less per year. The problem was how to present it. Greece might be poor, but it was democratic and politically-minded. Ambassador Liatis then translated very carefully: “the Prime Minister states that it is in his intention to settle”, and “indeed he might have been able already to settle it if you had not connected it with loans, DLF in this case. It would have been disastrous to the Greek Government, as to any Greek government—to appear to settle under the pressure of a threat of no loans unless there was a settlement. It would have been a similar disaster to the United States, from the point of view of its position in Greece.” The Prime Minister could not follow what he viewed as a political mistake in Washington. The United States might be correct from its point of view, but the Prime Minister was, so far as Greece was concerned. In any event, the Greek Government “is determined to find at a proper time a proper solution, without connection to aid from the United States.” This was the duty of the Greek Government, and the Greek Government would settle with or without United States aid to Greece. This was one of the basic measures which the Greek Government must take in order to re-establish Greece’s credit and good name. The Prime Minister wished to stress that, when the time came in his view to approach the bondholders, he would ask the United States to assist in achieving this, through admonitions and suggestions to the bondholders. In response, Mr. Ball stated that he appreciated the Greek position and wanted to make it clear that we did not wish to be categorical. At the same time, he should say to the Prime Minister that the situation created for us some political problems, not only to the extent that it might condition the amount of help we can give Greece by Congressional control of funds, but also because the Congress exercises great scrutiny over our policies and programs thus limiting our own freedom of action. He did not put this forward as a categoric condition, but rather to reveal that these are political facts for us, as well as the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister interjected at this point that he saw quite well that the United States also had difficulties, and agreed entirely. The United States difficulties, however, were different. His were more fundamental. After reverting momentarily to the prior discussion of the Greek 5-year program, the Prime Minister concluded his presentation by pointing out that when problems failed of resolution, occasionally it was because the means to resolve them were not available. At other times, it was because the problems were not understood. If now the problems between the United States and Greece were not resolved, it would not be because he had failed to do what he regarded his duty in endeavoring to explain them. For his part, Mr. Ball concluded by extending assurances that the United States had every intention of doing everything it could to help. The United States wished to see the Greek economy grow as rapidly as possible, and the standard of living raised for its people. 312. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 336, CF 1836. Confidential. Drafted by Jones and approved by S on May 12 and by the White House on May 24. The time of the meeting is from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library) Washington, April 19, 1961, 10:30 a.m. SUBJECT Meeting of the Prime Minister with the President PARTICIPANTS H.E. Constantine Caramanlis, Prime Minister of Greece H.E. Evanghelos Averoff-Tosizza, Minister of Foreign Affairs H.E. Christian X. Palamas, Director General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs H.E. Alexis S. Liatis, Ambassador of Greece The President of the United States The Secretary of State Ellis O. Briggs, U.S. Ambassador to Greece G. Lewis Jones, Assistant Secretary, NEA Note: This conversation was divided into two parts: the first part in which all participated is described below; the second part was between the President and the Prime Minister while they walked in the garden for ten or fifteen minutes. There is, as of now, no record of what transpired between them.According to the President’s Appointment Book, the meeting lasted until 11:25 a.m. after which the two men held a discussion in the garden until 11:44 a.m. Preliminary Briefing Ambassador Briggs and Mr. Jones were called in about 10:20 to the President who asked how the visit was going. He was told that the Greeks are very pleased with the treatment they have received and that they were particularly delighted the U.S. Government has relaxed its informal ban on DLF lending arising out of the unresolved Greek bond problem. The President said he would like to know more about the Greek bonds: Who owned them? were they the subject of speculation? It did not seem reasonable to him to withhold needed aid to a country over old debts of this kind. He asked Mr. Jones to submit to him a memorandum giving the details.Not found. Mr. Jones gave the President for himself and Mrs. Kennedy as souvenirs the small enameled Greek cross prepared by PR for members of the official party. The President showed familiarity with his briefing book and glanced at the topic heading papers prepared by GTI. The Talk Caramanlis initiated the conversation by congratulating the President on his firm, but unprovocative reply to Mr. Khrushchev’s message on Cuba.For text of Khrushchev’s letter and President Kennedy’s reply, see Department of State Bulletin, May 8, 1961, pp. 661–666. The President said that he was opposed to the U.S. moving in on the situation in Cuba at this time: we must keep in step with other Latin American countries. Caramanlis said that everywhere democracies are faced with the problem of Communism and this calls for sacrifices to meet the challenge. The President told Caramanlis that he knew the latter wished to speak to President Truman and that he had put through a long distance call to Independence, Missouri. He said he had just received a letter from President Truman regretting his inability to be present at the state luncheon given Monday for the Prime Minister’s party. Caramanlis said he would be glad to speak with President Truman, whose name has special significance for Greece. Unfortunately, when President Truman was in Greece three years ago, the Cyprus trouble was at its height and he was unable to receive Truman. However, he would like to invite him to return to Greece. Caramanlis said that it was essential to the success of NATO that equilibrium be preserved in the south of NATO. Greece for the past ten years had been endeavoring to achieve this. However, the NATO allies displayed a remarkable lack of willingness to make NATO strong. Disagreements existed. There was no disposition to make sacrifices in the interest of the whole as Greece had done in connection with the Cyprus question. The NATO members were too selfish. Caramanlis said that among the NATO allies Greece was the only country ready and willing to have a larger army. Geography might account in part for this, but the fact remained that Greece was the poorest of the NATO allies and was always pressed to find ways and means to make ends meet. The Prime Minister thought the fifteen NATO countries should get together to discuss seriously what needs to be done now and what in the future. He said that the U.S. was the “natural leader” of NATO and, if necessary, the U.S. should “compel” the NATO partners to straighten out their differences. The President asked what was needed to strengthen NATO: Which way should NATO move? Caramanlis replied that the first requirement was a common policy against Communism; the second great need was to establish consultation procedures which would be able to deal with all problems. Averoff interjected “consultation with discrimination”—said that not all problems between NATO members were of general interest, in which event there should be consultations only between the parties concerned. The President said that there was a real problem in dealing with NATO countries where differences in policy arose outside of Europe; for example, in the Congo, Angola and West Irian. Averoff said that Caramanlis understood about these different policies: His essential thinking was that the NATO powers should be agreed on a policy against Communism. Caramanlis reiterated that the U.S. should make itself the spokesman of the NATO countries while keeping the democratic essence of NATO. Averoff said that the heads of governments should face the lines of policy, but the NAC was the proper forum for carrying them out. He said that due preparation would be needed before the heads of government meet but all should know how the other NATO governments think and feel. The last meeting of heads of state was in 1957. (At this point the President was called out of the room for about five minutes. He returned and got Mr. Rusk out of the room also. Their combined absence lasted about ten minutes.)Presumably for discussions related to the Bay of Pigs invasion. The President’s Appointment Book indicates that during the morning he attended a series of brief meetings regarding Cuba. When the President returned he said that President Truman was on the phone and Truman and Caramanlis talked. Caramanlis delivered a cordial invitation to Truman to come to Greece “this year.” Truman said he would think it over and wondered who might arrange such a trip. The President left the room while this call was in process, but when he returned he said at the request of Caramanlis that he would encourage Truman to go. When the conversation again returned to substance, the President said he expected to see General DeGaulle in early June. He had seen Macmillan and Adenauer and their views appeared to coincide closely with the views of Caramanlis. The Prime Minister replied he had seen Macmillan about two months ago and they had reached agreement regarding consultation.President Kennedy met with Prime Minister Macmillan on April 6 and 8, and with Chancellor Adenauer during his April 12–17 visit to the United States. Karamanlis met with Macmillan during his February 13–15 visit to the United Kingdom. The President said that an effort would be made to lay the groundwork for a heads of state meeting. If such a meeting takes place it must have a firm foundation—it must not be simply a ceremonial meeting. Caramanlis agreed and said that the heads of state should, at a “propitious moment,” sit down and face frankly such issues as armament. Caramanlis said that he wished to draw to the President’s attention the special Greek interest in the Balkans and the Middle East. Greece was European, but rather far away. For centuries it had been subjected to pressures from its neighbors to the north. These pressures are greater today since Greece’s neighbors are Communists and determined to push to the Aegean. He said that Greece was in a delicate and even “critical” situation. It was trying to preserve equilibrium in the Balkans and was sacrificing to do this. Caramanlis went on to say that Greece is the link between Turkey and Yugoslavia. So far as the latter country was concerned Greece would be satisfied if it stuck to its neutral policy. At this point an urgent telephone call came through to the President and some minutes passed while he dealt with it. The Secretary commented to the Greek party that the situation in Cuba was very disturbing. The general conversation ended at this point. The President and Caramanlis went for a walk in the garden and the remainder of the group waited in the President’s office talking in a desultory way until their return. 313. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Marcy and approved in S on August 9. Washington, July 31, 1961. SUBJECT Prime Minister Caramanlis’ Letter to the Secretary PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Howard R. Cottam, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic and Regional Affairs, NEA Oliver M. Marcy, Deputy Director, GTI Alexis S. Liatis, Ambassador of Greece Following an exchange of niceties, the Ambassador handed the Secretary (1) Mr. Caramanlis’ letter to the President,In his July 24 letter, Karamanlis, after thanking the President for the courtesies extended during his Washington visit, indicated that Ambassador Liatis would be explaining specific Greek needs and concerns to Secretary Rusk. The message was forwarded to the Department of State in airgram A–20 from Athens, August 10. (Ibid., 781.13/8–1061) and (2) Mr. Caramanlis’ letter, together with its enclosures, to the Secretary.This July 22 letter outlined Greek economic and military assistance requirements. (Ibid., 781.5–MSP/7–2761) The Secretary hastily perused Mr. Caramanlis’ letter and laid it aside, saying that he would be responding to it promptly and that the Ambassador could be sure that the points raised by Mr. Caramanlis would have the direct and careful attention of the United States Government. In discussing Mr. Caramanlis’ letter, Mr. Liatis made the point that the Greek Prime Minister is personally and most particularly interested in the economic program for Greece. He very much wants to get forward with it this year for a variety of reasons, including the example a prosperous Greece would set for the rest of the underdeveloped world. The Secretary merely commented that as the Ambassador knew the Administration had not yet gotten its foreign aid bill through the Congress: a great deal of what we could do would depend not only upon the authorization but also upon the appropriations bill. We were having difficulty because of the 5-year lending authority which we seek, but the Secretary was hopeful. As regards the military aspects of the Prime Minister’s letter, the Ambassador had little substantive to add, merely noting that the assist-ance sought would bring it more closely into conformity with NATO requirements, and that essentially what was desired was that the programs already elaborated between JUSMMAT and the Greek Government be expedited. Again asserting that the Ambassador could be certain that the Prime Minister’s letter would receive our immediate and careful attention, the Secretary raised the question of the Greek position regarding the maximum tariff on tobacco vis-à-vis the EEC. The Ambassador first commented that it was premature for the Greeks to act vis-à-vis EEC since Greece is not yet formally a member of that organization. Following some discussion, he elaborated that the principal difficulty was that tobacco was a very sensitive issue in Greece, and that any Greek action which smacks of being a concession to the United States in respect to tobacco is political dynamite. Following some further conversation during which Ambassador Liatis admitted that he had discussed the issue cursorily with Mr. Caramanlis prior to his departure from Athens, and undertook to review his own files concerning the conversation between Mr. Dillon and Mr. Protopapadakis in Paris, the Secretary asked if he could have his colleagues “snap at the Ambassador’s heels on this matter”. The Secretary concluded that this was an issue we wished to resolve as quickly as possible and the matter was left that the Department would follow up with Ambassador Liatis. As the meeting was breaking up, the Ambassador asked concerning Berlin and the Secretary’s labors in respect thereto. The Secretary pointed out that he was going to Paris this weekend and following conversations with the British, French and Germans would speak with the North Atlantic Council on Tuesday. Upon his return to Washington he would no doubt be in consultation with the NATO Ambassadors because he foresaw that, as the crisis developed, there would be a great deal to do. He noted in this connection that we were most grateful for Greece’s staunch support as regards the Berlin issue, to which Ambassador Liatis replied that we should never be in any doubt regarding Greece’s position on such matters. The Secretary inquired as to the Ambassador’s personal plans, and was told that the Ambassador would be available in Washington throughout the summer. 314. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 781.5–MSP/8–2961. Confidential. Athens, August 29, 1961, 7 p.m. 317. Deputy Prime Minister called DCM in this morning in lieu Ambassador who indisposed. Canellopoulos, making clear he spoke directly on behalf Prime Minister who still away taking cure, urged USG consider early announcement some increase in defense support, implying Caramanlis government would suffer in forthcoming electoral contest (still not announced but more and more probable) if it did not produce additional American aid. He made point amount not so important as “psychology” and went on to say increase in defense support now would provide tangible results for successful Caramanlis Washington visit which had caused such favorable public reaction. No encouragement given.A more complete account of this discussion was transmitted to the Department of State in despatch 153 from Athens, September 1. (Ibid., 781.13/9–161) Briggs 315. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 781.11/9–161. Secret; Limit Distribution. Athens, September 1, 1961, 7 p.m. 330. 1. Net impression of half hour talk with King Paul today, Crown Prince present, is that while steadfastly “on our side” he has been doing relatively little homework during past two months vacation on Corfu, with only occasional brief visits to mainland, and the grim potentials of advancing international situation have yet to sink in. (This tallies with information reaching us from other sources; it contrasts with word that Queen is deeply concerned.) Royal family, minus Crown Prince who remains as regent at government’s request, depart tomorrow for medical checkups in Munich and then Switzerland, to be gone two weeks. (Absence from country being shortened on urging of government.) King observed that he can always get back to Athens in three hours, should circumstances require. 2. King spoke highly of morale and readiness Greek Armed Forces, this in connection his visit to recent annual maneuvers in Kastoria area. He referred to Khrushchev’s threat to atomize Acropolis as having salutary effect of uniting “all Greeks except Communists” and with appreciation to Prime Minister’s response.During an August 10 reception in Moscow, Premier Khrushchev told the Greek Ambassador that in the event of war the Soviet Union would use nuclear weapons against all NATO states, including Greece. Asked if he seriously contemplated the destruction of priceless cultural monuments like the Acropolis, Khrushchev replied that he would “destroy the whole thing.” (Telegram 503 from Moscow, August 11; ibid., 781.56311/8–1161) He thinks incident far from intimidating people has solidified them; also that it has strengthened Caramanlis electoral prospects. 3. On elections, he said he does not believe Prime Minister has yet made up his mind since latter is somewhat reluctant schedule campaign in what may turn out be period international tension. He indicated Caramanlis decision might wait his return to Athens September 13. (All other evidence points to Caramanlis decision for autumn elections, with announcement probably to be made later this month.) Prime Minister himself has been absent capital for three weeks at Kamena Vourla; he ends vacation today, opens Thessaloniki Fair tomorrow and returns to Athens thereafter. Foreign Minister Averoff has been similarly absent at mountain home in Epirus; I expect see him tonight for first time since early August. 4. King also remarked that Moscow behavior has diminished chances of opposition making electoral deals with Communist EDA, and increased prospect that Papandreou (whom he is seeing prior departure) may succeed in forming combined opposition. (This of course will be all to the good—if it in fact develops.) 5. On Belgrade conference,The Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States September 1–6. King apparently uninformed but expressed hope participants wouldn’t get off track. He has not been in touch with any attending Chiefs of State. Briggs 316. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 881.10/9–1261. Secret. Athens, September 12, 1961, 7 p.m. 377. Reference: Embtel 376.Telegram 376, September 12, reported on Zolotas’ overall analysis of the state of the Greek economy. (Ibid., 881.10/9–1361) Subject: Defaulted pre-war bonded debt. 1. We took advantage Zolotas visit to raise subject of resumption negotiations for settlement defaulted bond debt. We pointed out settlement would redound to Greece’s favor not only with US but with Common Market and other circles as well. Zolotas responded he fully prepared and willing discuss informally at Vienna, noting however this remains essentially matter for Greek Government determine and settle. He volunteered opinion no Greek Government could withdraw from most favored debtor position because of oft-repeated political connotations. He thought however Greeks would welcome any assistance in advising [arriving?] at formula which would make such a clause acceptable to Bondholders Council. In his view it could be limited in application to Greece’s immediate Communist neighbors in Balkans. Zolotas was given no encouragement on acceptability such formula but was encouraged include in any discussions with Dillon and Ball in Vienna.At the Vienna meeting of the International Monetary Fund. Briggs 317. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 375/9–1361. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Paris for Stoessel. Athens, September 13, 1961, 11 p.m. 386. 1. Prime Minister informed this morning of contents Department telegram 285.Telegram 285, September 3, instructed Briggs to inform Karamanlis that the United States would regard a Soviet or Bulgarian attack on Greece as coming within the scope of Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. (Ibid., 780.54/9–361) Caramanlis’ immediate reaction was to inquire whether this NATO guarantee or direct US assurance. After discussion in detail and some reflection his part, Caramanlis, who in calm unruffled mood, said he appreciated this reply from US to his request but wanted to say in all frankness it did not fully satisfy him. Asked to elaborate, Prime Minister went on to say record is clear that he and Greek Government have given strong support to NATO but that he frankly lacks confidence in ability of NATO to come immediately to aid of Greece in event of attack on this country. He pointed to pulling and hauling involved in all NATO decisions, mentioning doubts re British and Italian readiness face up to hard decisions involved in present crisis. He called attention, as he often does, to Greek geographic position, saying if Belgium or Holland attacked other Western European powers immediately involved because of geography, but this not necessarily so in case of Greece with her position separate from rest of European NATO. He said he had discussed his preoccupations about NATO with President Kennedy during his July visit. He said again this morning that he and Greek people know what they must do and will do it. There is no doubt, however, Prime Minister would like to have US assurances of direct and immediate support for Greece in case of trouble without waiting for results of NATO deliberations. 2. In short, what Caramanlis wants is simple US statement to effect we are on Greece’s side and have no intention letting Greece go down Soviet drainpipe. Reassurances along these lines would have more positive effect than assurances re NATO commitment which regarded here as useful but rather legalistic. 3. Same exercise repeated later in morning with Foreign Minister, who was attended by Director General Palamas. They had been advised of Caramanlis position and both took very careful notes of our statement. Briggs 318. Editorial Note Prime Minister Karamanlis resigned on September 20. King Paul appointed a “service government” under General Constantine Dovas to conduct new elections. The elections were contested by three major political parties: Karamanlis’ National Radical Union (ERE); the Communist-dominated Union of the Democratic Left (EDA); and a new center left party, the Center Union (KD), led by former Prime Minister George Papandreou, and formed through a merger of a number of smaller parties. The Dovas government called for elections on October 29. 319. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 375/9–2661. Secret. Repeated to Athens and Sofia. Paris, September 26, 1961, 8 p.m. 1661. From Stoessel. General Norstad visited Athens September 24–25 to speak at opening session of annual conference Atlantic Treaty Association, derived following principal impressions from his numerous conversations: 1. Regarding build-up of NATO forces, military authorities stated those necessary actions within present Greek means are being taken and those requiring reallocation of funds within overall present capability are being considered, but acknowledged that full response to present situation dependent on level of defense support and military assistance funds. Norstad found military authorities (he called on interim Defense Minister and met with Chiefs of Staff) in virtual ignorance of measures being taken in light of Berlin situation by other NATO members, including US. 2. Norstad’s contacts reflected general expectation October election would return Caramanlis to office, with no strong convictions more precisely formulated. Prime Minister Dovas, among others, noted opinion of “political experts” that party’s showing might improve by a few percentage points probably leaving Caramanlis short of Parliamentary majority. 3. Greeks with whom Norstad talked were unanimous in view that Exercise CheckmateNATO exercises in Thrace. had been useful to Greek people, with a positively good effect. 4. During an analysis of Communist protests and threats prior to Checkmate, General Frontistis remarked that Averoff had interrupted Bulgarian charge’s reading of protest note (Athens 337 to Department),Telegram 337 from Athens, September 3, reported Averoff’s response to the Bulgarian demarche. (Department of State, Central Files, 780.54/9–361) declaring it couched in unacceptable terms, and abruptly dismissing charge. Frontistis considers Bulgarian claims (in Athens and Sofia) to be worried about Greek actions not genuine, but merely propaganda. Greeks believe Bulgarians are increasing forces by holding conscripts longer and by calling additional conscripts and reservists, but note that an apparent increase of 20–25,000 is partly due to seasonal factors so that actual increase is about 15,000. Frontistis believes many of signs of reinforcement (temporary closing of roads to diplomats, stationing of tanks where clearly in evidence, etc.) are staged for effect, though he has evidence of some build-up in Struma Valley extension. 5. King and Queen, after exchange of pleasantries, opened conversation by saying they intended to be frank and asking “If there is attack against Greece by Bulgaria, even small, are you coming to our defense?” Norstad replied, “Yes, Sir, without any question,” and elaborated from viewpoint of commitments and capacity of Alliance and of US record, beginning with Truman Doctrine and reinforced in word and action since. He mentioned Sixth Fleet presence and observed that Checkmate had demonstrated capacity for further reinforcement in matter of hours. King and Queen expressed warm appreciation for response and in return offered assurances that a border incident was farthest from Greek desire and that if one should occur government would go to great lengths to prevent it expanding. 6. King and Queen look forward eagerly to visit and lunch aboard US nuclear submarine Shark, remarking they had learned of vessel’s port call “by accident”. When Norstad surmised US officials had perhaps wished to avoid embarrassing them, reply was “We do not embarrass easily”. Said they wished visit submarine to show its presence was all right, election or no, had been waiting for chance to make such public gesture “after what happened in Denmark and elsewhere.” Comment: Norstad felt that warmth of response to his assurance of US and NATO support demonstrated both need for it and acceptance of it for the moment. Need is somewhat perplexing, especially in light recently renewed US pledge. Norstad concludes for time being that posing of question was but another manifestation of need characteristic of Greek Government for recurrent reassurance. Gavin 320. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 781.5–MSP/10–1961. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. The telegram, delayed in transmission, was received on October 21. Athens, October 19, 1961, 4 p.m. 524. For Assistant Secretary Talbot. 1. Following signature PL 480 agreement late yesterday,For text of P.L. 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act, enacted July 10, 1954, see 68 Stat. 454. For text of the surplus agricultural commodities agreement, signed in Athens on October 18, 1961, and entering into force the same day, see TIAS 4876. Minister Coordination Arliotis indicated desire for private conversation. In most serious tone, he began by saying Prime Minister has just received message from Greek Embassy Washington to effect aid for Greece being “deeply cut.” I told Arliotis we had received no word from Washington re aid level and anticipated none before end of month. In answer my inquiry, he indicated Greek Embassy had got it from “semi-official” source. He went on stress this worst possible timing in view imminent elections, would have incalculable effect on voting, would be played with maximum emphasis to Greek people by Communists as confirmation their worst charges against US, et cetera. Arliotis implied only Prime Minister Dovas and he were privy this information (although top Foreign Office official must also know). He said Prime Minister had taken personal charge of matter and I could expect be called in probably tomorrow, Friday. 2. While Greeks have been ardently dramatic since dawn of history and we may expect them pull full stops out, I agree fully timing for this sort of news could hardly be worse. At present moment in Greece, with election campaign in full swing and Greek relations with Soviet Bloc in agitated state, any indication US aid to be reduced would have profoundly disturbing effect on US-Greek relations. Public knowledge of any planned reduction our aid to Greece would play directly into hands Greek Communists and reinforce their argument, hitherto lacking conviction, that Greece can only protect its security by going neutral. [1 paragraph (10 lines of source text) not declassified] [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] It goes to attitude of Greek people as a whole, for whom US presently plays role of strong protector of which they historically feel in need. Irrespective strong support Greeks in general give NATO, it is US help and protection they want above all else. At a time of tension for Greece, both domestic and international and when we are calling on Greece to make additional contributions to NATO effort (Embassy telegram 506),Telegram 506, October 13, reported the U.S. Military Assistance Group’s (JUSMAGG) assessment of Greek military capabilities. (Department of State, Central Files, 781.5–MSP/10–1361) evidence of slackening US support would seriously damage our position and discourage those who support us in Greece. 5. I have no desire be dramatic myself and do not believe above is overstating case. But if reported decisions re cut in Greek aid level should come out now by leak or otherwise, then, believe me, this comes at a time which will ensure maximum unfavorable publicity and harmful effects for us locally. 6. I realize demands on US are pressing everywhere, but do we want to rock Greek boat before it is tight enough to weather rough seas on its own? I should welcome any suggestions re tack to take in anticipated session with Prime Minister. Best thing, of course, would be to be able inform him reports are unfounded.In telegram 409 to Athens, the Department of State replied: “You may if necessary reassure Greek Govt there no intention communicate to Greek Govt, let alone make any public announcement concerning, aid levels prior Greek elections. FYI. We understand AID expects inform you shortly proposed aid levels on classified basis soliciting your comments with view considering them at regional conference to be held shortly.” (Ibid., 781.5–MSP/10–2361) Bennett relayed this message to Prime Minister Dovas on October 23. He reported on their discussions in telegram 538 from Athens, October 23. (Ibid.) Bennett 321. Editorial Note Greek national elections held on October 29 resulted in a victory for the National Radical Union, which captured 51 percent of the vote and 176 seats in Parliament. The Center Union won 34 percent and 100 seats. The EDA was the major loser, dropping from 24 to 15 percent and from 78 to 24 seats in the new Parliament. The King asked Karamanlis to form a new government. The Embassy commented: “New Caramanlis Cabinet represents a reshuffling of old ERE elements plus strong injection of new blood notably in key economic areas. Papaligouras (Coordination) likely be strong personality in Cabinet along with Averoff in Foreign Affairs, Theotokis in Finance and Rallis in Interior. Appointment of Papaligouras and particularly Pipinelis in Commerce indicative of fact Caramanlis feels he has strength to place persons he considers most able into key positions despite possible disgruntlement of other tried and true ERE followers; Papaligouras led rebel movement which brought down Caramanlis govt in 1958 and Pipinelis has so far failed win parliamentary seat. Protopapadakis in Defense will be unknown quantity. “We consider Cabinet on the whole an improvement by several notches over previous Caramanlis Cabinet.” (Telegram 600 from Athens, November 6; Department of State, Central Files, 781.13/11–661) George Papandreou protested over the manner in which the elections were conducted, calling them fraudulent, and announcing that he would undertake a “relentless struggle” to topple the Karamanlis government and force new, untainted elections. 322. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 375/12–261. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Paris Topol, Rome, and Ankara. Athens, December 2, 1961, 3 p.m. 699. Paris for USRO, Stoessel and McGuire. Rome for Rood. Main Greek effort in connection Stikker visitNATO Secretary General Dirk Stikker visited Athens December 2 for discussions relating to NATO’s scheduled spring Ministerial Meeting. During his visit, the Greek Government outlined its case for further military aid. The Embassy reported on the Stikker visit in airgram A–296, December 2. (Ibid.) was to emphasize crucial nature Greek need for continuing external aid order support its military effort. Pointed to low per capita income, import-export imbalance. Estimated aid of $35 million more aid required annually beyond present levels. Greeks pushed idea of NATO multilateral special fund to make up deficiencies national military budgets. Stikker responded cautiously. Foreign Office NATO Director reports Averoff intends approach Secretary in Paris to solicit his support multilateral fund idea, and that Averoff will push for it at NATO meeting. Airgram follows. Briggs 323. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 781.21/12–461. Confidential. Athens, December 4, 1961, 6 p.m. 704. Parliament opened officially this morning (December 4) with address by King Paul and oath-taking by approximately two-thirds of deputies. Entire opposition except for progressive and handful of independents boycotted session. This accords with irresponsible decision of Papandreou and Venizelos, as protest measure against alleged election irregularities (notwithstanding their success at polls). Communist-controlled PAME deputies were likewise absent, thus gesturing anew toward united front. Chiefs of Mission attended and public galleries were filled. King’s address did not touch directly on domestic politics, but stressed international affairs, reaffirming Greek loyalty to NATO. Markezinis deputies refrained from applause, some which was interpreted to imply that progressives, while participating parliamentary sessions, may still try to make trouble for Caramanlis. (Prior to Royal address, Caramanlis drew round of applause from ETE deputies and gallery walking to floor of parliament and greeting Markezinis.) According various reports, Center Union intends to enter parliament December 8 or 9, taking oath “with reservations” (which is permitted by Greek constitution) and launching attack on conduct of elections. Not clear where Center thinks it going with these tactics, but leadership being pressed by portion of rank-and-file to adopt more constructive and moderate approach. Interior Minister Rallis told Embassy Officer he thought steam would go out of Center campaign by mid-month. This remains be seen. Airgram to follow. Briggs 324. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in GreeceSource: Department of State, Central Files, 881.10/12–861. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted and approved by Marcy and cleared by OFD, B, and S/S. Washington, December 8, 1961, 10:22 p.m. 536. Department has had initial session with FBPC representatives Munro and Heath with little tangible result re most favored debtor clause. Hopes have second more successful session next week. Meantime Munro states British agitating for multi-national approach to Greeks to include Councils UK, France, Germany, Switzerland as well as Ottoman Council. Response request for reaction Department opined Multilateral approach might well spoil favorable disposition towards settlement we believe we have created on part of Caramanlis. It generally understood by all concerned that settlement with US would set pattern for settlements with other Councils. Request your comment this possible approach which may prove only new element in event Munro continues insist it impossible meet Greeks on most favored debtor issue.In telegram 733 from Athens, December 12, Briggs commented: “I strongly support Department’s view that interjection non-U.S. bondholders into picture at this juncture could mean protracted renegotiation of agreement already reached in principle with FBPC.” (Ibid., 881.10/12–1261) The Greek bond question was ultimately solved through bilateral discussions between the bondholders representatives and the Greek Government. An agreement embodying the terms of the settlement was signed on October 19, 1962. Rusk 325. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 781.5/1–162. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Paris. Athens, January 1, 1962, 8 p.m. 777. Paris for Stoessel. Reference Paris 3271 to Department repeated Athens 41.Telegram 3271 from Paris, December 30, 1961, reported that General Norstad was “disappointed” with the tentative figure of $83 million in MAP for Greece. (Ibid., 781.5/12–3061) In view my repeated recommendations re desirable level FY 62 aid for Greece it will be no surprise to Department that I associate myself with General Norstad’s views as repeated Reftel. If, in addition this unexpectedly heavy slash projected in MAP funds, supporting assistance is to be cut anywhere near as sharply as rumored, then I can only declare my belief we are heading for trouble in Greece. There has been much Washington publicity in recent months that under our new aid policies America means to help those who help themselves and that we intend to give our assistance especially to those who share our view of the world et cetera. Greeks hold strong convictions, which we in Embassy share, they meet both these criteria. We do not see how we can overlook fact that Greece has to live with three communist neighbors on its Northern boundary, or that Greece is subject to continuing feints and threats from Soviet bloc. (Latest one, as recently as last week, received official notice by Department. Moreover it has not escaped our Greek allies that we have within week announced substantial additional aid program for one of their Communist neighbors.) Nor can we ignore ominous shadow cast by events in Berlin in this part of the world. In that connection, Greece responded promptly and loyally to Berlin build-up plans. Since it has been long agreed that Greece is NATO country which requires outside assistance in her military effort if her economic development is not to be critically handicapped, perhaps Greeks may be excused by [if] they thought they would have adequate help on their military effort taken in wake of Berlin. At all events they went ahead on their build-up per request, and surely that stoutness of attitude is worth something to us in these times. No one is more anxious than I to see Greece’s economic development proceed apace. Great strides have been made in past decade and there is general agreement the next three or four years may be crucial. This is precisely why I consider aid decisions re Greece for FY 62 and 63 to have such special importance. Whatever its faults, new Greek Government formed after last fall elections is best aggregation of progressive talent Greece has had since war. With government stability and sound, progressive economic leadership on Greek side, and with judicious mixture of advice and financial assistance on our part—and with some luck—we could within three or four years actually see Greece able stand on her own feet for first time in modern history. That to my way of thinking is an objective worth keeping constantly before us. Aid to Greece should not by any means be considered a “reward for good behavior”, but rather an investment toward sound and attainable mutual goals. We are getting good return on our investment. True enough, current statistics are optimistic on Greece’s foreign exchange reserves and balance of payment position. I personally do not believe situation here is nearly so rose-colored as these figures appear to imply to some economists. With Greek history in mind and with knowledge that almost one third Greek exports now go to eastern bloc, statistics alone can be insecure basis for decision. To establish FY 1962 aid levels for Greece mainly on economic grounds and without adequate weight being given to political and psychological factors, not to mention harsh military realities imposed by Greece’s geographic position and by Berlin situation, would in my judgment be a great mistake for US Government to make. These matters have now been before appropriate Washington officials for many weeks. Our Greek allies, handicapped in their own budgeting, are becoming understandably restive and concerned. I once more, in all seriousness, bespeak aid level adequate and appropriate to Greece’s need, as specified in repeated communications from Athens and Paris. I do so in belief that on our decision in this matter may well depend character of our relations with this threatened and exposed ally during predictable future.In Polto 888, January 11, Ambassador Gavin endorsed the views of Norstad and Briggs and urged that assistance to Greece be given a priority by NATO. (Ibid., 781.5/1–1162) Briggs 326. Telegram 859 From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of State Athens, January 30, 1962, 6 p.m. [Source: Department of State, Central Files, 781.00/1–3062. Confidential. 1 page of source text not declassified.] 327. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 375/3–162. Confidential. Drafted by Schiff. Washington, March 1, 1962. SUBJECT NATO Mission on Greece and TurkeyThe North Atlantic Council Foreign Ministers authorized the creation of a Mission to Greece and Turkey (“Wise Men”) to examine related defense and economic development problems during their May 8–10, 1961, meeting at Oslo, Norway. At the North Atlantic Council meeting in Paris December 13–15, 1961, the Foreign Ministers instructed the Mission to complete its report by April 1, 1962. PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Mr. Faure, NATO Mission member Mr. Ferguson, NATO Mission member Mr. von Mangoldt, NATO Mission member Mr. Kohler, Assistant Secretary, EUR Mr. Miner, Director, GTI Mr. Vincent, International Staff, NATO Mr. Habermeier Mr. Abrams, RA Mrs. Kupinsky, RA Mr. White, AID Mr. Schiff, NEA/GTI The Secretary began the discussion by asking if the Mission had any unresolved anxieties which they wished to discuss. Mr. Ferguson stated that there were two. In the first place, the Mission would find it very difficult to make a judgment on whether Greece and Turkey should be pressed to increase their military strength to meet Force Goals and suggest that additional assistance be made available to permit them to do this. That is, the Mission would not be able to suggest that these two countries should be singled out for special assistance for this purpose, although if they did try to meet NATO Force Goals, they would need special assistance. Secondly, so far as economic assistance was concerned, there appeared to be general agreement on the requirements of Turkey. However, the Mission felt that Greece would need “unorthodox” aid for a transitional period of two to three years. During this two to three year period, loans limited to the foreign exchange costs of projects would not satisfactorily meet the problem because the Greeks would have difficulty in mobilizing the needed domestic resources. Mr. von Mangoldt said the Greek capital market was still limited and could not be depended upon to provide the necessary resources. With time he felt it would grow. Mr. Ferguson noted that the Greeks could raise drachma for their investment program if they cut their defense expenditures, but the Mission would not want to make such a recommendation. Mr. von Mangoldt said the Mission understood the United States decision to terminate the grant assistance to Greece, but he believed that loans should be made available to cover not simply the foreign exchange costs of projects. In response to the Secretary’s question as to what the order of magnitude would be, Mr. Ferguson replied that the Greeks might need external assistance of $20–30 million annually in 1963 and 1964, after allowing for assistance they would get from the European Investment Bank. This would provide the same type of assistance to the Greeks as they had received previously in the form of Defense Support funds from the United States, and assumes no rapid increase in military strength to meet NATO Force Goals. This presents a difficult technical problem, Mr. Ferguson stated, but it was only a technical one and not a major one. The Secretary then asked if there would be any problem created if the Mission reported an uncovered gap. Mr. Kohler said he thought this was not a problem and suggested there might be some advantage to reporting the minimum requirements of Greece, even if it could not be guaranteed these would be met. Mr. Ferguson added that the Mission’s report will identify the needs, try to get NATO to agree on the reasonableness of the needs and leave to the NATO members to decide if they are willing to commit themselves to acting on these requirements. This type of report would have a bearing on the use the Greeks make of their internal resources. Mr. Faure asked again about NATO’s role in dealing with the Greek-Turkish problem and whether this should be done directly or indirectly. He suggested that the military assistance might be handled within NATO while economic assistance could be handled outside NATO. The Secretary said this is our preference too. Mr. Faure then asked whether NATO might not participate as an observer in any consortium, even on economic assistance, that might be arranged. Mr. von Mangoldt said from his OECD experience, he knew this would give the neutrals trouble. The best formulation, Mr. Ferguson stated, would be for the individual NATO members, as separate Governments, to agree to take some action. The Secretary added that the report could recommend to NATO that further action properly belongs in other organizations. He noted that if action were taken in OECD, the delegates in the OECD are, after all, not strangers to NATO, many represent the same Governments and will be acting under instructions from their Governments. It is the governments which would be acting, rather than NATO as such. Mr. Faure said he thought we were right. Mr. Ferguson referred to previous resolutions in NATO on Greece and Turkey and said the Greeks and Turks would feel deceived if the same thing were to happen again. The Secretary expressed hope that NATO delegates would be prepared to say that the Delegate’s government, and not only that NATO as an organization, accepts the report. He then raised a question about a NATO military fund. Mr. Faure said there are two proposals—one for a military fund and the other for an economic fund. The latter, which was a mutual assistance fund mainly for defense support, had been mentioned previously by Foreign Minister Averoff at the Oslo meeting but the Greeks, who were supposed to submit memoranda on the subject, have never done so. Mr. Vincent said he thought the Greeks meant a mutual assistance fund for military assist-ance but supposed that the Greeks were awaiting the outcome of the Mission’s report, before pursuing the matter further. Greece appears to want a Special Fund relating military and economic aspects of assistance and emphasizing the importance of their tie-in to NATO. Mr. Faure said the Mission must find some formula which demonstrates the NATO interest in Greek-Turkish problems, or, at least, would not entirely conceal the NATO role, but he admitted that the Greeks would probably be satisfied if enough aid were forthcoming regardless of its source. He asked whether, for example, if a consortium encountered problems, NATO could not help by prodding. Mr. Ferguson said he thought this was the responsibility of individual member governments. Mr. Kohler noted this is devolved on the Secretary-General of NATO to see that the resolution approved was implemented by member governments. Mr. Faure then asked the Secretary whether he had any further thoughts he wished to pass on. The Secretary said there might be a problem arising from the difference between any action that might be taken as a result of the report and the expectations of Greece and Turkey. Mr. Ferguson commented that he did not believe the United States would have impossible problems in terms of United States resources. He thought it important for the United States to provide funds to Greece over and above the foreign exchange costs and he believed AID would have the funds and flexibility to do this. Mr. Miner suggested this would provide an opportunity for other NATO members to help and Mr. Ferguson added this was exactly what the Mission had in mind. The Secretary advised it would be good if both the Mission and the United States Government would feel free in the next month to keep the channels open for further exchanges of information. This was agreed to on all sides and it was also agreed that Ambassador Tuthill in Paris would be the logical point of contact. Mr. von Mangoldt said that on Turkey they had nothing new to add. They could foresee that about $300 million a year would be required in 1963 and after. Mr. Faure said that NATO should take full cognizance of the military burden which each country has and to meet in some way the hopes of the Greeks and Turks and not simply relegate the problem on the economic side to other international agencies. He understood that NATO could not, however, take direct responsibility. The Secretary asked whether we could not talk to the Greeks since, although the problem is of direct concern to NATO, the means for dealing with it may require getting at it outside NATO. The Secretary thought that we might prepare Greece for the general approach that what is needed is a commitment from NATO Governments to follow through on action outside NATO since it is essentially governments who are involved in this responsibility. 328. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Embassy in FranceSource: Department of State, Central Files, 781.5/3–662. Secret; Niact; Noforn. Repeated to the Department of State and Rome. The source text is the Department of State copy. President Kennedy appointed Henry R. Labouisse Ambassador to Greece on December 18, 1961, and the Senate confirmed the nomination on January 29, 1962. He presented his credentials to King Paul on March 7. Athens, March 6, 1962, 3 p.m. 124. Paris for General Norstad, Stoessel, McGuire and USRO. Rome for Admiral Hussell and Rood. Gen. Frontistis plans call on Gen. Norstad March 7 to present results military studies showing reductions required three Hellenic services beginning January 1, 1963 attributed withdrawal US defense support in 1963. Proposed reductions already notified by Chief JUSMAAG Athens to Gen. Wheeler. Drastic cuts planned seem designed reduce expenditures to levels substantially below what would seem be required if objective confined to reduction defense expenditure for 1963 by amount of withdrawn defense support. There has been no effort on civilian side of Greek Government to allocate resources to military completely or even partially to fill gap created by withdrawal 1963 assistance even though this clearly possible in light of overall budget increase equivalent $96 million, of which only $33 million investment. Balance $63 million for miscellany of general purposes. We forced to conclusion Greeks have come to fundamental decision that except as external grant aid may be available they entitled to and should reduce level their defense effort (measured against GNP) to levels other small NATO powers. They using withdrawal 1963 defense support as cover for this decision. Following analysis may be helpful: (1) Although level support 1961 and 1962 commonly thought of as $20 million, in fact retention 10 percent of generated counterpart by US for own use brings figure to $18 million. (2) Carry-over during calendar 1963 estimated at $5 million. This results from time required to procure imports with US dollars and collect the drachmae from Greek importers. Effect of reduction in 1963 therefore about $13 million. (3) This amounts to 1.6 percent of the 1962 Greek budget. (4) Military apparently arbitrarily excluded from sharing in steadily increasing tax revenue. If military got proportionate share of increase $6 million additional would be available annually. (5) By financing larger proportion investment budget through international loans, Greece could, if it wished, divert some of its own financial resources and investment to defense. US, Common Market, Germany, possibly other NATO allies all possible sources of substantial loans for construction projects and equipment. In summary cessation American grant aid need not have such drastic effect unless Greek Government wants it that way. However, unless US credits on easy terms and in amounts at least sufficient to equalize past grant aid can be available promptly, there appear to be serious economical, political and psychological factors which will make it extremely difficult if not impossible for government to maintain military expenditures we desire. I shall comment further on this subject later. Labouisse 329. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State RuskSource: Department of State, Central Files, 811.0081/4–2362. Secret. Also sent to the Secretary of Defense and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development. A note on the source text indicates the memorandum was received and distributed in the Department of State as NSAM No. 139. Washington, March 23, 1962. I am concerned lest if we increase MAP for Greece as is, I gather, being advocated by General Norstad, we will be going contrary to the President’s instruction in NSC Action 2447 of last January 18th.This NSC Action instructed the Agency for International Development to prepare a study of its programs with an emphasis on the mix of military and economic assistance, alternative programs, and, in the case of Greece and Turkey, to take into consideration the special factor of their NATO membership. (Ibid., NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting, January 18, 1962) In effect it called for prompt further reviews of US aid programming for certain key countries, including Greece, and recommendations by July 15 for proposed FY 1964–68 military assistance plans (including the final proposed FY 1963 program) on certain alternative bases. My query is whether a quick decision now would not at least partly prejudge the outcome of this exercise. If a quick decision is imperative, we must of course bite the bullet. However, in view of the President’s desire for a thorough-going review of the Greek and Turkish aid programs, I believe we should consult his wishes in this case. McGeorge Bundy 330. Despatch From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 781.00/3–2662. Confidential. Drafted by Stearns. Athens, March 23, 1962. No. 619 REF Embdesp #604 of March 8, 1962Despatch 604 reported on political attacks on the Crown and on the efforts of the Royal family to improve its public image. (Ibid., 781.11/3–862) SUBJECT A Winter of Discontent: Some Implications of the Current Political Maneuvering in Greece 1. It is apparent that the Center Union’s campaign to nullify the results of the October 29, 1961, elections is turning into a broader and more fundamental attack on several of the governing institutions of Greece; what started four months ago as a disgruntled effort on the part of the defeated opposition to challenge the legitimacy of the elections, and therefore of the Caramanlis Government, is becoming an effort to challenge the legitimacy of certain Greek institutions, such as the Palace, the military leadership, and the internal security forces which, in the minds of the opposition, exerted undue influence on the conduct of the elections. To understand the significance of this challenge, and to estimate the lines of its probable development, it is useful to consider briefly the electoral debate itself and to see what, if anything, the opposition has proved by its campaign. 2. The general charge advanced by the Center Union against the Dovas Service Government is that the conduct of the elections was characterized by force and fraudulence (“via kai nothia” in the euphonic Greek phrase). The evidence adduced by the opposition to support the charge falls into two categories: (a) evidence designed to show that many voters, especially in the Athens area, were illegally registered, and that military voting registers were not made available to party repre-sentatives for inspection within the time specified by law; and (b) evidence of police pressure on individual voters in some provincial areas. 3. While the Center Union, for purposes of its campaign, has tended to lump the evidence together, and to draw from it extravagant conclusions about a “master plan” to rig the elections in favor of ERE, objective examination of the evidence makes clear that much of what the opposition has been talking about is not malfeasance but nonfeasance. That is, with respect to the civilian vote the opposition has proved numerous technical violations of the law, especially as it affects the registration of voters, but has failed notably to prove that the elections as a whole were rigged. Thus, despite all the time that the opposition has spent rooting through the registers, not a single case of double voting has so far been proved and the Government has been able to show that a number of illegally registered voters were in fact supporters of the opposition. 4. With respect to the military vote and the activities of the police and para-military TEA forces in the provinces the evidence, while scattered, is somewhat more persuasive. Numerous [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] reports tend to confirm that the Army high command bent every effort to deliver a heavy vote for Caramanlis and that General Kardamakis, the Chief of Staff of the Hellenic Army and a long-time associate of the Prime Minister, was deeply involved in the electioneering. The pre-electoral activities of TEA and the gendarmerie do not appear to have been so explicitly pro-ERE; the mission of the internal security forces was to hold down the vote of the extreme left. Nonetheless, in at least one instance, that of the Police Chief in Methoni, the Courts have found evidence of strong-arm methods employed against a non-Communist, and it is permissible to question the wisdom of allowing provincial constabulary to intervene in free elections even when motivated by anti-Communism. 5. The conclusions to be drawn from these observations are the following: (a) while there was no widespread adulteration of the civilian vote, the administration of the elections was poor and open to abuse by all parties; (b) the Army leadership was overly involved in the campaign and inadequate restraints were placed on the activities of the internal security forces in the pre-electoral period. 6. It is probable, as some Government spokesmen have said, that similar conclusions could have been drawn from any Greek election, including those conducted by the present opposition leaders. However, what was acceptable, or at any rate accepted, practice in 1951 or 1956 may not be so today. The Center Union, under the purple banner of Papandreou’s oratory, has ridden off in all directions and in so doing has created much confusion about the real issues raised by its attack on the election results. These issues do not, as the Center Union would have us believe, pose the question, “who should govern Greece?” They do, however, raise important questions about the way Greece should be governed. 7. If we accept this line of reasoning, it becomes easier to see why the Greek public’s response to the Center Union campaign has been mixed and why the campaign itself has shifted emphasis so markedly in recent weeks. There has from the beginning been a measure of reserve and skepticism in the public’s attitude toward the Center Union and especially toward its leadership. No serious observer of the Greek political scene believes that Papandreou and his ill-assorted coalition command as much popular confidence as Caramanlis, and once this is admitted the most extreme of the opposition charges become transparently ridiculous. Many people believe, however, that the Palace, the Army leadership and the internal security forces intervene too much in the political life of Greece, and that the sluggishness of government administration, its apparent unresponsiveness to individual needs, has created a potentially dangerous gap between the governing class and the governed. 8. For this reason public opinion, which was apathetic about the Center Union’s attack on the election results, has appeared more receptive to its attacks on the Palace. It explains why many intellectuals who have little or no use for the leadership of the Center Union nevertheless feel that in questioning the impartiality of the Army leadership and the gendarmerie the opposition is performing a useful service. Finally, it indicates how, almost without realizing what they are doing, the Center Union leaders find themselves conducting a very different campaign from the one they began four months ago. In recent weeks the implicit issues have simply become explicit. 9. Greece, it is often said, is in mid-passage, but the phrase is usually used to describe a stage in the country’s economic development. It is less widely understood that Greece is also in mid-passage socially and politically. Methods of administration appropriate to the conditions of prewar Greece; habits of thought suitable to the period of the Bandit War; royal prerogatives which survived in the atmosphere of an earlier and less enlightened time; these are a few of the anachronisms whose continued existence vexes the public and will trouble the Government until they are resolved. These are real issues, as opposed to the synthetic ones which the Center Union introduced at the beginning of its campaign. The apathetic response of the Greek public to Papandreou’s attempt to discredit the elections (which the public correctly identified as political opportunism) has, in effect, forced the Center Union leadership to change the focus of its attack. 10. In these somewhat changed circumstances the danger to Caramanlis does not appear to be especially serious at the moment. The immediate threat was diminished as soon as it became clear that a majority of the Greek public were extremely skeptical about the most violent and politically-motivated of Papandreou’s charges. When the Prime Minister was able to ascertain that public confidence in the Government had not been shaken, his position became simpler and his principal concern one of holding together the versatile but high-strung group of men who compose his present cabinet. So far, he has managed to do this with consummate skill. Ministers whose personal loyalty he has reason to doubt—Finance Minister Theotokis and Interior Minister Rallis, in particular—have been those to whom he has assigned responsibility for conducting the Government’s defense in Parliament. This strategy has enabled the Prime Minister to avoid direct participation in the election debate and has forced ministers of untested reliability to commit themselves publicly on a subject they might have preferred to finesse. The total effect has probably been to strengthen the cohesiveness of the Government and to lessen the danger that it can be brought down from within, as it was in 1958. 11. The Prime Minister’s success in holding together his cabinet also strengthens his position with the Palace. An important objective of the Center Union has been to convince the Royal Family and, to a lesser extent, the American Embassy that the Caramanlis Government is “irregular” and therefore a source of political instability in Greece. When the opposition leaders call for a “transitional” government they are appealing to the Palace to replace Caramanlis with some compromise candidate whom they would support until new elections were held. Given the well-known lack of personal rapport between Caramanlis and the Palace, the Center Union reasons that this scheme might be acceptable to the Royal Family if they become convinced (a) that the Prime Minister was not giving them adequate protection from political attack, and (b) that a compromise candidate of their own choice would receive widespread bipartisan support in Parliament. In such a situation the likeliest candidate would be Theotokis, who enjoys close personal relations with the Royal Family, is well regarded by backbenchers of both Government and center opposition, and has no great affection for Caramanlis. Other, more remote possibilities would be Rallis, Minister of Coordination Papaligouras, or Minister of Commerce Pipinelis. It is perfectly clear, however, that this strategy has little chance of succeeding as long as Caramanlis remains in full command of his cabinet and his party. In recent events, there is no sign that his grip is relaxing or that rumored anxieties of the Royal Family are being exploited to his political disadvantage. 12. Indeed, at present it is the Center Union leaders who seem to be in trouble. Papandreou has become enmeshed in a tiresome debate with ex-Liberal members of the cabinet about who is entitled to wear the mantle of the elder Venizelos; the Center Union rank-and-file are deeply divided on how to phrase their criticism of the military leadership and an open letter which the party recently addressed to the Armed Forces, denouncing their present leaders as “unworthy”, was revised so often that its eventual release was anticlimactic; lastly, at a time when public interest is centered on Princess Sophie’s dowry, the financing of the Queen’s Fund and other matters involving the Royal Family, the Center Union finds itself half in, half out of Parliament and created a further impression of confusion by rushing off to Crete on March 18 for a mass rally on the elections. 13. Assuming that public confidence in Caramanlis remains unshaken, we are justified in concluding that the Government will ride out the present agitation. In its fumbling way, the Center Union has found in the Palace and in some questionable political activities of the military and internal security forces valid issues with which to attack Caramanlis. Its confused handling of these issues, however, provided the Prime Minister with the time he needs to fashion at least temporary solutions to the most pressing of his problems. It is to be hoped that he will do more than that. Basic reforms are long overdue in Greece’s internal security legislation, in the way the country conducts its elections and in the way the Royal Family comport themselves. The changing character of the election debate has clearly demonstrated that it is in these areas that the Greek public is looking for effective action from the Government. For the Ambassador:H. Daniel BrewsterCounselor of Embassy for Political Affairs 331. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 375/4–762. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Athens. Paris, April 7, 1962, 3 p.m. 4766. Department pass Defense. From Stoessel. Embtel 4723 and Polto 1333.Telegram 4723 from Paris, April 5, reported that Norstad and Frontistis had agreed that, pending the completion of NATO’s study of the Greek defense situation, Greek forces would remain at existing levels. (Ibid., 375/4–562) Polto 1333 from Paris, April 6, reported that Averoff was dissatisfied with the Wise Men’s report and believed that it would cause considerable political harm to the Karamanlis government. (Ibid., 375/4–662) Following text (non-essential words omitted) memo for record dictated by Gen Norstad regarding his discussion with Greek PriMin April 6: Begin text. 1. Friday 6 April, lunched with Caramanlis, FonMin Averoff, and Secy Gen Fon Office home Amb Melas, Greek PermRep NATO. Since I warned Caramanlis extremely disturbed about econ Wise Men’s reportNATO document AC/213.D/2. and he wished discuss this with me, I myself broached subject by asking if he wished spoil his digestion by discussing Greek mil budget problems during luncheon. Ensuing discussion extremely frank throughout. 2. Caramanlis without question seriously disturbed, in fact angered, conclusions Wise Men’s report. He indicated Averoff already stated strong objections NATO Secretariat and Melas would be instructed reject report at early meeting NATO Council. Stated he failed persuade Americans on problems Greece on recent visit in States and attitude United States, together with Wise Men’s report, very discouraging. Assured me lack external assistance in proper form would not change his policy and he would continue support NATO wholeheartedly; however, Greece’s contribution would have be seriously curtailed. 3. I responded by stating I felt rejection report would be mistake since such action would not help him achieve any results and same time would tend alienate others, including many his friends. I very definitely indicated outright rejection at this time would not be well recd by United States. I gave this as my opinion and not result any indication from United States. I indicated Greece could state her objections parts report if she felt that had be done, but an outright rejection would be most unproductive. This position clearly had support Melas and I believe also Averoff. PriMin, as translated by Secy Gen of FonOff, did not yield on this point at this time. 4. I reviewed my meeting with Frontistis on 7 March 62, taking advantage this opportunity make it abundantly clear that I had given Frontistis figure $50 mil as gap ceiling, indicating limits within which he should work, with no suggestion as to how gap would be filled or in fact, without any indication it could be filled by any means. This point there discussion whether it best consider matter on NATO basis or bilaterally, and I suggested that, while I knew no decision on part United States on this particular point, there some indication willingness consider joint Greek-American approach in first instance (see DEF 911870).Not found. There appeared be general agreement bilateral approach would be better course, at least as initial step. There followed brief consideration level at which such discussions should take place, in course which I stated in reply to question that United States side would probably be headed, at least nominally, by Amb or Assistant or Under Secy level, depending location discussions took place. 5. I suggested Frontistis be encouraged provide us with reply on force goals as early as possible, since this essential basis for any further discussions. 6. Caramanlis ended talk by stating because Greek public opinion he could not promise not publicly reject Wise Men’s report, but because my advice he would give it further consideration. As Melas saw me to door, he suggested, since Averoff seemed sold this line, he quite hopeful. 7. From this meeting I conclude Caramanlis will not publicly reject Wise Men’s report, NATO Council. Greeks will probably make effort separate Greek and Turkish parts report, hoping former can be held up on basis Wise Men will consider additional information which has become available since visit to Greece—an action for which appears be some justification. It obvious Greeks hoped subject would not be discussed Athens since do so could be embarrassing hosts and guests alike. 8. I recommend United States take initiative in proposing bilateral consideration Greek def budget, basing action in general on long association in creating and maintaining Greek mil strength and specifically on request made by PriMin in letter to SecState 28 June 61,Not further identified. which has been acknowledged, but to which, according Greeks, no real reply of substance recd. Fact meeting would be directed toward def problem would in no way preclude consideration broader econ and financial problems Greece. 9. Believe this joint approach problem would not only contribute directly solution but also prove most useful smoothing over what has become quite sticky situation. For instance, Greeks claim have been told Wise Men’s report reflects American thinking and Averoff said he had been told report itself written by State Department. I dismissed remark by simply saying I did not believe it. Whatever action taken, early indication most important. End text. Gavin 332. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 375/5–362. Confidential. Drafted by Kupinsky and approved in S on May 6. The meeting was held in Prime Minister Karamanlis’ office. Athens, May 3, 1962, 6 p.m. US/MC/29 UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE TWENTY–NINTH MINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL Athens, Greece, May 4–6, 1962 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Ambassador Labouisse Mr. Robert Schaetzel Mrs. Ruth Kupinsky (Reporting Officer) Greece The Prime Minister Caramanlis Foreign Minister Averoff Coordination Minister Papaligouras Ambassador Palamas (Dir Gen of Fon Off) Mr. Jean Grigoriadis (Reporting Officer) SUBJECT Discussion of Outstanding Problems Affecting Greece at NATO Meeting Disarmament and Nuclear Testing The Secretary said that the key questions at the NATO Ministerial Meeting would be Berlin and disarmament. On disarmament, it is clear that the Soviets will not accept inspection, and without inspection there can be no disarmament. The Soviet position is basically a propaganda position. This puts the US at a disadvantage since US proposals are based on what we can genuinely accept and are, therefore, more modest than Soviet propaganda recommendations. US proposals are based on Stage 1 which would protect the land mass under NATO and we would only move into Stage 2 when we were sure of Soviet intentions. The US expects the Soviets to resume nuclear testing. We would be glad to stop tests under a nuclear treaty. If we could stop today, this would be consistent with the security of the free world. If the Soviets do not stop testing, however, we will compete with them. We have made extraordinary efforts to reach agreement on ending all tests, without success. In response to a question from the Prime Minister, the Secretary said that the French were not taking part in the disarmament discussions and we assumed that this was due to their nuclear program. With regard to the Germans, both on Berlin and nuclear testing, the US and German positions were alike and we worked closely together. We would also have to negotiate what disarmament would involve for other countries not now directly participating in the discussions. It was essential that the balance of forces not be disturbed at any stage. Berlin The Secretary noted that during the Berlin crisis, attention is being given to the central front where forcible intervention might occur. During the discussion of the central front there has been less consideration of other fronts, including the US, and this has opened up the question on whether there is less interest in the other fronts. The Secretary assured Greece that we consider our commitment is to all of NATO, including Greece and that an attack on any part of NATO would bring into play NATO forces including US forces, to that area. President Kennedy wanted the Secretary to make this clear. The Prime Minister said he thought the Soviet Union took advantage of ambiguities of the NATO countries to create frictions. He thought we should agree on common positions among ourselves and state these firmly to the Russians. The Secretary said that the effectiveness of this approach could be illustrated by Berlin where we have stated firmly that there is unanimous agreement by the Western powers that the presence of Allied forces in Berlin and free access to Berlin are not negotiable. Aid to Greece The Secretary observed that with a strong and more independent Europe, the Alliance has a more difficult problem on consultation than in previous years. He also noted that while NATO is primarily interested in the problems of the West and in confrontation with the Soviets the US also has to take an interest in problems of other areas of the world, particularly Latin America and the Pacific. The US gives the NATO area first priority in the struggle with the Soviets, since Europe plus North America are central to this problem. With the emergence of 50 to 60 newly independent countries, the US has been called on for more foreign assistance and it is now particularly important that other industrialized countries also contribute to such assistance. This is important to the Alliance since the US could not continue to extend the aid required without the participation of other countries. The US will not do less than it has been doing, but is concerned that others do their part, and, in this context, the idea of consortia is important. Multilateral assistance, while adding to the unity of the Alliance also complicates its task. From the point of view of the recipient country, multilateral aid is not as simple or as comforting an arrangement as bilateral arrangements, since it takes time to negotiate and is complicated. This is one of the questions involved in the Wise Men’s report on Greece and Turkey. What is required at the NATO Ministerial Meeting in Athens is a moral commitment from the member countries of the Alliance that the needs of Greece and Turkey are important and that the members of the Alliance will move ahead to work out arrangements to meet these needs. Ten years ago Greece was covered by the solid woolen blanket of US assistance. Now the way must be opened to weave what in America is called a “crazy quilt,” pieces of quilt which when put together make a warm covering. It should not be difficult with the Greek Ambassador, the US Ambassador and Mr. Stikker to find a good combination. The US has in mind such possibilities as infra-structure, which could be handled by Mr. Stikker, and development loans, Export-Import Bank loans, and increased consumables in the military assistance program, all of which could be handled here in Athens. The US envisages such countries as the UK, France and Germany participating in the combined program, and the US is prepared to work quickly with all involved since we realize that Greece has a time problem. The Secretary said he believed that the important question was not what was in the Wise Men’s report, and to which we understood the Greeks took exception, but that the countries in the Alliance recognize the requirements of Greece and commit themselves to do what was needed to meet them. Regarding the magnitude of the Greek requirements, the US envisages intimate bilateral consultations with the Greek Government in Athens on this question. It was also important to undertake a multilateral program with other interested countries, in which the US would have a large and active role. The Secretary emphasized the strong interest of President Kennedy in economic and social development. It was in the US interest to encourage Greek military strength and sustained economic development. The Prime Minister agreed that the US principle was right but that Greece found the Wise Men’s report unacceptable. The report not only does not help Greece but creates difficulties in solving Greece’s problems. One of the Wise Men, Edgar R. Faure, had said he was “ashamed” that he had signed the report, since it was inaccurate and unjust. He had attempted to amend the report but Greece understood that Mr. Ferguson, the American, disagreed with this approach. Greece understands Stikker had also expressed disagreement with the report. Norstad was also understood to have said the report was incorrect, but urged Greece not to reject it. Since the question of the status of the report was now a matter of prestige, Stikker had suggested finding ways of ameliorating it. Caramanlis said that the report created three problems for Greece: (1) From an economic point of view, the report created problems for the future since it was a bad appraisal of the country’s economy and its needs, and its estimates and conclusions would be used as guidelines in further consideration of Greek needs; (2) it results in an internal political problem because if the Government accepts the conclusions of the report, the political opposition would charge that the Prime Minister had not done enough to present the true situation; and (3) it creates an internal NATO problem since it gives rise to bitterness. Caramanlis said that he felt that they would be better off without the report. On the economic side, the primary difficulty with the report, according to Caramanlis, was that the Wise Men took into consideration only the balance of payments gap. Caramanlis said Greece has a budget deficit problem. If the Wise Men had considered the whole budget, i.e., the military, regular expenses and public investment, they would have come out with a deficit of $150,000,000 for this year, compared with the Wise Men’s estimate of a need for $30,000,000 each year. The Prime Minister said that of this deficit Greece could raise $30,000,000 to $40,000,000 through internal borrowing, leaving a deficit of $110,000,000 which would have to be met by foreign assistance. Greece has a five-year program on which it has already begun. If funds are not found to continue this program Caramanlis said he would have to stop this program which is already successful. Public investment in economic infra-structure, such as roads and electric power, was an absolute necessity in Greece and if it were reduced this would have serious political and social repercussions. On the military side, Caramanlis said Greece cannot finance its military programs through loans and, therefore, believed that external assistance should be split between loans and grants. Caramanlis said that his economic program had succeeded through his taking a hard political line and that at this stage the program is at a critical turning-point. Greece feels it is being abandoned, instead of appreciated, by the Wise Men’s report. Caramanlis said that Greek hospitality for the NATO meeting in Athens does not permit her to reject the report, despite Greece’s strong feelings on this subject. He could not accept the Stikker–NAC resolutions without amendments, since these resolutions refer to the Wise Men’s report. The Secretary replied that the resolutions also refer to other reports, including a Greek memorandum. He suggested that the Greek Foreign Minister in accepting the resolutions at the NATO meeting could present a statement making the points made by the Prime Minister in the conversation. If the resolutions in their present form were accepted by the NATO countries, Greece would have a commitment from member governments that they would take all appropriate measures to meet Greek needs. In the multilateral arrangements in the OECD which would follow this commitment, the US would inform other countries what we can do to assist Greece, as leverage to obtain contributions from other Governments. The Secretary assured Caramanlis that the US had never let Greece down and would not do that now. The Secretary went on to note that the US also has problems. Congress has made important changes in the aid program requested by the President, substantially reducing support assistance. The US also has a balance-of-payments problem, chiefly because of its contribution to NATO. In addition, the US has a budgetary problem, largely due to its debt resulting from loans it had made for its military programs. The Secretary said in the light of this situation, he could not be expected to take back to our Government for sympathetic consideration the Greek position that it could not finance defense programs through loans. The Secretary said that the American proverb “There are many ways to skin a cat,” was apt to the present situation. He had no doubt that a way could be found to meet Greek needs if we could get a moral commitment from NATO countries at this NATO meeting. The Secretary was inclined to think that the public relations problem was most of the difficulty. If this was so, the question is how to handle the problem of public opinion and not to be concerned with the Wise Men’s report. The Secretary said he was sure that when responsible governments in the OECD consider Greek development needs they will not be bound by the figures in the Wise Men’s report. Caramanlis replied that he would not bargain on a matter of principle and as he considered the Wise Men’s report inaccurate and unjust, he could not accept it as a basis for evaluation of the true Greek situation. He said he always had the courage to tell the truth about his position and that of Greece, and whatever decision was taken at the Athens meeting, Greece would remain the most loyal ally in NATO and of the US. Since Greece does not want to reject the Wise Men’s report at the Athens meeting, Caramanlis said he had amended the Stikker resolutions both on substance and procedure. If the US could not accept these revisions, Caramanlis said Greece would have to reject the report. The Secretary said we would consider the Prime Minister’s proposals and let him know our position. The US is interested in the “inner reality” of the Greek problem and a sound solution to this problem. Greece has an obligation to clarify at the Athens meeting how Greece sees the situation since otherwise, other governments might get the wrong impression of the Greek position. The Prime Minister agreed and said he would submit his amendments to the US Delegation early tomorrow morning.No copy of these amendments has been found. The North Atlantic Council adopted resolutions concerning the special economic problems of Greece and Turkey. The resolutions called on countries to assist Greece and Turkey and called for examination of the urgent establishment of consortia for aid. See vol. XIII, pp. 389–393. In the NATO Final communique issued on May 6, the Ministers also “agreed to establish a study group to consider further the special defense problems of Greece.” For text of the communique, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 541–542. 333. Memorandum From David Klein of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Staff Memoranda, Klein. Secret. Washington, July 11, 1962. SUBJECT Greece and the Defense Budget Labouisse’s telegram 23Telegram 23, July 7, reported on three separate discussions between Ambassador Labouisse and Karamanlis on Greek defense and economic assistance requirements. (Department of State, Central Files, 881.10/7–762) and his conversations with the Greek Prime Minister on the question of the defense budget is under study by State, AID and Defense. The consensus remains that $175 million is a good figure and that the United States Government should not permit itself to be pushed to finance the higher SHAPE estimate. There is no military justification for the higher figure. From a purely economic standpoint, there seems to be no need for increased U.S. assistance. This problem—taken by itself—seems to be one of weaning the Greeks from continued and interminable dependence upon us. At this juncture there seems to be agreement within the government agencies concerned on new tactics for dealing with the defense budget problem. Until now we have insisted that $175 million was the optimum figure and there was no justification for more. However, it is now being proposed that, instead of a categorical reply, the Greeks be told the United States remains committed to the $175 million target figure but if the Greeks feel that $197 million is what they want, the United States would not object to their seeking the additional $22 million from other non-U.S. sources. (Frankly, from my reading of the cables on the Labouisse–Karamanlis talks, I get the uneasy feeling that we are focusing almost all our attention on symptomatic aspects of the basic problem rather than the basic problem itself—the reason for Karamanlis’ mood and his entire catalogue of complaints which clearly go beyond the specific military and fiscal problems.) As for handling the defense budget exercise, there are at least two schools of thought. One is to let Karamanlis write the President about this problem, as he threatens to do; the other is to have the Secretary or Under Secretary of State take the initiative and speak with the Greek Ambassador here, spelling out the U.S. position, making it clear that there is an absolute identity of views on this problem between the President and the Secretary of State. Bob Komer leans to the first approach—letting Karamanlis write the President. Of course if Karamanlis is determined to do this, there is no way—or reason—to stop him. For our part, however, I think it preferable that, in the first instance, the Secretary or Under Secretary of State speak with the Greeks; try to probe their thinking a little more carefully than has been done; attempt to convince them that as far as the defense budget is concerned, we have studied the problem carefully and sympathetically; we have come up with what seems to us the right proposition; and that this decision is that of the U.S. Government and not merely of the Department of State. Karamanlis may still write the President, but, in my view, the Secretary should delve into the problem and at least establish its nature before the President becomes involved personally.In telegram 32 to Athens, July 14, Secretary Rusk instructed Ambassador Labouisse to inform Karamanlis that the United States had not changed its policy of seeking close ties with Greece and would make every possible effort to find sources of military assistance for Greece. (Ibid.) The Secretary made similar points in a July 17 meeting with Ambassador Matsas. A memorandum of their conversation is ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. The White House will be consulted before any single course of action is taken. In the meantime I will stay in touch with Bob Komer and make sure that you are informed of the latest developments. And perhaps it might be useful if Bob and I had an opportunity to talk with you in the next day or so about this matter to be certain we are all working on the same frequency. DK 334. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 781.5/7–3062. Confidential; Priority. Athens, July 30, 1962, 7 p.m. 119. Eyes only for the Secretary. Because I fear we are about to contribute unnecessarily to the differences which exist between us and the Greek Government on the question of our aid to the Greek defense effort, I would appreciate your personal consideration of our position. Embtels 113 and 114Telegram 113, July 28, reported Labouisse’s belief that the Greek Government was ready to increase its defense spending to the $165 million level and suggested that talks be held in Athens, preceded by indications of U.S. willingness to contribute an additional $5 million to its 1964 Greek economic assistance package. Telegram 114, also July 28, outlined Labouisse’s objections to NATO procedures and tactics for negotiations with Greece on the interrelated issues of economic development and defense assistance. (Both ibid., 375/7–2862) are the last of a series of exchanges which involve not only the question of the amount and form of our aid to Greek defense, but also the manner in which we propose to provide it. The Greeks have undoubtedly exaggerated the harm they will suffer by the withdrawal of our defense support in 1963; they have chosen to look at the “deeper implications.” I have lost no occasion to make clear to them the basis for our decision and how we foresee they should be able to solve their defense budget problem. Although they understand our position intellectually, they continue to entertain a substantial suspicion that we are drawing away from the intimate relationship which has existed since the beginning of the Truman Doctrine. It is only natural that unreasonable and exaggerated Greek reaction to our policies should generate impatience on our part, however much we try to avoid it. But I hope we will take Greek attitudes into account (as an important and unavoidable factor in our problem) not only as concerns the substance of our decisions, but also for the manner in which we choose to carry them out. More is at stake than the Greek defense program (which I hope we think is important). The departments of our government enjoy many privileges in this country. Because of our special relationship these privileges are not only extensive but given ungrudgingly, without condition or demand for quid pro quo. To the degree we dilute that relationship by what the Greeks consider a lack of understanding, we will find it increasingly harder to get and keep such privileges. As this relationship is important to us and as there can be no question of the Greek need for assistance in their defense effort, I feel strongly that we should follow the line recommended by the Embassy, particularly in Embtels 113 and 114. Labouisse 335. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2149. Secret. Repeated to Rome. Athens, September 4, 1962, 7 p.m. 322. CODEL Johnson. Following is summary record conversation between Vice President Johnson and Prime Minister Caramanlis September 3 9:45 am at Prime Minister’s office.Vice President Johnson visited Greece August 31–September 4, at the conclusion of a 5-nation tour. Conversation summarized herein followed 30 minutes private talk between VP, Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, Amb Labouisse and Komer. This summary prepared by Bowling and cleared with Amb Labouisse. Also present were Averoff, Papaligouras, Matsas, Palamas, Komer, Busby, Brewster, McCoy and Caramanlis’ private secretary. Papaligouras acted as principal interpreter. Summary Discussion centered on acceptance by Greeks discontinuance supporting assistance, and methods by which US aid for FY 63 could most effectively meet Greek needs. VP promised strong support for most effective possible aid program. Caramanlis asked US approach other NATO powers to encourage defense assistance. VP said Greeks must take initiative here; US would then support. End Summary. Caramanlis noted that in previous conversations each side presented its views and explained situation it faces. Explained now up to VP see what US can do to provide answer. VP replied understand and sympathize Greek problem and hope Caramanlis understands our problem in Greece and elsewhere on defense support. Want do everything possible within limitations imposed by Congress strengthen Caramanlis and strengthen Greece. Will continue do so this year just as effectively as in past. Details can’t be spelled out now but we do know we can’t give defense support. No lessening of interest on part US; on contrary my presence shows US interest increasing. US intends provide substantial assistance in PL480, MAP, development loans; should be as effective next year as last year. Defense support impossible. Caramanlis said he wished discuss details. Termination defense support understood, though still feel both sides do not have same appreciation this problem. In any case no further point in discussing defense support, now must discuss what can be done in terms forms assistance available. VP said will try utilize other forms to do job, in terms self-help principle requiring recipient countries do their part. For instance, if Greece will get its development loan applications in order and present them to Amb Labouisse we will accelerate development loans. PriMin described Greek development programs, pointing out of $200 million annually, only about $30 from Greek budget, rest from internal and external loans. Need for local currency much more acute than need foreign exchange, and is limiting factor in pace of development. Herein is importance defense support. Twenty percent or less stated development requirements are for foreign currency. Need local currency-generating form of aid if defense support terminated. In development projects requiring large proportion foreign currency, such as [omission in the source text] for good projects. Now working with US Embassy on three year project provide loan for foreign exchange such miscellaneous items as telephone system from US. This unfortunately will not be helpful unless private Greek purchases from US also included in order obtain more local currency for state investment program. Amb Labouisse noted such procedure would in effect merely change budgetary support from grant to loan basis. Caramanlis replied he was thinking of general program loan, not tied specific projects. At VP’s request, Amb Labouisse explained US policy development lending is oriented toward projects, not programs. As you know, US stands ready with $10 million program loan. Question is application such loans to private sector development. This is difficult problem for us. PriMin noted need local currency only one of problems Greek development. Another is that current program half-finished, which raises several problems: incomplete projects such as dams, road, and irrigation systems requiring large amounts local currency. Thus $10 million program loan important. VP said US going to give $10 million program loan this year. VP then said we intend continue major MAP deliveries, probably increased this year. Greece will receive 57 M47 tanks, 263 OAPC’s, 24 8-inch howitzers, 120 SS-eleven missiles, one LST, three minesweepers, and two squadrons F104 G’s. This is illustrative of the kind of MAP we hope provide if we get what we ask for from Congress. We also pleased over rate development Greece; more remains to be done; we intend help Greece do it. In addition $10 million program loan, we want act favorably on development loans and urge Greece expedite presentation additional project loans. US will continue PL480 if we can end sterile talk about defense support. Perhaps ways could be found through PL480 give Greece other surplus products to generate local currency for development. VP warned he could not make commitments, and careful study necessary, but possibility exists using for instance supply US surplus dairy products to generate more local currency for economic development. PriMin remarked he now paying price for making Greece self-sufficient in most agricultural products US has in surplus. Papaligouras said effort must be made see what surplus US products Greece could absorb under PL480. Caramanlis asked if triangular trade arrangement for PL480 could be worked out. Vice President replied in negative, must be bilateral. Prime Minister has effectively presented Greek case and we have explained our situation. We trying find ways make our aid more effective FY 63 than FY 62 and desire say so to press. Caramanlis noted one problem is real. Other is how to present things to the public, and requested discuss former first. Understand Vice President cannot make commitments. Project loans solved foreign exchange but not local currency problem. US has expressed willingness help Greek development. We have perhaps tended act with defense support still in mind. Now no further question defense support. We therefore will submit to Embassy within next ten days everything we have in various projects and ideas for development lending. Hope Vice President will exercise his influence see they accepted to maximum possible extent, and do whatever he can to support Greek proposals. Vice President said this was constructive suggestion, far better than bumping head against brick wall of defense support. US goal is a peaceful, strong Greece. We can go this way by several roads. Last year Greece got $90–100 million FY 62 MAP; if President has his way on foreign aid bill Greece should get $80–100 million FY 63, including as before some commercial consumables. Development lending is another road; in FY 62 we provided $10 million, in FY 63 we are assuming $20 to $40 million, assuming our Congress comes through and you find acceptable projects; this would be more than you are getting now. Papaligouris noted Greece has EDFO and National Bank loans already approved, and hopes for Acheldos project loans; will see what other projects can be submitted. Vice President went on to note that roughly $100 million MAP, $40 million development lending, $20 million PL480 would make $160 million in US aid FY 63. Congress may cut, but administration shooting for this size assistance to Greece. We can’t work out details and should peg our actions on Prime Minister’s constructive suggestion. I can’t say publicly you’ll get this much or that much. Realize Prime Minister’s opponents allege he does not present Greek case; we realize his internal political problems and want help him. Don’t want commit US to certain figure and then have it fall on him if we don’t deliver at day of reckoning. I should tell public how hour after hour he told me his needs various types US assistance and that I am convinced if Congress gives administration a good bill our aid for FY 63 will be more effective than for FY 62. Have prepared such a statement which would avoid commitments, avoid trouble from countries like Iran and Pakistan where defense support also terminated, and help Caramanlis. Caramanlis asked for assurance of broad-minded US consideration Greek loan applications. Vice President replied in affirmative, adding Prime Minister’s future is our future. Vice President then read his suggested statement to the press, commenting that like a Mother Hubbard it conceals everything and touched on nothing, but still, like a bikini, covered the essential points. Caramanlis suggested and he and VP discussed changes in statement to: (a) emphasize termination supporting assistance is general policy not directed at Greece; (b) promise magnitude future aid would be greater than in past. Vice President said domestic Greek public must understand Prime Minister pounded table on all issues and we understand Greek problems well. But US Congress must not get impression Vice President handing out commitments before appropriation voted, also Greeks must realize we love Greece more than ever. Don’t say I promised you a specific amount of aid, but I will really work to make our aid more effective for your needs. Caramanlis requested that US support Greece in context NATO aid to Greek defense, materially if possible, otherwise morally. Ambassador Labouisse pointed out that US cannot back creation special NATO fund, but within framework recent NATO resolutions will support Greek efforts obtain contributions from individual countries. Vice President said Greece should exert its efforts submit speedy and adequate data to OECD consortium. If you want me to approach the Italians on assistance in connection NATO defense study or consortium, will do so provided you take the initiative with Italians. So far as I know you’ve taken no initiative. Caramanlis said the contributions of other NATO countries would be dependent on US contributions. If US and each of the three others would each give $5 million, problem would be solved. Ambassador Labouisse pointed out that US MAP was already heavy support for Greek defense. Vice President declared US would try to help with Italians and others if Greeks took initiative. Caramanlis said Greece would approach other countries through normal channels. Remainder of the meeting was devoted to detailed review of two proposed press statements.In a September 10 memorandum to the President, reporting on his tour, Johnson wrote: “In Greece, we cannot allow Prime Minister Caramanlis to fall before an irresponsible opposition because of our termination of defense support. He has accepted the end of this form of aid, but to tide him through the next year and to save the Greek defense and development programs we need to: (a) provide $10 million in special help ($5 million extra in commercial consumables under MAP and $5 million counterpart now in the pipeline); (b) require Greece to provide roughly another $10 million for defense, to partially compensate for the loss of defense support; (c) shift our PL480 to a defense grant basis; (d) implement the $10 million program loan; and (e) give prompt and sympathetic consideration to Greek development loan applications.” (Department of State, Greek Desk Files: Lot 65 D 185, Vice President) Labouisse 336. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2152. Confidential. Drafted by Horgan and cleared by S on September 27. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission. The source text is labeled “Part IV of IV.” Separate memoranda of conversation covering Greece’s foreign relations with other states, the Yugoslav and Macedonian issue, and Cuba are ibid. New York, September 25, 1962, 10 a.m. SecDel/MC/12 SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE SEVENTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York, September, 1962 PARTICIPANTS US The Secretary NEA—R. B. Horgan Greece Foreign Minister Averoff Ambassador Bitsios, Permanent Representative to U.N. SUBJECT Problem of External Assistance for Greek Defense Mr. Averoff reported that he was under instruction from the Prime Minister to express the latter’s distress on this matter. He said this was ground which had been covered before and he only wished to take time to make one point in this conversation. He reported that the NATO reaction “had not been bad” at the meeting of September 12. He gave as an example that the Germans were hinting at $10,000,000. However, he wondered whether the United States could not find some way to participate. He said that Mr. Stikker had a number of suggestions for ways NATO members could participate: (a) in connection with the imports of the Greek Army; (b) in the building of national strategic works (NATO infra-structure). He explained that when Greece approached other members, the members had a tendency to parry the request with a question as to what the United States was doing. Mr. Averoff said that the Greeks were giving them facts and figures of the many forms of American aid to Greece, but that United States participation in helping to solve this particular problem would be most useful. The Secretary expressed the hope that the Greeks would be taking the initiative with other governments. Mr. Averoff indicated that he would not do so right now. He said the rationale being used (Greece needs assistance because the Greeks are defending not only Greece but other members of NATO), is not a very effective one coming from the Greek Foreign Minister. It is an effective rationale coming from Mr. Stikker, and the Greeks are holding back only until after Mr. Stikker has moved in this direction. The Secretary explained to Mr. Averoff that any United States initiative would not, in our opinion, be useful. He said he would look into the question as to what the United States might do with regard to the two types of participation Mr. Averoff had mentioned. 337. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2153. Confidential. Drafted by Horgan and approved in S on October 7. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission. The source text is labeled “Part I of II.” A separate memorandum of conversation dealing with Cuba is ibid. New York, October 5, 1962, 9:30 a.m. SecDel/MC/90 SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE SEVENTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY New York, September, 1962 PARTICIPANTS U.S. The Secretary NEA—Rogers B. Horgan Greece Foreign Minister Averoff Ambassador to the U.S. Matsas SUBJECT External Assistance for Greek Defense; Gromyko’s Insulting Behavior Mr. Averoff called on the Secretary at his own request. He said he wished to let the Secretary know about the change in Greek tactics in the campaign to obtain external assistance for Greek defense, which has been necessitated because of Mr. Stikker’s illness. As he had told the Secretary on September 25, Greece had been counting heavily on Mr. Stikker who was a strong pillar of support. Foreign Minister Averoff had instructed the Greek representative at NATO to call upon all the other representatives himself. Here in New York, Mr. Averoff had talked very seriously with Foreign Minister Piccioni of Italy. He said he had couched what he had to say in the most friendly fashion but had argued very hard for Italian assistance. He said one of his arguments had been that Greece had never asked for reparations after the war when Italy was devastated. Now that Italy was rich again, they owed something to Greece. He said Piccioni had no reply except to laugh with Averoff who had made this argument, he said, in a joking way but felt it had force. Mr. Averoff said he had also spoken with Mr. Spaak, who he believed was personally sympathetic; but he wondered whether the Belgian Government policy would permit anything to be done. He made the point that even a little assistance from Belgium, perhaps in materials, should be a very strong stimulus for Italy to do more. He said he might be able to see Foreign Minister Luns of the Netherlands in Europe. The Secretary indicated approval of these actions and said that this was the kind of initiative the U.S. had wished so that we would be in a position to support it.In Topol 505, October 12, repeated to Athens as telegram 433, the Department of State commented that it was encouraged by Greek efforts to stimulate donor contributions and instructed the Permanent Representative to NATO to follow up on Greek approaches, stressing U.S. support. (Ibid., Central Files, 871.5/10–1262) Mr. Averoff went on to underline the importance for Greece of obtaining this assistance for its defense needs. He said that it was, of course, partly a financial problem for Greece. He said that Greece had one and a half million people whose incomes were in the $50–$80 per year range; but, he added, the significance was also political. He said he was confident that Mr. Karamanlis would remain in power—that the regime was stable. He said, however, that the opposition was extremely bitter and “was attacking everything.” If assistance was not forthcoming, the opposition would argue that the Greek Government, having lost U.S. aid, had made a mistake in placing its confidence in NATO. The Secretary bantered with him concerning U.S. aid, pointing out that it was because Greece had been doing so well that it had lost one type of aid from us. Mr. Averoff agreed that progress had been made but said he only wished to say that it was not yet enough. Mr. Averoff mentioned the fact that, when he had gone to Mr. Gromyko’s Reception, he had been greeted in a very unfriendly way. When Mr. Gromyko saw him coming, he had called out to him: “I see you are sharpening your knives against us.” Mr. Averoff said he had explained that Greece had lived in a very dangerous part of the world for over three thousand years and was only interested in keeping its independence. Ambassador Matsas stressed the public rudeness of Mr. Gromyko’s treatment. 338. Telegram From the Embassy in Greece to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 881.10/12–162. Confidential. Repeated to Paris. Athens, December 1, 1962, 6 p.m. 575. Paris for USRO. 1. At his request, I called on Prime Minister yesterday afternoon. He said he wanted to tell me frankly of his great disappointment and concern over apparent failure of consortium. He was confirmed in his belief that Greece’s allies did not understand true situation, that their analysis was not same as his and that he was in better position than they to judge requirements of situation and consequences of failure. There had been more stability, political and economic, during his administration than in all modern Greece’s history. This, he believed, was because he had followed the correct policies. But, in spite of progress to date, much remained to be done. If he could not obtain the necessary assist-ance now to enable him to complete the task, all recent progress could be lost in brief time. 2. He indicated he had in mind making a public statement announcing withdrawal from consortium and a return to bilateral dealings. He stated that he would take no action of this nature pending December meeting of NATO Council. He asked that we help him in bringing pressure to bear on other NATO countries. He emphasized the serious political and psychological aspects of failure of consortium, not only internally for him and his government but also for NATO as a whole. 3. I told the Prime Minister that we had already used our best efforts with other potential contributors and would continue to do so. I repeated to him all that the US had done and was doing by way of aiding Greece and stressed that we thought the record a good one. I, too, emphasized the practical as well as political and psychological problems we have in continuing aid to Greece with our reduced appropriations, increasing demands, B/P deficit, etc. (I mentioned particularly economic and psychological problem of aid to country whose reserves increasing, to which he replied that reserves would soon disappear if economic progress does not continue.) With respect to other countries, I gave it as my personal opinion that some of them could do more. I then said to him that there were indications that satisfactory results might be obtained for support of the Greek defense budget and that this should be considered a real accomplishment. With respect to the consortium, I pointed out that this was not just a one-shot operation but also a long-range one. I emphasized that any hasty action in withdrawing would have serious consequences, for Greece would continue to require external aid and must look for it to the same countries who are members of the consortium. Withdrawal would only serve to annoy and make more difficult achievement of his government’s long-range objectives. Rather than withdrawal, I cautioned him to seek to explain to the public, that, in fact, Greece would receive substantial aid in 1963 and that consortium would continue to deal with Greece’s needs. 4. Caramanlis did not seem to think he could put a sufficiently acceptable face on results to date to enable him to deal with opposition and mounting public concerning situation. In latter connection, both government and opposition press have been active in denouncing failure of consortium to date. 5. Comment. (A) Although Caramanlis remarks followed fairly closely line he has been taking over past several months, he appeared more dejected than before. In addition, his pitch was not so much that US should contribute more, but rather that NATO countries as whole had failed to meet critical situation. He referred three times to humiliating nature of his position and also to his belief that NATO image will suffer. I believe he is sincerely concerned. He expects and obviously will receive much criticism from opposition and public that he has failed to present Greece’s case adequately. Fact that Turkish consortium appears to be going fairly well only aggravates his problems in this emotional atmosphere. This, I believe, is largely basis for his references to political and psychological factors. He is pinning last hopes on some action by NATO Council. If the combined contributions for defense through NATO working group and for economic development through consortium are not increased by mid-December (when he must present his 1963 budget), his present frame of mind would seem to lead to public statement that whole exercise has been waste of time and effort and he will take his chances through more usual bilateral negotiations. (B) I hope to be able to influence Papaligouras to persuade him to follow more moderate course, although this will be difficult as Papaligouras feels personally involved and will take brunt of opposition attack for failure to obtain necessary aid.Labouisse met with Papaligouras on December 3. In telegram 590, December 6, the Ambassador reported that during their discussions Papaligouras confirmed that Greece would make no decision about the consortium until the conclusion of the NATO Ministerial Meeting. (Ibid., 881.10/12–662) 1 (C) Caramanlis called in French Ambassador after seeing me yesterday and discussed French attitude which, to date, has been negative. (D) From reports we have received here from Greeks and through USRO, it appears Greeks stand better chance of obtaining more new money for defense than for economic development. This could prove unfortunate for, while it would benefit B/P position, it would not meet budgetary requirements for development. We will comment further on this after talk with Papaligouras. Labouisse 339. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at ParisSource: Department of State, Central Files, 781.5/12–1262. Secret. Drafted in the White House and cleared by Bundy. Washington, December 12, 1962, 7:58 p.m. Tosec 11. Eyes only for Secretaries Rusk and McNamara from the President. In our NATO review we did not touch upon the Greek problem, which I gather may come up again at Paris. I am concerned lest, wearing our NATO hats, we press for too high a Greek defense budget and NATO contributions thereto at the expense of the equally important Greek development effort. Labouisse in Athens suggests that the Greeks will end up increasing their 1963 defense budget to $185 million but cutting back their development plan by an even larger amount. Since I gather that we would find acceptable a defense level of $175 million, wouldn’t it be better (from our standpoint and that of the Greeks themselves) to tell the Greeks so, and to tell our NATO allies to go higher on the economic consortium rather than the defense side, if we can’t get them to do both. I don’t want to tie your hands on this complex matter, but I suggest we tread softly on these “mix” issues, which involve quite substantial cumulative US and NATO outlays, until we can sort them out here. Ball 340. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–PA/12–1462. Confidential. Drafted by Breecher and approved by S on December 15. The meeting was held in the U.S. Delegation headquarters in the NATO Building. Paris, December 14, 1962, 4 p.m. US/MC/9 UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE THIRTIETH MINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE NORTH ATLANTIC COUNCIL Paris, France, December 13–15, 1962 PARTICIPANTS United States The Secretary Ambassador Finletter Mr. Willis Armstrong Mr. Charles Breecher (Reporting Officer) Greece Foreign Minister Averoff Coordination Minister Papaligouras Ambassador Palamas Deputy PermRep Phrydas SUBJECT Problems Affecting Greece at NATO Meeting Greek Defense Problem The Secretary said he knew Mr. Averoff realized that the US Administration had a stronger and stronger political problem at home on defense aid because the Congress kept asking what the Allies of the US were doing both to help themselves and to help less wealthy Allies. Mr. Averoff replied he thought that the other members of the Alliance did not realize the full extent of the Communist danger and as a result they were not doing in the defense field what they should. In particular the people in Europe did not understand the military threat and were therefore not ready to counter it. The Secretary commented that it seemed governments were not making enough of an effort to educate their people on the Soviet threat and what was needed to meet it. Mr. Averoff said he had to agree that the failure of the Alliance to mount an adequate conventional defense was due to psychological and political reasons. The Alliance was not fully awake to the dangers of local conventional wars. The Secretary remarked that certainly the Berlin problem threw a special light on this situation. Mr. Averoff said that was true but the Europeans were counting on the US deterrent alone to protect them and not on conventional forces. The Secretary stated one could perhaps understand this type of reasoning better regarding the central front but one could understand it even less for the flanks. He then asked Mr. Averoff what information the Greek Government had concerning Bulgaria. In particular, did the Greek Government think society was being thrown open to somewhat freer discussion such as seemed to be taking place in the Soviet Union, where more freedom of speech was being given to writers? Further, was there a noticeable difference in living standards between the Greeks living on the Bulgarian border and Bulgarians living 50 miles further north? Averoff replied the Bulgarians had found some scapegoats for their bad economic situation. The Greeks did not feel any destalinization had taken place in Bulgaria, because the Bulgarian regime was just as rigid or even more so than in Stalin’s time. The Bulgarian army had been reinforced. There was a lack of consumer goods. As to living standards, these were appreciably lower in Bulgaria than in Greece. However, the Bulgarian army was stronger than the Greek army and had means which the Greek army didn’t have. They had advanced firing technology which only the Soviets had in remainder of Communist world and had very modern airplanes. Greek pilots were better trained than Bulgarian pilots but Bulgaria’s planes were faster and could fly higher. He didn’t feel that the Bulgarians intended to attack Greece on their own but thought the Soviets considered Bulgaria a faithful Ally that could be used for any purpose the Soviets desired. The Bulgarians were rightly called the Prussians of the Balkans. If there was any Bulgarian attack the Greeks would have to withdraw well inside Greek territory. This was hard on morale within the Greek Government though the facts of the situation were fortunately not known to the Greek population. The Secretary said that apparently Greece was also concerned with “forward strategy” and seemed to feel that the most likely danger was a local war with conventional means. However, it was hard to imagine that the Bulgarians might attack Greece without full Soviet backing and it seemed questionable that the Soviets would wish to become involved to that extent. Averoff replied that after Cuba one could be more optimistic that the Soviets would not think that the West would accept as a fait accompli a land grab carried out within 24 to 48 hours. That seemed to be the real danger. The Soviets might rely on the theory that the Allies would accept a limited extension, by the Soviets, of their territory. This was the reason why Greece needed stronger armed forces which could prevent occupation of Greek territory. However, Greece was already spending for its armed forces more than it was spending for education and for welfare together. This obviously created internal political difficulties. There was for instance a strong drive in Greece which had Communist backing, to increase educational spending by 15% at the expense of defense spending. If the Government instead put its money into defense it was most important that it could say that the other members of the Alliance were also helping this Greek defense effort. Mr. Papaligouras added that at the NATO Ministerial meeting at Athens it had been agreed to deal with the Greek military problem in NATO and with the Greek economic problem in the OECD. So far, the OECD Consortium for Economic Aid to Greece had not produced anything. If the NATO side failed too, the Greek economic problem and even more important, the Greek political problem created by this failure would be very serious. The Greek populace would interpret failure of the two exercises as a refusal by the Alliance to help Greece. There would also be unfavorable comparisons with Turkey. Greece wanted a strong Turkey and had been glad yesterday to support the Turkish case in NATO. However, as he had stated to NATO Acting Secretary General Colonna 13 December it was necessary that the pledges to Greek defense as recorded in the NATO “protocol” be firmed up. Since particularly Germany wanted to make its pledge conditional on pledges by others, it might be desirable to postpone discussion of the NAC defense resolution on Greece from this afternoon to tomorrow 15 December. The Secretary said he had talked to German FonMinister Schroeder and the Germans were aware of the problem. He could not say more on this at this time. Averoff said that it was pertinent to recall that the personal prestige of Mr. Karamanlis was engaged in getting help from Greece’s allies. Nobody but Prime Minister Karamanlis had the prestige to keep Greece together, so it would be a very serious matter if Mr. Karamanlis were to be unsuccessful in his endeavor. Greece did not want to turn into another Turkey and face a “post-Menderes” situation. This would not happen in Greece because the Greek army was sound and the population was more advanced than in Turkey. Nevertheless, if Mr. Karamanlis was hit seriously by the opposition over the issue of aid to Greece this could lead to political instability since there was nobody else who had the personal prestige to do the job. The Secretary said that while he was fully aware of Mr. Karamanlis’s great value to Greece and to the Alliance he felt sure one would not want to think of the future of a NATO country in terms of one life which might depend on a car accident. He recalled that when Mr. Pusey who was then quite unknown, had been offerred the presidency of Harvard he said that he simply did not have the prestige to take on that type of job. The Harvard trustees replied that the day after Mr. Pusey had become president of Harvard he would have the necessary prestige. The Secretary of course did not mean these words as any disparagement to Mr. Karamanlis who was so greatly admired throughout the Alliance. The Secretary asked whether the present pledges made in NATO if firmed up would not help the Greek Government domestically. Papaligouras said yes they would. If $23.5 million were made available that would certainly help, particularly if it was “presented right” to the Greek people. The difficulty was of course that the Greek Government had continuously been saying that something was going to be forthcoming from Greece’s allies in the aid field and this event was being continuously postponed. So it was important that a firm announcement should be made now. The Secretary agreed this might be desirable but pointed out that as of now the Greek delegation could not yet tell its Government that the whole matter was settled in NATO. Therefore, and in line with the wish of the Greek Delegation he would suggest to Mr. Colonna that the Greek defense item on the agenda this afternoon be postponed to tomorrow, 15 December.On December 15, the NATO member states agreed to provide Greece with $24.4 million in defense assistance through a combination of grants, spare parts, equipment, and raw materials. Acting NATO Secretary General Colonna informed the Greek Government of this decision. The Karamanlis government accepted the offer and informed the Secretary General that it would raise its defense budget by $6 million. See vol. XIII, pp. 462–467. 341. Telegram From the Consulate General in Thessaloniki to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 781.00/1–1563. Confidential. Repeated to Athens. Thessaloniki, January 15, 1963, 2 p.m. 91. Most significant statement to emerge from three and half hours lunch January 14 with Northern Greek CU leaders at home Bacatselos was measured statement by Deputy Pasmatzides that “unless King terminates favoritism to Caramanlis and returns to neutral role, CU prepared to raise constitutional question and attempt remove both King and Crown Prince from scene”. Whether this statement designed as blackmail in obvious hope it will reach King or is advance warning not made clear. In any case circumstances of statement, during deliberate lull in conversation, presence of Bacatselos, Ioannides of Macedonia and CU Deputy Karaghiozis, plus strong emphasis, subsequent reiteration, and reference to “allied favoritism” to Caramanlis, make clear statement not idle theatrics. Indeed appears luncheon was scheduled so statement could be made. Airgram follows.Airgram A–62 from Thessaloniki, January 18. (Ibid., 881.062/1–1863) Folsom 342. Memorandum for Director of Central Intelligence McConeSource: Department of State, Greek Desk Files: Lot 66 D 232. Secret; No Foreign Dissemination; No Dissemination Abroad; Controlled Dissemination; Background Use Only. Washington, February 8, 1963. SUBJECT Comments of Queen Frederika on DeGaulle, the British, Greek Political Leaders and the Political Situation in Greece On 31 January 1963, Queen Frederika of Greece made the following comments [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] 1. With regard to Greek reaction to DeGaulle, Queen Frederika stated that serious damage to NATO and the Common Market would be unfortunate but indicated a thinly-veiled admiration for DeGaulle’s attitude toward the British by saying that “it is high time someone told them they cannot always have their cake and eat it.” (Comment: Her deep-seated animosity toward the British is likely to affect her judgment on any issue where British interests are concerned.) 2. Queen Frederika feels that Prime Minister Konstantinos Karamanlis is a man of great ability and is completely loyal to the Crown, but he is becoming increasingly hard to get along with and occasionally shows bad judgment. As an example, she mentioned his ineffectiveness in protecting the Crown from public criticism, particularly where Royal financial matters were concerned such as the dowry for Princess Sophia’s marriage. Thus, the time may be approaching when elections and a new government are in order. According to the Queen, the best solution would be a government headed by some National Radical Union (ERE) figure other than Karamanlis, such as Minister of Interior Georgios Rallis or Minister of Finance Spyridon Theotokis, and including moderate elements attracted from the Center Union (EK). 3. The Queen believes that the future election should be held under a reinforced proportional system as it was in 1961. (Comment: Sofoklis Venizelos, EK Parliamentary Deputy, recently informed [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that King Paul had advocated to him the related party system. It is possible that the Queen’s comment reflects recognition by the Palace that the Center will not accept the related party system and that the best alternative is the reinforced proportional system.) 4. In discussing Venizelos and EK leader Georgios Papandreou, the Queen feels that the former is exploiting Papandreou’s extremism in order to put Papandreou out on a limb from which he will eventually tumble, leaving Venizelos as the dominant figure in the Center. She considers Papandreou a fanatic and irresponsible and Venizelos a slippery opportunist who is trying to ingratiate himself with the King and Queen in pursuit of a scheme to isolate and discredit Papandreou. She apparently also does not have a high regard for Progressive Party leader Spyros Markezinis. 5. Although claiming not to fear grave internal political crisis in Greece, she emphatically stated that if this ever happens, all United States support must be enlisted in behalf of the Crown since “otherwise there will be complete chaos.” (Comment: She is constantly haunted by vague fears of political upheaval which might destroy the Monarchy, or perhaps more likely, a series of political events which might eventually force the abdication of the sovereign. She has little confidence in the basic stability of the government and believes that only constant vigilance of the Crown can protect Greek politicians from their own follies and prevent political chaos which, in turn, would be successfully exploited by the Communists. Hence, all of her political judgments are based on the assumption that what is good for the Monarchy is good for Greece.) 6. While discounting allegations that the military are deeply involved in internal politics, the Queen is confident of their loyalty to the King and Queen. (Comment: During the conversation, she gave the impression that if faced with a critical situation, the Royal couple might turn to the military as a last resort to save the regime.) For the Deputy Director, Plans:[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] 343. Letter From the Ambassador to Greece (Labouisse) to Secretary of State RuskSource: Department of State, Greek Desk Files: Lot 66 D 232, Athens. Top Secret. Athens, April 5, 1963. Dear Mr. Secretary: We have received disturbing information this week concerning the organization of a possible coup d’etat against the Greek Government. While the indications are that the coup is not planned for the immediate future, the information, which comes from General Kardamakis, the recently retired Chief of Staff of the Greek Army, has such a ring of authenticity that I believe you and the President should be advised without delay of this possibility of an overturn in Greece some time in the coming months. The story was told by General Kardamakis to Colonel Baldry, our Army attache. The following is the gist of Colonel Baldry’s report to me. [13–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] Something would also have to be done about controlling the venal and disruptive press. General Kardamakis stated that the decision for a coup d’etat has already been taken, that it is no longer a question of whether, but when. General Kardamakis described the officer corps of the Army as broadly divided into two groups, with the majority consisting of “truly patriotic” strong, loyal officers who form a large bloc and look to him as their leader. This group, he said, was fully organized—he supplied names of some key officers—and capable of assuming power. They believe that the time to strike will soon arrive.The three officers whom Kardamakis indicated as leaders of the conspiracy were Brigadier General Odesseus Angelis, Colonel Alexander Hatzipetros, and Lieutenant Colonel Georgios Papadopoulos. Colonel Baldry reported that Papadopoulos was “not known to this office.” (Memorandum from Baldry to Labouisse, April 3; ibid.) [4 lines of source text not declassified] On the other hand, he expressed the opinion that the sizeable left-leaning element of the nationalist opposition would combine with the communists to win the next elections. Dissatisfied with the present, this officer group is not content to wait for elections and allow the latter to happen. It, therefore, plans a military take-over before waiting until blood would have to be spilled. General Kardamakis said that he himself felt that such a revolutionary step should be taken only as a last resort and that he has been resisting heavy and mounting pressure from the younger officers in the group for some time now. To get away from this pressure he has decided to leave Greece at the end of the month on an extended European trip with his wife, to be abroad two to three months. He did not think the coup would take place in his absence, but he could not guarantee it in view of the rising impatience of the officers (it could also be that, if such a move is being planned, the General would prefer to be out of the country at the time of execution so as to avoid responsibility and would then expect to be called home to take over the helm). Colonel Baldry pointed out to General Kardamakis the very serious consequences both in domestic affairs and in Greece’s international relations which would follow on such a coup and suggested various other possibilities of easing the situation. The General was not, however, to be dissuaded and expressed the determined conviction that a military coup is the only way to bring about necessary reforms in Greece. After two years or so the government could then be returned to the people under a new, stronger constitution. The General stressed that the Army’s loyalty is to the country and to the Crown. As for our analysis of the above, General Kardamakis is known to us as a blunt, dedicated, but opinionated officer who is not averse to using the Army for political purposes and who is of the type inclined to feel that the Army is the true guardian of the country’s honor and knows what is best for Greece. His identification of other key officers in the conspiracy was forthright, and there seems little reason to doubt his general description of the forces at work among the officer corps. In short, his presentation seemed sufficiently genuine and accurate to be greatly disturbing. We have from time to time had vague rumors and bits of information concerning Army cliques, secret societies within the armed forces, predictions that the Army would never allow nationalist opposition leaders with any leftist tinge to take over in the event of electoral victory and the like. Of late rumors have been somewhat on the increase. However, we have considered that, despite rather feckless attempts of the Papandreou–Venizelos opposition to draw the Army into politics, there was little likelihood of violent overturn in Greece [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. In fact, one of the achievements of recent years in Greece has been the removal of the Army from politics to a more proper military role. If Kardamakis is right in his appraisal of the situation, then we are indeed headed for trouble here. [2–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] In my judgment there is no remote justification in the present local situation for the type of action General Kardamakis declares he and his group are planning and which, unfortunately, they may well be in a position to carry out (the appointment several months ago of the present Army Chief of Staff was more or less forced on the government by the Kardamakis group, and the present Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is regarded as a figurehead). [13–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] Resentments of this sort may lie at the base of the current disaffection of Kardamakis. It would seem, however, that other factors also weigh heavily in the balance: the impatience of the officer corps (which comes largely from the economically less advanced rural areas) with social inequities and with the pace of social reform, as well as irritation over the inevitable loose ends of democracy, such as a largely irresponsible press and petty venality, along with the fear that the next election would result in a Popular Front Government. While there is no doubt some corruption in the Greek bureaucracy, we have considered it to be of rather mild proportions for this part of the world. I have considered this problem at some length with Colonel Baldry and with my Deputy, Tap Bennett. Because of the sensitivity of the information we have not yet brought in any other officers of the Mission. Colonel Baldry has informed his superior, Major General Fitch, Army G–2, by personal letter. I am sending a copy of this letter to Phil Talbot for his information, but am making no other distribution. I am planning to have Colonel Baldry arrange another discussion in the near future with General Kardamakis, at which time he would be provided with a carefully worked-out rundown of the fateful consequences to Greece of this contemplated action. The General would be advised in emphatic terms of the damage to Greece’s international reputation, the blow to NATO confidence in this country, the dangers of upsetting the essentially fragile economic structure and the creation of an instability which would frighten away the very investment which is only now beginning to come to Greece and which the country so desperately needs for its economic development. [1 paragraph (7–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified] Sincerely yours, Henry R. LabouissePrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 344. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Talbot) to the Ambassador to Greece (Labouisse)Source: Department of State, Greek Desk Files: Lot 66 D 232, Athens. Top Secret; Official–Informal. Washington, April 22, 1963. Dear Harry: The Secretary has asked me to respond to your letter of April 5 to him. The information conveyed by General Kardamakis to Colonel Baldry is indeed disturbing and we would like to be kept informed of any new developments resulting from subsequent contacts with General Kardamakis. We agree with your analysis there is no justification for the type of action Kardamakis proposes. We concur that it jeopardizes much of what has been accomplished in Greece’s economic as well as military advancement. Such a “solution” would be regarded as a blemish on Greece’s good name, particularly here in the United States. In view of our long involvement and large investment in Greece, we could not stand idly by and witness the creation of a Latin American type of totalitarian government in Greece, nor do we want a return to the Metaxas kind of tyranny. We are therefore unalterably opposed to such a “solution” in Greece. [2–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] It occurs to me that the General may be trying to justify action on lines similar to the May 27 movement in Turkey. However, Greece’s economic indicators belie him. The rate of Greek progress has indeed been most impressive. [4–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] Some of the current frustrations with the social system are a result of the economic progress of the last decade. Your action in informing the General of the dire consequences to Greece of such contemplated action was well taken. We would like to add that Greece with a totalitarian government in the Balkans would be a staggering blow to the cause of democracy in the area; the derogation of democracy would be a source of satisfaction to Greece’s Communist neighbors. You may also indicate to Kardamakis that the use of United States equipment to achieve such a “solution” would be regarded with grave misgiving and disappointment by the United States. Such a development would jeopardize MAP on a world-wide basis and add fuel to criticism from some sources that it is used to displace democracy in its very homeland. We would also find it difficult, if not impossible, to continue our MAP for Greece at anywhere near the same magnitude as in the past; at a minimum it would cause a review of our military assist-ance programming. Obviously it is impossible for Caramanlis to remain in power indefinitely and we are prepared to cooperate with another government should it come to power through constitutional means. We would not be diffident concerning the possibility of working with such a government as long as the turnover did not involve Communists or find them represented in the cabinet. In the meantime we would not wish to do anything to compromise the effectiveness of Caramanlis’ Government as it still has considerable time to serve in office—nor can a politician of Caramanlis’ skill be discounted in the next election by any means. We are aware of the dilemma caused by the Center Union’s “inexorable” struggle and realize that perhaps this causes anxiety and frustration among various circles in Greece. A political pot that is warm or hot is not, however, particularly unique in Greece. Consequently, we are not unduly concerned about the Center campaign, although we would quite obviously prefer the Center to focus its energy on Greece’s real problem areas, rather than its present activities, including accusing the United States of meddling in Greek affairs. Approaches similar to the General’s probably point to one of the Center’s problems—the need to satisfy the Army as to their attitude toward the monarchy in the short run. Please keep us informed. I look forward to the opportunity the Istanbul meeting will give us to review these problems.On May 1, Labouisse reported that Colonel Baldry had made a detailed presentation to Kardamakis outlining U.S. opposition to any attempted coup and that Kardamakis indicated that he no longer regarded a coup as inevitable. Labouisse also reported that U.S. soundings indicated that many military men would oppose a resort to force, adding: “In sum, I believe there is less reason for concern about the situation than seemed the case three weeks ago.” (Letter from Labouisse to Talbot, May 1; ibid.) Sincerely yours, Phil 345. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Gr–US. Secret. Drafted by Komer. Washington, June 3, 1963. SUBJECT Call of Mr. Papaligouras, Greek Minister of Coordination, on the President PARTICIPANTS The President Mr. Phillips Talbot Mr. Robert W. Komer H.E. Alexander A. Matsas Mr. Panagiotis Papaligouras The President indicated to Papaligouras that we don’t want to push Greek military expenditures to the point where it takes away from economic development. The President said that the threat is always there but he doesn’t anticipate any major attack on Greece or generally. DeGaulle might say that the Americans couldn’t be trusted to defend Europe but Khrushchev doesn’t know this and can’t afford to take the risk. The President was aware of Greek concerns over the Bulgar threat but said the Soviets won’t unleash the Bulgars ever if they were stronger than at present (the major danger in Greece, as in Italy, is internal). The President said Greece should concentrate on internal growth. Let’s not have a Communist resurgence in Greece as in Italy (Papaligouras indicated he fully understood the President’s views but did not regard them as incompatible with his own proposed policy of keeping the army at the present level and keeping the defense budget at a level which would allow for only a small annual growth, less than the increase in GNP. Papaligouras summarized Greek defense needs as being hardware, plus $10 million in military consumables, plus commercial credits (from Europe), plus around $20 million in externally generated resources comparable to the $23 million which Greece got last year. Papaligouras said that Caramanlis had asked him to appeal to the President personally to find ways and means of helping the Greek military budget as we had in 1963. Papaligouras also expressed interest in U.S. support of a smooth transition from a state of dependency to economic self-sufficiency on Greece’s part. He hoped we could ease this transition via further program loans and P.L. 480. The President stated that we would take a look at all of the Greek proposals and he asked that they be brought to his personal attention (the President did not however make any commitment whatsoever on any specific Greek request). 346. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Schott and approved by S on June 18. The source text is labeled “Part I of IV.” Washington, June 6, 1963, noon. SUBJECT Greek Minister Papaligouras’ Meeting with Secretary Rusk—Aid PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Robert R. Schott—GTI Panagiotis Papaligouras, Greek Minister of Coordination Alexander Matsas, Ambassador of Greece United States Contribution to NATO Greek Defense Exercise Minister Papaligouras reviewed his meeting with the President. He said that he and the President had explored the possibilities of a United States participation in the form of a grant in the NATO Greek defense exercise in 1964. The only solution they had come up with was a 104(C), PL–480 (Title I) component. The President requested that his staff provide responses to the various requests made. Mr. Papaligouras revealed that he wanted to learn the attitude of the United States on these matters in order to proceed with his planning. The GOG needed a reaffirmation of United States support (not that it is doubted) for internal political reasons. The Government has a guns vs. butter problem with attendant manifestations—social pressures, population movement, industrialization, unemployment and underemployment—which create problems of a much more sophisticated nature. A condensation of social pressures has resulted which, combined with rising expectations, are of a more explosive nature than heretofore. Greece must industrialize in 20 years to bridge the gap between its per capita income of $365 and the much higher rate of Western Europe with which Greece is now associated as a member of the EEC. On the defense side, the Minister quoted the President as having said that the United States does not want to push Greek military expenditures to the point that they detract from domestic resources for development; Secretary McNamara and Messrs. Kaysen and Komer of the White House also put forth this attitude during the White House meeting. Secretary Rusk expressed some concern that defense expenditures should not be cut drastically because if the defense establishment of Greece went below a certain level, stability might be jeopardized and an outside threat invited. Papaligouras agreed and explained that he had made these identical points to the President who understood. What he and the President had agreed was that military expenditures should not be exaggerated. If in the past perhaps a too rapid build-up had occurred, it had not been done only at the behest of the Greek generals; SACEUR had also reported that the Greek army was in a low state of preparedness. At the same time, the Bulgarian army has been modernized and has taken an offensive posture as compared to its former defensive nature. These things worry Greek army officers and create potential internal political problems. Fortunately, the GNA is 100% loyal to the Government, NATO and the State; it is a conservative force. The maintenance of the army is an important factor politically, as well as being vital to sustain the morale of the people, particularly along the frontiers. There must be continued stability to set the stage for economic development and investment, which the GOG hopes to stimulate and, thus, eliminate the need for external assistance in a few years. The Secretary remarked that Couve de Murville told him that De Gaulle was most impressed with the performance of the GNA. Mr. Papaligouras went on to say that defense costs will remain at approximately 1963 levels for the next 1–2 years, and noted that salaries and the modernization effect might add a small amount, but nothing substantial. He recalled that Secretary McNamara stated he would look into ways to accelerate deliveries of MAP to enhance the modernization of the GNA. The Greek Government had the impression that MAP, including commercial consumables, would remain at previous levels ($100 million) in FY 1964. The President and Secretary McNamara had given the Minister assurances to this effect. With regard to the NATO defense exercise, Mr. Papaligouras stated that the United States policy of promoting burden sharing had been a unique success. No such precedent had previously occurred. The NATO exercise for Greece should not be permitted to collapse because the GOG would not be able to replace the $23.4 million, which it obtained in 1963, from its own 1964 resources. The Secretary agreed that the exercise should continue, adding that unless the Europeans recognize and accept their responsibilities, NATO is going to experience increasing difficulties. He asked if the $23 million had met the problem. Mr. Papaligouras replied that a satisfactory level of Greek defense has resulted (about $185 million). The GOG realizes that the various force levels set by the generals cannot be achieved, but if the same procedure can be followed in 1964, a satisfactory situation will result. This calls for a United States participation in the form of a grant under PL–480 (104(C)). In this way the GOG will be able to utilize the West German commitment of a $9 million grant which was promised in 1964 on the condition that another major power would participate. The French offered commercial credits in the 1963 exercise which Mr. Papaligouras said he refused because the GOG found it unacceptable to finance defense with commercial credits. One of the principal problems already facing the GOG is the large number of commercial credits outstanding. The Consortium On the Consortium, the Minister commented that he is hopeful that the French would make a substantial contribution in the form of a loan. Mr. Cochran, the American Consortium chairman, who is doing an excellent job, believes there are favorable possibilities for Greece in the OECD Consortium. The Secretary stated he was moderately optimistic because of the French participation in the Consortium. He emphasized it is very important from the United States Government’s view that the Consortium be supported. The United States cannot return to a bilateral economic aid relationship with Greece. The Secretary stressed the importance to Greece and the United States that a mechanism continue to exist to meet the problem of providing Greece’s external assistance requirements. Mr. Papaligouras agreed to endeavor to influence the Prime Minister and the Cabinet to stay in the Consortium. Mr. Papaligouras admitted that creating a Consortium takes time. He said that the Prime Minister, at the time he considered abandoning the OECD Consortium, was primarily concerned lest a disappointed Greek public adopt an anti-Western attitude as a result of the apparent failure of the Consortium. The Minister’s Five Wishes Mr. Papaligouras reviewed his “five wishes”: (1) MAP, (2) commercial consumables, (3) PL–480 (104(C)) and United States participation in the 1964 NATO defense exercise for Greece, (4) 1964 program loan, and (5) project loans. On the first two the President and Secretary McNamara had indicated that he could plan on the same level as in FY 1963. On the last two, Mr. Bell and he had a constructive conversation and he would not take the Secretary’s time with further remarks on these points. The Secretary commented he had the impression that MAP and commercial consumables for FY 1964 were programmed at the same levels, but that commercial consumables over the long-run would be phased-out. The decision on future levels of commercial consumables would be decided after FY 1964. GOG Confidence in United States The Secretary commented he has the feeling that Prime Minister Caramanlis is less sure and confident about his relationship with the United States than he should be. The Secretary expressed the hope that Mr. Caramanlis, in the future, will view the relationship with more certainty. The United States realizes that the Prime Minister has problems, like all political leaders, but hopes he realizes that Greece is regarded as a special, more mature friend which, unlike others, does not require periodic indications of reassurance. The Secretary commented that perhaps the United States should publish aid figures on a per capita basis in which case Greece would be at the head of the list. The Prime Minister could perhaps use these figures to reassure the Greek people. Mr. Papaligouras replied that the Prime Minister was upset about the termination of supporting assistance, but now accepts the decision. The Minister remarked that without the NATO defense exercise the situation would have been grave. The Secretary answered that without the termination of supporting assistance, there would not have been a NATO defense exercise for Greece. The Minister agreed. The Secretary explained that the problem of meeting rising expectations is built into the situation in each country. There are always differences between hopes and expectations and what is realistic and attainable. The United States has these problems in eighty countries. Undoubtedly in the seventeen year period during which the United States has rendered about $3.5 billion assistance to Greece, there has not been a single year in which expectations were satisfied. All political leaders have these problems and, hopefully, Mr. Caramanlis will adopt a more calm and understanding attitude. The Secretary ended the meeting by reaffirming the United States’ interest in supporting the Greek government’s initiative to engender assistance from the other NATO powers. He agreed to look into the possibility of a PL-480 grant as a United States contribution. He added that the Department would hope to obtain responses to Mr. Papaligouras’ requests to give him prior to his return. 347. Editorial Note Prime Minister Karamanlis resigned on June 11, following a disagreement with the Royal family over their desire for a State visit to the United Kingdom. The Prime Minister’s resignation climaxed a long period of slowly increasing conflict with the Royal family and came shortly after Georgios Lambrakis, an EDA Deputy, was killed by right-wing terrorists during a political rally. The left charged government complicity with this crime. On June 17, after consultations with the ERE leadership, the King asked Panayiotis Pipinelis to form a transitional government prior to elections. 348. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1. Confidential. Drafted by Labouisse. Athens, July 2, 1963. PARTICIPANTS Prime Minister Pipinelis Ambassador Labouisse I called on the Prime Minister on July 2 at 10:30 a.m. He told me that he was more optimistic than he had been last week about the general situation. He sees his government as an interim one: to cover the Royal visit and to prepare for elections. He thinks the visit will go well enough. As soon as that is over, he hopes to be able to bring about the passage of an acceptable electoral law, to be followed by early elections. He would like to see Caramanlis back in his old seat. He has already spoken to the ERE leaders about the electoral system. They want a majority system but might be willing to compromise. He will see the leaders of the other parties and hopes to have some understanding with them before parliament meets so that a new law can be passed easily. He said that Papandreou had just made a statement that he wanted elections to be held in November (to give more time to “ventilate” the country) but that he, Pipinelis, wants earlier elections, “probably in October.” If he can obtain no agreement from the parties, he will have to go forward on the old system—“this is my threat.” Pipinelis says that he does not want to see ERE broken—“this would be a catastrophe.” On the other hand, he says that the Center Union has already split. Concerning the election, he said that the only real question was that of the electoral law. Other matters, such as replacement of monarchs, control of the Gendarmarie, Army voting, etc., he can deal with on his own initiative. He mentioned, as an example, the success which he had with the national radio, saying that representatives of the Center Union and the Progressive Party sat with the director of the national radio to ensure non-discriminatory action. The Prime Minister is anxious to keep things moving forward, and realizes the dangers of loss of momentum. His government must see that decisions are taken on pending matters, wherever necessary. I mentioned the need for a reply about the VOA projected sites in the north. He said he would try to let us have an answer in a day or two. HL 349. National Security Action Memorandum No. 251Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 251. Secret. Washington, July 8, 1963. TO The Secretary of State SUBJECT Estimate of Greek Political Outlook Before approving the proposed aide-memoire on U.S. aid to Greece arising out of the Papaligouras visit, the President would like the Department’s estimate of the Greek political outlook. In particular he wonders what sort of alternative cabinets could emerge from the current political crisis, and what the likely implications for U.S. interests of each might be. If we face the prospect of prolonged jockeying and possible renewed instability in Greek politics, is there anything the U.S. could or should do about it? McGeorge Bundy 350. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource: Department of State, S–S/NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 251. Secret. Drafted by Schott, Barnes, and Lagoudakis and cleared by Talbot and RNA. An annex entitled “Background of Current Greek Political Situation” is not printed. Washington, July 15, 1963. RESPONSE TO NSAM 251 U.S. POLICY AND THE POLITICAL OUTLOOK IN GREECE U.S. Policy in Greece 1. As set forth below, the most probable outcome of the present Greek cabinet crisis is one which will be relatively favorable to basic United States interests—namely, a return of Caramanlis and the ERE to power. Since any United States actions which could be construed as interference in Greek domestic politics would almost certainly reduce rather than enhance this probability, and would be welcomed by both the Palace and opposition elements as grounds for attack against Caramanlis, the U.S. should refrain from such steps. We should, however, continue our current programs in Greece and proceed with the delivery of the projected aide-memoire, which will signify the continuity of our policy of cooperation and our interest in the welfare of Greece. 2. In the current context it is to the benefit of the largest parties, ERE and the Center Union, as well as to the benefit of U.S. interests in Greece, that elections be held by about October. Through an unfortunate combination of developments not now foreseeable, such as an indefinite postponement of elections, the currently favorable outlook might be reduced. Under such circumstances, we will consider what United States actions might be necessary and possible to increase the chances for an outcome compatible with our basic interests in Greece. 3. In any such consideration we must constantly bear in mind that Greeks are in general suspicious and resentful of real and imagined foreign intervention in their domestic political affairs. Greek public opinion is particularly alert to the operation of the so-called “American Factor.” Political Outlook in Greece 1. The Pipinelis government will be under pressure from several directions during its period in office. The Communist-dominated EDA, of course, will oppose the government at every turn and will try to secure the cooperation of the non-Communist Center Union in some of its anti-government activities. The Palace probably will attempt to intervene more directly in governmental affairs in an effort to weaken Caramanlis’ position. The Center Union is likely to continue its attempts to harass the government, though it will be wary of joint action with EDA. The Center Union probably will devote much of its energies toward securing a favorable electoral law and ensuring that the election is a “fair” one, threatening to continue its struggle of the past two years if its demands are not met. Pipinelis has already met some of the Center Union’s demands—such as equal radio time—and probably will attempt to work out acceptable compromises on other issues. Despite the pressures from all sides and his desire to compromise, Pipinelis is dependent on the support of Caramanlis’ ERE, and is unlikely to take any steps that would seriously weaken Caramanlis or the ERE. It now appears that the ERE will retain its cohesion. Pipinelis will strive to push through an electoral law and complete the formation of the electoral rolls in time for an election within the next few months. 2. The outcome of the coming election is likely to depend to a considerable extent on the type of electoral law adopted. Caramanlis and many members of the ERE favor the majority system, and several years ago Caramanlis forced such an electoral law through Parliament. However, the Center Union, EDA, and some elements of ERE are opposed to such a system. So are many sections of the public, who fear that it would drive the Center Union and EDA into an electoral alliance, and create new bitterness between the government and the opposition. While the opposition parties and probably the Palace favor a relatively straight proportional representation system as one most likely to reduce Caramanlis’ strength, the ERE is strongly opposed. The most likely outcome of the struggle, after considerable political maneuvering, is the adoption of a reinforced proportional representation system—such as was used for the last election—which would benefit the ERE and the Center Union, so long as the ERE and the Center Union maintain party discipline. 3. The timing of the election will also have a bearing on its outcome. Caramanlis appears to have strengthened his popular appeal by resigning over his dispute with the Palace. As time passes, however, this issue may be superseded by other issues less favorable to Caramanlis and ERE. The now electoral rolls now under preparation apparently cannot be completed much before October or November. The Pipinelis government could attempt to rush the election by taking short-cuts in preparing the rolls, but such a maneuver probably would spark accusations that the government was rigging the elections in favor of ERE, and seems unlikely to be attempted. A more serious danger is that the Palace, fearing that Caramanlis might curb the royal family, might undertake desperate political moves to postpone elections in the hope of somehow preventing his return to power. For example, it might seek the cooperation of opposition leaders and perhaps some disgruntled ERE elements to form an openly political government. However, it is likely that the ERE will remain united and the government will carry out electoral preparations thoroughly and as speedily as possible, and probably will be able to hold elections sometime during the fall. 4. Caramanlis and the ERE will be in a strong position for elections held under such conditions. After many years in power ERE is relatively well-organized throughout the country, while the Center Union’s organization is weak in most rural areas. Greece has had seven years of stability and progress under Caramanlis, and there is widespread confidence that such progress will continue. Satisfactory crops in most parts of the country, expanding industrial activity, and a booming tourist business are elements of strength for the government. These factors are somewhat offset by the solid core of support possessed by both the Center Union and EDA and by the feeling of many Greeks that Caramanlis and ERE have been in office too long. However, it seems unlikely that these considerations will be enough to overcome Caramanlis’ assets, and he is likely to be returned to office with at least a working majority. No basic change in the Parliamentary strength of EDA or CU appears likely. 5. Such an electoral outcome would result in a further period of political stability and economic progress in Greece, as well as a continuation of Greece’s present foreign policy. The need to compete with the other parties in promising greater welfare benefits might create some fiscal problems for a new Caramanlis government. If relations with Greece’s neighbors become a prominent campaign issue, it could limit the flexibility of a new government in dealing with some perennial problems. However, even if these developments do occur they would create relatively minor difficulties. Friction between Caramanlis and the Palace might be a more serious problem, for Caramanlis may insist that the royal family play a more circumspect role—a prospect which the Palace, particularly the Queen, would find most unpleasant and would attempt to evade. 6. If for any reason—a long-delayed election, changing popular sentiment, or unexpected economic difficulties—Caramanlis failed to obtain a majority of seats in Parliament, Greece’s political stability would be substantially reduced. Even if the Center Union obtained a majority, conflicts within the leadership, the lack of cohesion in its components, and lack of a clear policy, would result in at least a modest decline in stability. However, it seems quite unlikely that the Center Union could secure a majority itself. A more likely result would be the failure of any party to win a majority of seats, with the consequent need for a coalition government. While such a coalition, which almost certainly would not include EDA, would not inevitably be short-lived or characterized by a preoccupation with political maneuvering to the exclusion of dealing with the problems of a nation entering the modern world, there would almost certainly be strong tendencies in these directions. There is no reason to fear that a Center Union government or a coalition government excluding EDA would, at least in the foreseeable future, represent a threat to Greece’s pro-Western foreign policy. 351. National Security Action Memorandum No. 257Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 257. Confidential. Washington, July 31, 1963. MEMORANDUM FOR The Secretary of State The Secretary of Defense The Administrator, Agency for International Development SUBJECT Aide-memoire for Greece I approve the proposed Aide-memoire submitted by the AID Administrator concerning U.S. assistance to Greece,Not found. with one exception. Since we have not yet resolved the question of the appropriate long term “mix” of our aid to Greece (as required by NSC Action 2447),See footnote 1, Document 329. and since we do not know how much our aid appropriations will be cut, I do not believe that we should make even an implicit commitment to continue MAP at a level which the accompanying memorandum suggests would be around $100 million annually. It seems to me quite sufficient to indicate that we propose “to continue a substantial program of grant military assistance”, instead of saying that we at present contemplate no reduction. When we present this Aide-memoire, we should use the occasion to underscore the U.S. view, that, above the present level of defense effort, Greece should give top priority to an intensified development effort. As I told Mr. Papaligouras, “we don’t want to push Greek military expenditures to the point where they take away from economic development.” Because U.S. representatives in the past have spoken with conflicting voices, I wish steps taken to insure that all concerned, including our NATO military people, are aware of and actively support the position in the Aide-memoire with respect to Greek defense budgets. John Kennedy 352. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL US–Gr. Confidential. Drafted by Hoctor. Washington, August 7, 1963. SUBJECT U.S. Aide-memoire to Greece PARTICIPANTS His Excellency Alexander A. Matsas, Ambassador of Greece The Honorable Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary of State, NEA Joseph Wheeler, AID/GTICC Thomas F. Hoctor, GTI The Greek Ambassador called on Mr. Talbot to receive the U.S. aide-memoire on defense assistance and economic aid to GreeceNot found but see Document 351. in response to requests made by Coordination Minister Papaligouras at the time of his recent visit to the U.S. In presenting the aide-memoire, Mr. Talbot made the following points: 1. In delivering the aide-memoire we wish again to emphasize the continuing U.S. interest in the security, stability and progress of Greece. 2. Our views regarding the feasible and proper level of the Greek defense effort are formed in the light of the probable availability of Greek resources and NATO assistance and of the competing needs of the growing Greek economy. We regard these matters as interdependent. Military security provides the confidence and stability needed for economic growth; increased economic strength and well-being should provide the basis for an adequate defense effort. The foundation of Greek security, like that of the other NATO countries, rests on the NATO alliance. 3. U.S. aid programs regarding Greece reflect our belief in Greece’s growing ability to sustain a satisfactory rate of economic growth. At this stage we regard Greece’s own efforts as the essential ingredient, with inflows of foreign capital being attracted by Greece’s successes in the economic field rather than, as in the past, Greece’s economy being impelled toward growth by foreign assistance. We therefore reiterate our view that the GOG should continue to press ahead wherever possible at this time in its economic programs. Mr. Matsas read the aide-memoire, expressed the thanks of his Government, and pointed out that, since the aide-memoire is a long and complicated document, he could not comment on it except to note in passing the fact that the U.S. proposed to contribute $5 million in 1964 toward the NATO Working Group exercise for Greek Defense, rather than $10 million, as had been the case in 1963. He also noted the phased reduction of commercial consumables under MAP. In conclusion, Mr. Talbot remarked that the state of U.S.-Greek relations marked by the aide-memoire showed the remarkable progress made by Greece since 1947, and even since 1953. He reiterated his previously expressed view that the U.S. wished to continue on a “business-as-usual” basis with regard to Greece, despite the present pre-election situation. 353. Editorial Note Prime Minister Pipinelis resigned on September 26 following protests by the Center Union that his links with ERE and the repeated election law violations during the 1961 campaign necessitated a neutral figure at the head of the Greek Government during national elections. King Paul asked the President of the Supreme Court, Stylianos Mavromichalies, to form a government to oversee elections. Mavromichalies presented his government to Parliament on September 28 and announced that the King would call new elections for November 3. 354. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, DEF NATO–19. Secret. Drafted by Schott. Paris, October 16, 1963. SUBJECT Discussion of Greek Defense with Secretary General Stikker PARTICIPANTS United States Ambassador T. K. Finletter J. R. Schaetzel, Deputy Assistant Secretary, EUR David H. Popper, EUR/RPM Ronald I. Spiers, EUR/RPM Robert H. Kranich, EUR/RPM Philander Claxton, S/MF Seymour Weiss, G/PM Arthur Foley, REU Charles Sullivan, Treasury Robert Schott, GTI Frederick Sligh, AID Mrs. Bracken, GTI Herbert Spielman, EUR/RPM NATO International Staff Dirk U. Stikker, Secretary General John Getz, Director, Office of the Secretary General David Bendall, Deputy Assistant Secretary General for Economics and Finance Mr. Stikker commented that as a result of the NATO resolution to assist the Greeks to finance their inordinately high defense budget, he had agreed to act as the collection agent for them. In spite of the need which he personally believes justified, it has not been an easy job. For example, in Athens where he recently met with the Greeks, he had experienced a rather difficult time. He found the Greeks to be ungrateful regarding his efforts to obtain 1963 assistance and full of complaints. The Greek attitude was annoying, but he had tried to control his temper. In the Secretary General’s experience, the Greeks have not taken the initiative expected of them. They have failed to follow through to negotiate out the various pledges; their efforts have not been well-coordinated; and they have not been very cooperative. In spite of these difficulties, Mr. Stikker stated he is hopeful the Greeks will raise their self-financed Greek budget, which was $154 million in 1962 and was raised to $161 million in 1963, to $170 million in 1964. Of course, this event is predicated on the assumption the NATO exercise will come up with approximately the same amount as pledged in 1963. The Greeks calculated their over-all defense requirement in 1964 to be $213 million, leaving a $43 million gap. The Secretary General told them this was too high and they came down to $30 million; however, he believed they would be satisfied with approximately last year’s level. Perhaps, if the Greeks settle their pre-war debt with the U.K., the latter might contribute. If the U.K. participates, France may also, although the French have a tendency to consider Greece and Turkey as United States preserves. Mr. Stikker referred to his conversation with Secretary McNamaraA copy of the memorandum of conversation is ibid. and said that he had hoped the United States would contribute $10 million to the 1964 exercise, as it has done in 1963. However, Mr. McNamara had stated that the United States could not contribute more than $5 million because of our worldwide commitments. Mr. Stikker pointed out that our cut would make his job exceedingly difficult. He agreed to use the totality of our aid to Greek defense, which he knew was significant, as an argument to buttress the United States contribution (his aide then reviewed the projected DOD figure for FY1964 which was: $5 million for the defense exercise, a programmed MAP figure of $80 million, and expected deliveries amounting to $150–$180 million). Mr. Stikker reiterated that he considered it important to assist the Greeks, even though their economic progress has been impressive. He commented that the Bank of Greece estimated the 1963 increase in GNP to be 9%, which, combined with the 1962 rate of about 4%, averaged out at about 6%. Mrs. Bracken agreed that while there is a lack of coordination in the GOG, that perhaps the technique of the Greeks submitting a shopping list to the members might be helpful. The Secretary General remarked the Greeks have resisted this approach because of their desire to translate these contributions into drachmae for the defense budget. It was also mentioned that the consumable portion which is purchased abroad for the Greek defense budget is a small component of the over-all defense budget and the Greeks would probably prefer to purchase these items from traditional suppliers. Mr. Stikker admitted that he had found it difficult to obtain an accurate figure on the “gap”. He emphasized the importance of the United States coordinating its projected amounts of military assistance with him because this information is necessary when discussing the problem with other prospective donors. They insist upon knowing what the United States is planning to do. We indicated the impossibility of projecting possible future long-range U.S. aid to Greece in view of current congressional attitudes. A general discussion of Greek military planning ensued and it was generally agreed that the Greeks would attempt to utilize the planning exercise as a way to obtain aid. Mr. Stikker referred to his recent overflight of Thrace near the Bulgarian border. [5 lines of source text not declassified] 355. Editorial Note Greek national elections held November 3 resulted in a victory for the Center Union. The party emerged with 42 percent of the vote and 138 seats in Parliament. ERE won 39 percent and 132 seats while the EDA took 14 percent and 28 seats. Since he lacked a clear majority, Center Union leader Papandreou formed a minority government and introduced a series of reform measures. When Parliament refused to pass one of his reform bills, Papandreou resigned and asked the King to dissolve Parliament and call new elections. 356. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Confidential. Drafted by Talbot and approved in the White House on December 2. Washington, November 25, 1963. SUBJECT President’s Reception, November 25, 1963 PARTICIPANTS President Johnson Assistant Secretary of State Phillips Talbot Her Majesty, Queen Frederika of GreeceQueen Frederika led the official delegation to the funeral of President Kennedy on November 25. The President welcomed the Queen, recalling his long and friendly association with Greece. He reminded her that he had been the first member of Congress to speak in favor of the Truman Doctrine. She responded that she remembered that well, and that American actions had saved Greece. The President referred to Greece as a brave country and staunch ally, with whom we stand firmly. In response to the President’s question about the current situation in Greece, she said it was going to be all right. The “present crowd” (the new Government) were a little nervous, because they had attacked “us” (presumably the Royal Family) while they were out of office. But they were learning that they could work with “us” and she did not foresee any great trouble. She wanted President Johnson and the United States to know as a certainty that so long as her husband was there, the Communists would never gain any power in Greece. President Johnson said he was sure this was true, and that we are proud of our friendship with Greece. 357. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Confidential. Drafted by Talbot and approved in S on December 9. Washington, November 26, 1963, noon. SUBJECT Call of Greek Deputy Prime Minister on the Secretary PARTICIPANTS The Secretary His Excellency Sophocles Venizelos, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Greece His Excellency Alexander A. Matsas, Ambassador of Greece NEA—Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary The Deputy Prime Minister expressed the deep grief of the Greek people at the tragedy which had overtaken America. The Secretary responded with appreciation to Mr. Venizelos for having come at this time of great grief here. He was also glad to have this chance to talk with him. Mr. Venizelos expressed his desire to speak briefly about both internal and external aspects of Greek policies. His party for 11 years had been in opposition before forming the present Government. This Government differed from Caramanlis’ Government in that while both opposed the Communists, the previous Government had depended on police measures, whereas this Government intended to use the more efficient measures of social action. The Secretary might remember that this party had fought Communists effectively in the past. Mr. Venizelos himself had been appointed Prime Minister specifically for the purpose of fighting Communist efforts to take over the country. After the liberation he had taken part in all efforts to fight the Communists and other Ministers in the present Cabinet had done the same. It was worth noting that in the 1961 elections the EDA was opposed by Caramanlis through repressive measures, whereas in the 1963 elections they came out with less support even though repressive measures were not used. If the present Government should remain in power long enough it would hope to limit the EDA to its normal 8% of the popular vote by providing a reef in the Center for those in the EDA who are not Communists. Secretary Rusk said we understood what the new Government was seeking to achieve. We hoped we could be helpful to Greece in meeting its problems, but we were not interested in being too large an influence in Greece, nor for that matter in Turkey. The right balance was the question. It was important to consult on the security problems facing Greece, and on its relations with its immediate neighbors. At one stage it had seemed that our estimate of the threat from Bulgaria, for example, was somewhat different from the Greek estimate. We were not interested in an arms race if some way could be found to limit it. Deputy Prime Minister Venizelos recalled that he had headed a Greek delegation to the United States in 1946 which had led to the Porter Mission, from which had come the great cooperation between Greece and the United States. Secretary Rusk responded that these broad policies of the West in the post-war period were developed by different parties at different times. We spoke of a bipartisan policy in this country. It was interesting to recall that it was the Labor Party of Britain that helped form NATO. The most elemental problems are national in character, rather than partisan. Thus we could see no difficulty in continuing our cooperation with Greece through one party or another. Mr. Venizelos observed that all members of the present Cabinet in Greece are pro-West in orientation and great friends of the United States. It was under a government he himself had headed that Greece joined NATO. He wanted the Secretary to know that Greece is absolutely determined to maintain its commitments. The only external question on which the present government would differ with the Caramanlis government, Mr. Venizelos went on, was Cyprus. In order for Cyprus to live on it would be essential to make some changes in the Constitution. He was glad to be able to report that the British understood this well. Here in Washington, Mr. Venizelos had called on Prime Minister Inonu and Foreign Minister Erkin of Turkey. They would meet again at the NATO meeting, and he hoped the Ministers of the three guarantor powers would also meet in Paris to discuss the Cyprus matter. The great concern would be to eliminate from the Cyprus Constitution those parts that caused great friction between the communities in Cyprus and thus between Greece and Turkey, Mr. Venizelos said. He wanted the Secretary to understand that this had nothing to do with any step toward enosis, i.e., union with Greece. Its sole purpose was to eliminate those dangerous frictions. Contrary to the stories of desire to prepare Cyprus for union with Greece, the proposals were intended to make Cyprus livable for its own people. His Government would be content to see not Cyprus as part of Greece but a second Greece in Cyprus. Secretary Rusk said we in the United States had no specific formula to suggest for Cyprus. Our great interest was in good relations between Greece and Turkey and in a stable situation in Cyprus. He would hope the Greeks would be in close touch with their colleagues in Turkey and with the guarantor powers. The situation had considerable delicacy, of course. The United States could be glad to keep in touch with the thinking of the Greek Government, but he doubted that we should take any initiative ourselves. Mr. Venizelos said the Greek Government would be grateful to the United States if it would contribute to finding the solutions necessary so that Cyprus could go ahead as an independent state. Ambassador Matsas added that the Greek Government would be thankful if, when the amendment question was raised, the United States would view the problem with sympathy and understanding, as did the United Kingdom. Mr. Venizelos commented further that the present situation, involving for example a Turkish veto, made the situation very difficult. He could say that Archbishop Makarios was ready to make concessions beyond the Constitution, as for example by agreeing that the Vice President rather than the (Greek) Speaker of the House should act in his stead when the President was absent from the country. This was still a confidential matter, but it indicated his intention and showed that the Archbishop envisaged the issue as a question of negotiation to amend certain articles of the Constitution while at the same time making serious concessions. Secretary Rusk responded that we would hope this should be acknowledged as a problem in the first instance for the guarantor powers. He hoped that anything done would be accomplished by negotiation and agreement. Turning to another subject, Mr. Venizelos said that his Government was putting greater emphasis on the internal situation. It did not fear isolated attack from its neighbors, for example, Bulgaria. Thus, it was mainly interested in the domestic health of the country, and especially the condition of the peasants who were its backbone. Secretary Rusk asked about the Minister of Defense. Mr. Venizelos explained that the present Minister was a military man who had been a member of the caretaker government, kept on at the request of the King. He indicated that a new Minister would be chosen after the vote of confidence in the Parliament. The Foreign Minister said that his Government had no intention of cutting its military expenditures in a unilateral way. It recognized that this could only be done in consultation with NATO. Secretary Rusk expressed himself as very glad to hear this. We had pledged ourselves to each other, and needed to consult closely. We might have talks in NATO and discuss the situation in, say, Bulgaria as we both saw it. If at times we had different estimates, it was particularly important that we consult. Mr. Venizelos referred to a complaint of the Soviet Ambassador about recent NATO exercises. He indicated that the Soviets had not gotten much comfort from his response. Turkey 358. Letter From the charge in Turkey (Cowles) to the Deputy Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Council (Thurston)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 782.5/1–1061. Top Secret; Official–Informal. Cowles was serving as charge after the departure of Ambassador Fletcher Warren on November 15, 1960. Ankara, January 10, 1961. Dear Ray: There are a few angles of the recent Turkish request for additional military budget support, not explicitly mentioned in the wires, which we thought might interest you and General Norstad. One is that the request was made completely outside normal channels. Colonel Tunckanat of the Committee of National Unity (which has been the Turkish Government, above the Cabinet), assisted by some military officers, presented the Turkish request. The ministers who normally deal in budgetary matters played a silent role and in some cases made known their opposition. As you know, the highly competent Finance Minister, Alican, resigned because the Committee insisted on carrying through the pay raise and other benefits for the military which threatened his budget and the government’s financial stability. General Alankus, former General of the Ground Forces and new Minister of Defense, has told Embassy staff members that he opposed very strongly the request for additional aid at this time. A second interesting point is the divergence in Turkish presentations of their own intentions. According to your wires 28 and 31Telegram 28 from Paris to Ankara, December 14, 1960, reported on Norstad’s informal discussions with Sunay on the Turkish Air Force aid program. (Ibid., 782.00/12–1460) Telegram 31 from Paris to Ankara, December 31, analyzed the Turkish request for military aid. (Ibid., 782.5/12–3160) to Ankara, General Sunay in his conversation with General Norstad, proposed force levels which are in consonance with NATO planning. He has reiterated these levels in a subsequent conversation with General Morin. In Colonel Tunckanat’s briefings (Embtels 788, 789 and 805 to the Department),Dated December 10, 11 and 17, respectively. (Ibid., 882.10/12–1060, 882.10/12–1160, and 882.10/12–1760) however, we were told that unless the GOT received the requested aid, it would reduce the level of its forces by 35–40%, which would mean a reduction in army personnel to a point far below that mentioned by General Sunay and very drastic reductions for the Air Force and Navy as well. Although we do not know what the outcome will actually be, certain factors will undoubtedly be taken into account in arriving at a decision. One is, if the military budget finally comes out at the 1.788 billion TL, as proposed by the Minister of Finance, and if this limited budget must absorb a large pay increase and other benefits for military personnel, substantial reductions in force levels will have to be made. We cannot estimate at this juncture whether or not under these conditions it would be possible for the Turks to support the level of forces which General Sunay indicated. Although General Sunay is in a most influential position as Chief of Staff, his is by no means the only voice which must be heard in arriving at a decision on the military budget. The Committee of National Unity, as mentioned above, has been the Government of Turkey in this revolutionary period, and its decisions on funds and force levels, which would presumably be determining, cannot be ignored by General Sunay. After we informed him of the adverse U.S. decision on his request for additional aid, Colonel Tunckanat of the Committee told us that the Government would proceed on the basis of the smaller budget involving reduced force levels. It will be most interesting to see how this squares with General Sunay’s projected levels. A complicating factor is the inauguration of the Constituent Assembly. Review of the budget is one of the specified powers of this body. Hence while we may know about the proposed budget soon, it is unlikely that we will know the final figure until Assembly action has been concluded, a process which could take some weeks. Although the Committee’s power will be less now that it constitutes only the upper house of this new organization, it still retains an ultimate veto power since an average of 51% of the vote of the two houses (voting separately and weighted equally) is required to reach a decision when there is a difference between them. We have one question about your wire No. 31 to Ankara. In paragraph one it is stated that General Norstad sees no need for the Turks to pursue discussion of their aid request with the Embassy in light of the procedure to be followed involving General Sunay’s memorandum as to the breakdown of forces and General Norstad’s prospective recommendation thereon. We are pleased that the Turkish problem is now in the hands of the competent NATO authorities which is in keeping with our own recommendations (Embtel 789). However, since we delivered the Department’s reply to the Turkish request for aid, which was a fairly categorical “no”, it appears to us that the main discussion is over and there is nothing left to pursue. There remains, I suppose, the possibility that General Norstad might himself wish to effect a change in the U.S. Government’s negative position when he has studied General Sunay’s program. This would resemble somewhat the process which occurred in connection with the Turkish request for $12 million of “additional” aid last August. Leaving aside the question of the merits of additional aid, we can see some difficulties for you in this process. The Turks may get the notion that an approach to SACEUR is the most profitable means of obtaining aid which is otherwise difficult or impossible to secure. The Turkish Government can allocate its existing resources, including counterpart, to cover any budgetary requirement it wishes, leaving others uncovered. The present budget, for instance, apparently includes increased appropriations for health and education to be met out of existing resources. This is one reason why the military are receiving less in the approved budget, leaving their needs partially uncovered. Since the Turkish Government can thus control to a large degree the sectors of their budget for which external aid must be sought, it may not be entirely a matter of chance that it is the military sector which has been selected on this occasion. By the way, we note from your wire No. 28 to Ankara that General Sunay mentioned our letter of November 12, on the Turkish budget process. As you will have guessed, it offered no encouragement regarding increased aid, as he claimed, but it did make major recommendations for a more orderly budget making process. I am enclosing a copy as of possible interest to you.The letter was not found. In telegram 965 from Ankara, February 7, the Embassy reported that the budget presented to Parliament by the Turkish Government included a significant increase in defense expenditures financed by new taxes and a reduction in military manpower. The Embassy cautioned, however, that the Turkish Government might resurrect its request for substantial new U.S. financing of its defense program. (Department of State, Central Files, 882.10/2–761) Sincerely yours, LLC 359. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.06270/2–561. Secret. Also sent to Moscow and repeated to Athens, Bonn, London, Tehran, Rome, and Paris Topol. Ankara, February 5, 1961, 11 a.m. 957. Paris for Thurston, Rome for Rood. During call on Foreign Minister Sarper February 3 he prefaced remarks re action Soviet Ambassador Rijov by urging that information be handled with greatest care since his (Sarper’s) usefulness and perhaps mine would be seriously impaired if this discussion leaked out. Rijov had visited him earlier in day to deliver note re IRBMs. Note said Soviets had seen references in press to fact IRBMs being constructed Turkey under NATO auspices but US command; USSR did not like development which might bring Turkey to “dangerous adventure”. Sarper said note not provocative and contained no threat but clearly implied IRBM would be impediment to development good neighborly relations. In course conversation Rijov also stated U–2 flight had “complicated” Turkey-Soviet relation since Turkey was original base for plane.Reference is to the May 1, 1960, downing of a U.S. aerial reconnaissance aircraft over the Soviet Union. The aircraft took off from a base in Turkey. Sarper said he promised Rijov formal GOT reply in due course but made following points orally as his personal opinion: (1) Turkish leaders would never lead people into “dangerous adventure”; (2) GOT as NATO member would lose no opportunity improve its defensive strength; (3) Turkey already “surrounded” by countries equipped with atomic weapons all types and ranges. Hence for GOT deprive itself these means of defense would be limitation its sovereignty; (4) GOT nevertheless would be happy see end of atomic weapons and conditions which made them necessary through proper international agreements and controls. Abandonment atomic weapons question of global international import. Sarper then went on discuss current activities of Soviet Ambassador. He said Rijov was visiting various Cabinet Officers and CNU members for general discussions which almost invariably included description of various economic and technological advances made by USSR and concluded with statement US-Soviet relations improving very rapidly under new US Administration to point where agreement might soon be reached which would leave Turkey “outside the club”. Obvious implication not overtly stated was that before Moscow and Washington finally got together Turkey should improve relations and reach agreement with their strong and powerful northern neighbor which had demonstrated ability to conquer type of economic problems Turkey faced. Sarper said that Rijov had not tried this line with him or even in recent call on Inonu since both too sophisticated to swallow it but that he was using it on many more naive officials. Gursel aware Rijov activities which he considered nuisance and overstepping proper bounds. Described as being furious and demanding Rijov be stopped “or else”. Sarper said he had urged restraint since first they did not wish take any action which would imply Turkey afraid of Russia and second any action taken against Rijov might only drive this type of activity underground. Sarper said he felt it better continue as at present but to keep close watch over Soviet activities. Cowles 360. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/4–461. Confidential. Repeated to Bonn, London, Paris, Istanbul, Izmir, and Iskenderun. Ankara, April 4, 1961, 6 p.m. 1193. During first courtesy call on Foreign Minister SarperThe Senate approved President Kennedy’s nomination of Raymond Hare as Ambassador to Turkey on February 24. Hare presented his credentials to President Gursel on April 5. I referred to great interest of American people in Turkey despite relative absence of press stories and of hope all Americans shared that current difficulties would be solved. Sarper immediately said Turkey had two very great problems today, one was economic situation and other was Yassiada trials. Elaborating on trials he said violence occurring in heat crisis understandable but is accepted with much greater difficulty after months of calm and opportunity for reasoned judgment. He added, however, that both General Gursel and Ismet Inonu were watchfully waiting and hoped that “everything would work out for best” though final decision of course rests with CNU and assessment current political situation at time might be important determinant. Recognized possible impact abroad but said domestic impact just as serious for future of Turkey. He added that high court showing “amazing independence” and that Gursel said Chief Judge Basgol had even indicated might resign if more pressure brought on him to expedite trials. I commented that I had not intended raise this subject and had no instructions but since it had come up in conversation I would venture express some personal views. Yassiada trials and final verdict were of course internal matter and so regarded by us. Nevertheless it was internal matter which under certain circumstances could lap over into foreign field and produce strong reactions. In my judgment American people ready accept “adjusted” solution but not “ultimate” (death sentence) decision. Latter could in my opinion very seriously damage image of Turkey which Americans had formed, which would be most unfoertunate. Additionally could not but place USG in difficult position, as I believed had been prviously brought out.In telegram 1029, February 24, the Embassy reported on the results of earlier discussions with senior Turkish officials, advising the Department that it was unable to submit a “meaningful” estimate of the likelihood of executions following the trials. (Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/2–2461) Sarper said he understood and would in his own time and way pass on my thoughts to Gursel which he felt he knew how to do but he advised against my mentioning subject during first call on Gursel. I said I had no intention of raising with Gursel and reiterated that I had only mentioned them since he himself had raised subject. I gained impression that while Sarper in no sense confident of what outcome of trials might be and fully aware of serious implications internally and externally of death sentences he was seeking give impression that efforts being made within existing law to guard against such extreme action. Fact that this gave uninhibited opportunity reiterate our concern may also have served useful purpose. Hare 361. National Security Action Memorandum No. 35Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 35. Top Secret. Washington, April 6, 1961. TO The Secretary of State The Secretary of Defense The Director of Central Intelligence SUBJECT Deployment of IRBM’s to Turkey In approving the Record of Action of the March 29, 1961 meeting of the National Security Council,Not found. the President directed that a group representing the Departments of State (Chairman) and Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency should review the question of deployment of IRBM’s to Turkey and make recommendations to him. Accordingly, it is requested that the above agencies undertake this review as soon as possible and present their recommendations to the President through this office. McGeorge Bundy 362. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.5612/4–2061. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Owen and McGhee; cleared by S/S, EUR, and NEA; and approved by Ball. Also sent to Rome and repeated to Ankara, Moscow, and Paris. Washington, April 20, 1961, 2 p.m. 4936. Paris for USRO and Thurston. 1. President has asked State and Defense Departments and CIA to report views concerning early implementation recommendation made to him by interdeptal NATO Task Force headed by Mr. AchesonThe recommendations of the Acheson task force were discussed at the March 29 NSC meeting. See Document 361. to effect that Turk resources would be more effectively employed and their interests better served by planned commitment US Polaris submarines to NATO instead of provision first generation IRBM squadron now scheduled for Turkey. Reasons underlying recommendation were (i) doubts value substantial investment MAP and Turkish resources in first generation IRBM’s this late in the game, in view of oncoming availability US Polaris missile subs for commitment to NATO, (ii) desire avoid deploying strategic weapons whose vulnerability makes them useful only for “strike first” purposes in country on Soviet border—especially since eventual Turkish manning contemplated. Question raised whether (failing foolproof physical safeguards to maintain US control after Turkish manning) such deployment might increase risk of war by miscalculation, either (i) because of firing by Turks of weapons in case of local “incident”, when US would not want them fired, or (ii) because Soviets (fearing Turks’ firing) might feel compelled to attack and destroy weapons pre-emptively in case of grave international crisis. Same recommendation made in report of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy,Not found. which stated that weapons are obsolete, that their retaliatory value is highly questionable, and that USSR would be likely to strike at them pre-emptively. President has informed Committee its recommendations will be carefully considered. 2. Secy will discuss with Embassy Ankara, when he goes to Ankara for forthcoming CENTO meeting,Scheduled for April 27–28. approach by him along fol lines to GOT based both on technical military considerations and on need to revise projected MAP country programs in view of present FY 1962 $1.6 billion ceiling: (a) New Polaris missile system has developed more rapidly than expected. US expects to commit some Polaris subs to NATO as they become available. This will help meet SACEUR initial MRBM requirements, and place powerful force at disposal NATO for protection NATO area. (b) Question arises, in view of this fact and FY 62 $1.6 billion MAP ceiling, whether projected IRBM squadron represents most effective use Turkish and limited MAP resources from military standpoint. (c) If Turks agree MRBM requirement better met through upcoming Polaris availability, US would be prepared provide Turkey more MAP for other purposes desired by Turks, e.g., aircraft, Nikes, patrol boats, trucks and/or armored personnel carriers, than could otherwise be provided under projected MAP program in view of need to expend substantial sums on IRBM program. (Would have to be made clear to Turks, in this connection, that under $1.6 billion FY 62 ceiling, major reductions below 5 Year Plan levels will have to be made in all programs, including Turkish program. If we go forward with IRBM’s, substantial reduction will be necessary in non-IRBM items in Turkish program. If IRBM’s were not to be provided, more non–IRBM items could be provided.) (d) If Turks agree with our views re logic of adjustment in program under these circumstances, we would propose joint approach to NATO, under which adjustment would be represented to NATO as technical and military matter, arising from more rapid expected commitment US Polaris subs to NATO and from changes in over-all level US FY 62 MAP program. Could be pointed out—if UK and Italy wished—that UK and Italian MRBM’s, in view their early development, helped to fill pre-1963 MRBM gap but that longer time required for Turkish program made its usefulness for this purpose uncertain, in view rapid Polaris progress. 3. Embassies London, Rome, USRO and Norstad advice would be most welcome. Do Embassies London and Rome think UK and Italian Governments should be consulted prior or simultaneously with approach to GOT? Embassy Rome FYI: On November 28 Italian Ambassador here asked Department whether Polaris would substitute for existing IRBM’s and was told wld be additional but eventual substitution conceivable.No record of this meeting has been found. What possibilities do you consider exist for successful negotiation with Italians for substitution, both on merits of proposal and as a means of obtaining Turk agreement?In telegram 4181 from Rome, April 24, the Embassy outlined its rationale for a separate approach to the Italians on the issue of missile replacement. (Department of State, Central Files, 782.5612/4–2461) 4. Obviously, we do not want any aspect of foregoing considered outside US channels at this time. Bowles 363. Telegram From the Supreme Allied Commander, Europe (Norstad) to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.6512/4–2561. Top Secret; Niact; Noforn. Also sent to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and repeated to the Department of State and U.S. Element CENTO. The source text is the Department of State copy. Paris, April 25, 1961, 5:50 p.m. ALO 403. Personal for SecDef McNamara and CJCS from Gen Norstad. Department for Secretary Rusk only. Chief USELM CENTO Ankara for Gen Lemnitzer only. 1. Reference the Jupiter squadron for Turkey which is considered in the report, “A Review of North Atlantic Problems for the Future”Not found. and State message no. 4429,Printed as telegram 4936 to London, Document 362. I am sure the detailed background is familiar enough to Washington to obviate repeating it here. I wish remind you only that the project was initiated as part of a NATO requirement and was proposed to the Turks by NATO authority through Allied channels. The Turkish squadron is part of a requirement for six IRBM squadrons which appeared in MC 70.MC–70, “Minimal Essential Force Requirements, 1958–1963,” was prepared by the Military Committee of NATO early in 1958 as guidance and a yardstick for the 1958 and successive Annual Reviews. Documentation regarding MC–70 is in Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. VII, Part 1, pp. 314 ff. NATO did not, of course, specify the particular missile to be used; the United States selected the Jupiter for this purpose since the research and development on it was complete and the project had reached the stage where there were at least production commitments, if not an actual production program. 2. You know my views on the need for mid-range ballistic missiles in Allied Command Europe. The critical shortage of missile-delivery systems, which it was anticipated would continue up into 1963 to 1965, was an added factor when the Jupiter program was established. This was considered important militarily, but was perhaps of even greater significance from a psychological or political standpoint. In both these respects, I believe the program continues to be of value. 3. The Polaris submarine is clearly a superior weapons system, but I am impressed with the fact that these weapons will be in short supply for a number of years. The question therefore is not whether a Polaris submarine in Eastern Mediterranean will be better than a Jupiter squadron; rather, it is whether submarine plus squadron gives us greater strength than submarine alone. I believe that it does. If this question of quality is introduced, I hope thought will be given to the effect talk of obsolescence would have on the British Thor and Italian Jupiter positions. 4. Any kind of fixed installation, whether in Europe or North America, is vulnerable. This includes air bases and some of the longer range missiles on which NATO and the United States must place major dependence for the next several years. Even surface ships, when deployed close-in enough to be subject to continuous visual or radar surveillance, cannot be considered invulnerable. 5. Although I am convinced that custody and control arrangements either exist or can be developed to prevent unilateral action on the part of the Turks, the U.S. must still man these units to a considerable extent and for considerable time. In fact, the present program provides for almost complete U.S. manning until Jan 1964 and very probably this will have to be extended. Thus we could easily make a virtue of this necessity and continue substantial U.S. manning for the useful life of the Jupiter squadron. I do not believe, therefore, that the control problem referred to in the cited message is a valid concern. 6. From figures available here, about 80 percent of this project’s cost through FY 63 has been spent or is committed, and thus is not recoverable. It appears that much of the remaining 20 percent (maintenance, operations, etc.) would have to be spent on the same general items if another system replaced the Jupiter. All in all the savings over two years would be relatively small and would not make an impressive contribution if applied to other Turkish Armed Forces projects. 7. Since this project was initiated by NATO authorities through NATO channels, I believe it would be contrary to U.S. as well as NATO interests for the U.S. to consider it now on a bilateral basis. Should there be any modification of the program, action should be taken first through NATO rather than Turkish authorities. It is an admission against interest to say so, but I must express my belief that it may be possible to mold Turkish attitude so as not to bar such a change, even though the mere suggestion of a curtailment of the project would cause NATO and the United States some embarrassment. 8. In conclusion, it is my opinion, as you know, that this is the time to create strength, not reduce it. I believe therefore that this project should continue. 364. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 375/6–1461. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Geneva and Ankara. Paris, May 14, 1961, 2 p.m. 4972. Department pass Defense for Nitze. Geneva for Secretary. From Stoessel. Turkish Foreign Minister Sarper called on General Norstad at SHAPE May 12. Sarper indicated call was made at direction of Gursel. During two-hour conversation following subjects discussed: 1. Sarper stated NATO Oslo meetingMay 5–8. For documentation, see volume XIII. had made very favorable impression. Substance of meeting in itself not0 so impressive, but atmosphere and spirit were excellent and general tone had been positive and constructive. Sarper praised Secretary’s contribution as vital factor in success of meeting. He also felt Stikker’s quiet, effective manner had been most helpful. 2. Sarper reviewed his discussion with Secretary concerning installation Jupiter missiles in Turkey.No record of their conversation relating to missiles has been found. He reported that Secretary had stated Jupiters obsolete, had little if any military value, and in effect would serve no purpose except provide target for Soviet attack in event emergency. Moreover, Polaris system superior and deployment in eastern Mediterranean of Polaris would provide more effective deterrent than land based Jupiters. Under circumstances, Secretary had inquired if Turkey would not prefer stop Jupiter project. Sarper said he had informed Secretary that, while unable judge military value of Jupiters, Turkey considered it necessary go through with project for psychological and political reasons. 3. After relating his conversation with Secretary, Sarper queried Norstad, in his capacity as responsible Allied Commander, regarding his honest evaluation of Jupiter from military standpoint. Norstad in reply summarized appropriate portions of recent message to Secretary Defense on Jupiter (ALO 403 251750Z),Document 363. noting his view that it was not question of whether Polaris superior to Jupiter but of whether both systems together would not give greater strength than Polaris alone. 4. Sarper then said Gursel had requested him obtain Norstad’s opinion of over-all military program submitted by Sunay last month. Norstad replied that program in general looked good and was along lines his earlier conversation with Gursel. Certain details remained to be worked out through JUSMMAT. 5. Sarper remarked that substantial military assistance would be required to meet new program, he wondered if Turkey could therefore expect considerable increase in level of military aid. Norstad said military assistance plans are tentative and have not yet been submitted to Congress. However, from what he knew of President’s program, which contemplates total of $1.6 billion in military assistance, he thought it would be optimistic for Turkey expect same level of military assistance in 1962 as in 1961. It was certainly unrealistic to think in terms of substantial increase in aid. Sarper said if this were situation, what did US have in mind in suggesting increased conventional forces? In reply Norstad merely said that Turkey’s needs had always received most sympathetic consideration from US and he was confident that US would continue recognize Turkey’s special position in future. Sarper next raised problem of G–91 fighter (Topol 25 from Oslo, sent Department ed Secto 52, Ankara 2),Dated May 10, this telegram reported discussions between Rusk and Sarper. (Department of State, Central Files, 396.1–OS/5–1061) saying Turkish Chief of Staff does not want G–91 which had very short range, conventional capability only, and is limited to close support role. Turkey would prefer F–104’s. Norstad explained considerations which made G–91 useful to Turkey. He said no one wished force Turkey accept G–91, even though Turkey had clearly accepted G–91 as early as 1958 and most of project already paid for. Norstad remarked that it was hoped Turkey in time would have some 104’s but they are in no sense alternative to G–91. He also noted G–91 is about 1/7th cost of 104. Sarper clearly uninformed on details this situation. He indicated Tansel and Sunay would continue discussions when they are in Paris for SHAPE–X. 7. Sarper then raised final point, which he labelled as “most important of all” and one which he was specifically instructed by Gursel to discuss with Norstad. He began by recalling Ribbentrop–Molotov agreement of 1939 by which Soviets were to have free hand in moving toward Persian Gulf and eastern Turkey. These are traditional Russian objectives which they have not abandoned. Sarper said “new US strategic concept” has caused concern in Turkish Government from standpoint NATO opposition to Soviet pressures in this area. For example, what would NATO do if Soviets moved into Kars Province and then stopped, presenting West with fait accompli? Norstad said NATO commitment was clear and he read Sarper Article 5 of NATO Charter. All NATO countries are to act individually or collectively to resist attack against NATO member and to restore territory of country attacked, using force if necessary. Norstad was confident this commitment would be honored and he recalled that US had reassured Turkey in this sense on many occasions. US has the forces available in Europe to come to Turkey’s assistance. 8. Sarper said this was very encouraging. Would NATO use conventional or atomic forces to assist Turkey? Norstad replied that assist-ance would be in form of conventional and/or atomic forces as appropriate to circumstances. Norstad went on to say that, over and above NATO commitment, Sarper should realize that it was matter of vital self-interest for US to defend Turkey. If US permitted any territory of any NATO member to be occupied the whole foundation of US policy would collapse. Sarper in concluding conversation said he was reassured by Norstad’s statements and would advise Gursel that he could now have peace of mind. Gavin 365. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.56311/6–1361. Top Secret. Drafted by Magill and approved in S on June 26. Washington, June 13, 1961. SUBJECT IRBM’s for Turkey PARTICIPANTS The Secretary The Under Secretary General Norstad Mr. Nitze, Assistant Secretary of Defense Mr. Talbot, Assistant Secretary for NEA Mr. Stoessel, Political Advisor to General Norstad Robert N. Magill, Deputy Director, European Regional Affairs The Secretary and General Norstad reviewed their respective conversations with Turkish Foreign Minister Sarper on the question of the IRBM program in Turkey. The Secretary said he thought the way the Vienna talksReference is to the Vienna summit meeting between President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev June 3–&4. had gone created a somewhat different situation and that we should re-examine our approach on this question.In a June 9 memorandum for Secretary Rusk, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs Foy Kohler noted that as a result of the positions taken by the Soviet Union at the Vienna summit meeting, “any move to phase out the IRBM project would have very unfortunate repercussions in Turkey and in other NATO countries as well.” He recommended suspending the phasing out of the missiles in Turkey. (Department of State, Central Files, 782.5411/6–961) Mr. Nitze thought that the Vienna talks reinforced the undesirability of asking Sarper again to consider cancellation of the IRBM program. General Norstad agreed and said that it had been the same need for demonstrating increased allied nuclear power, in the context of the “missile gap,” that had prompted the IRBM program for Europe, including those for Turkey, in the first instance. The Secretary asked whether General Norstad had any doubts regarding the ability of the U.S. to control the use of the IRBM’s in Turkey. General Norstad said he had none whatever. He affirmed that it would be impossible for the Turks to take over the entire system during the life expectancy of these weapons and said that it should also be possible to develop a more effective two-key system. The Secretary thought that the main factor in this regard was not the two-key arrangement but whether or not the Turks could obtain the necessary know-how for operation of the entire weapon system. He said the Turks were greatly concerned about their possible isolation in the face of Soviet aggression and thought they might therefore be tempted in an emergency to take over the U.S. key by force. General Norstad said that the IRBM program could be handled in such a manner as to ensure that the Turks would not obtain operational knowledge of the entire system during its effective life. He agreed with the Secretary’s observation about the Turkish fear of isolation and said that both the Greeks and Turks have this concern. They regard the NATO strategic concept of “local hostile action, infiltration or incursion” as a rationalization which the major NATO powers might use to avoid a nuclear response to Soviet action against the NATO flanks. General Norstad said that he did not know quite why the Greeks and Turks felt this way but that he had been careful to reassure them and thought he had been successful. The Secretary concluded that there was a consensus that the IRBM program should not be held up or cancelled and asked Mr. Talbot to inform the White House of the recommendation of the group.In a June 22 memorandum from McGhee to Bundy, the Department of State reported that the deployment of IRBMs to Turkey should continue, noting that Norstad concurred with this judgment. (Ibid., S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 35) Note: After the meeting had broken up, General Norstad said he thought it would be unwise to volunteer anything more to the Turks on the matter. The fact that we would be proceeding with the program would be evidence enough that we had abandoned the idea of suspending or cancelling the program. 366. Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (McGhee) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 35. Secret. Washington, June 22, 1961. SUBJECT Turkish IRBM’s 1. This memorandum is intended to discharge the obligation which the President laid upon me when he asked that I study and report on the matter of Turkish IRBM’s.See Document 361. 2. It has been concluded that action should not be taken to cancel projected deployment of IRBM’s to Turkey. 3. This conclusion is based primarily on the view that, in the aftermath of Khrushchev’s hard posture at Vienna, cancellation of the IRBM deployment might seem a sign of weakness. Moreover: (a) When the Secretary of State raised this matter with the Turkish Foreign Minister at CENTO, the Turkish reaction was strongly adverse. (b) When the Turkish Foreign Minister discussed the problem with SACEUR, General Norstad underlined the military importance of sending IRBM’s to Turkey. This made it unlikely that any attempt to persuade the Turkish military that they should abandon this project would succeed. 4. The Secretary of State has discussed this conclusion with General Norstad, who concurs. George C. McGheePrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 367. Editorial Note A referendum on a new Constitution for the Turkish Republic was held on July 9. The referendum marked a major step toward the return to a system of civilian responsibility for government. However, the process of constitutional restoration was marked by evidence that many military officers opposed a return to party government and by signs of civilian discontent with the role that the military had assigned itself in the new constitutional order. The Embassy reported on these tensions in telegram 1156, March 29 (Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/3–2961) and telegram C–324, June 9 (ibid., 782.5/6–961). The restoration of civilian rule in Turkey began on January 12, when the military government authorized the formation of new political parties. The government permitted the parties to resume activity on April 1. On May 27, the Constituent Assembly approved a draft Constitution and decreed that national elections to approve a new Constitution would be held on July 9. The elections resulted in the approval of the new Constitution by approximately 62 percent of those voting. On July 21, the Constituent Assembly agreed to hold parliamentary elections on October 15. 368. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/8–761. Secret. Ankara, August 7, 1961, 3 p.m. 187. Embtel 151.Telegram 151, July 31, reported that the West German Government had urged Turkey to avoid “draconian” solutions in the punishment of the members of the Menderes regime. (Ibid., 782.00/7–3161) Saw Sarper August 5 to review Nicosia conferenceApparent reference to the Nicosia conference of Ambassadors to the Eastern Mediterranean states, chaired by Under Secretary Bowles July 31–August 2. Documentation on the meeting is ibid., NEA Files: Lot 66 D 5, Regional Operations Conference. and discuss Yassiada and other matters prior Paris meeting with Secretary.Secretary Rusk visited Paris August 3–8 for meetings with the Foreign Ministers of France, the United Kingdom, and the Federal Republic of Germany and a separate meeting with the NATO Permanent Representatives. As it turned out Sarper himself opened Yassiada question, saying that he being very active in matter having discussed with Gursel, Inonu, Aksal and entire Cabinet, all of whom favor moderation. He had also just had two-hour talk with General Sunay who, as head TGS, key figure in army and he believed could now be counted on to work quietly against executions. There had also been some approaches by diplomatic representatives but matter is now one where “job can only be done here” and he believed maximum efforts being made. He requested I pass this on to Secretary in pursuance their previous discussion. I replied Sarper had jumped gun on me a bit since I too had come prepared discuss Yassiada and had in fact prepared some notes on subject in order be as clear as possible. I then spoke from notes to following effect: 1. Matter discussed on several occasions previously on understanding that an internal issue but nevertheless one having potential international ramifications. 2. As trials appear be drawing to close I wished as representative of close friend and ally review again on informal basis but under discretionary authority my government. 3. Turkey has important role in world today as example of country in evolution through democratic process which at same time recognized world responsibilities, serving as bridge between East and West and old and new. 4. Military coup of last year was rational and bloodless; free world had been impressed. 5. Imposition death penalty could alter this image, bearing in mind, among other things that political executions usually associated with non-democratic regimes. 6. Also desirable all NATO powers put best foot forward in this time of danger. 7. These thoughts not new and I had been assured they known to those in decision making positions. 8. Aside form restating our views, I understood some missions had expressed their views more formally and I wished be assured that informal character of our approach, which had seemed appropriate in light delicacy of situation, should not be regarded as indication any lesser concern than more formal representations of other good friends of Turkey. Sarper replied could assure that nature our approach would not mitigate its effectiveness; in fact, he still felt would have been inadvisable for us do otherwise since, in light closeness Turco-American relationship, formal intervention could easily be regarded as threat. He also wished assure that Secretary’s views had been communicated to appropriate government authorities. Finally, noticing that I had spoken from paper, Sarper asked if I intended leaving it with him. I replied it not prepared for that purpose and asked if he actually wanted something or would himself make record of conversation. Sarper said did not think document of usual diplomatic character would be in order but might be useful if he could be given points covered on plain paper. I said would do so and am inclined feel this rather useful device to get our position on record while still maintaining informal character of our approach, especially since would appear any more formal approach would have to be at presidential level in order equate with British, German and perhaps other messages. Text will be possible see Sarper to deliver before departure Paris. If not CFA will do so immediately on return. Foregoing discussed with Assistant Secretary Talbot during his short stopover here August 5 to change planes en route Delhi.Talbot participated with Under Secretary Bowles in a regional Ambassadors meeting in Delhi August 6-d11. He indicated approval both substance approach to Sarper and intended method of informal written confirmation, draft text of which read to him.Text of the paper handed to Sarper was transmitted to the Department of State as airgram A–117, August 8. (Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/8–861) Hare 369. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/9–261. Secret; [distribution indicator not declassified]. Ankara, September 2, 1961, 11 a.m. 332. Department telegram 212.Telegram 212, August 24, noted reports of a coup plot led by Alparslan Turkes and requested the Embassy’s assessment “in light uncertainties revolving around termination Yassiada trials and impending elections.” (Ibid., 782.00/8–2461) We have reviewed with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] in detail their reports on Turkes. We feel plans and intentions revealed entirely consistent with our assessment of Turkes. As to likelihood these plans for coup could succeed, following factors need be borne in mind: 1. Effective power in Turkey today held by established military with no apparent split at top level. We do not consider so-called forces solidarity a separate movement but rather form of undertaking among those presently in control to support certain principles. As long as this unity of purpose continues, it will be exceedingly difficult to organize effective coup. 2. Most Turks in military and practically all in civilian life today desire return to civil government through free elections. While military and civilians might well disagree on role military to play after elections, there is agreement on basic objective. Therefore any move toward coup would have to run against current of popular sentiment. While many people are concerned about outcome of trials and elections, base for organizing coup hardly exists today. 3. We do not know size of so-called Turkes organization but what we do know indicates that it comprises relatively junior officers without many people in key jobs. While one must assume there is larger organization unknown to us, there is no evidence to suggest larger organization would include military leaders with important command positions. Turkes also faces problem of operating from outside country.Turkes, together with 12 other “radical officers” involved in the May 1960 overthrow of the Menderes regime, had been arrested and flown to Turkish Embassies on November 13, 1960. Turkes was assigned as a political officer to the Embassy in New Delhi. 4. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and Embassy have reports of unrest among junior officers in army. Their restlessness apparently still takes form of criticizing democrats for present ills, belief trials dragged on too long without needed punishment, desire see more reforms before government returned to corrupt politicians. It is our belief this group is unorganized and not one and same with Turkes supporters, though it could easily become fruitful field for Turkes philosophy. On balance we conclude that successful coup by Turkes in relatively near future unlikely. Different hypothetical outcome of trials and elections would not alter this conclusion. On other hand, if political scene deteriorates seriously after the elections, Turkes and his supporters would be able to improve considerably their position within armed forces and hence chances for successful coup. Question then might be one of timing. If established military moved first to reassume control of government, chances of coup by Turkes against military would be small. But if military allowed things to rock along with civilian government making demonstration of its inability to cope with problems of government, opportunity for successful move on part of younger officers would be enhanced. Foregoing observations directed primarily to answering Department telegram 212. Fact that our present reading of situation is such as to indicate that coup not logical product should not be interpreted as indicating that we regard present situation including both military and civilian aspects as something about which one can feel relaxed. In addition dissatisfaction of junior officers noted above there is tenseness between political parties and certain air of expectancy among people. If disturbances occur as result trials there is always question in current atmosphere whether ordinary soldier would participate wholeheartedly in repressing civilian unrest even if there were no particular problem at officer level. Hopefully army will, as they repeatedly assert they can, keep situation under control. There is also possibility public reaction may not be as strong as some fear. In sum we seem to be going into situation where another coup in immediate future does not appear in cards for concern. Turkey will face several moments of truth in next few months and how people and government forces react to each could have determining influence on future course events. Hare 370. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/9–1561. Secret; Niact; Presidential Handling. Ankara, September 15, 1961, 8 p.m. 398. Immediately on receipt President’s messageIn telegram 276, September 15, Secretary Rusk instructed Hare to seek a meeting with Gursel and, on behalf of President Kennedy, express deep concern regarding the prospective executions and urge their postponement. (Ibid.) I got in touch with Foreign Minister Sarper with view to arranging see Gursel. Sarper was in Cabinet Meeting at time in another Ministry but returned to Foreign Office to see me. Upon explaining my mission he said he had been expecting me since he had short time before received telephone call from Turkish Ambassador Washington, which had subsequently been confirmed by telegram, conveying identical message communicated to Ambassador by Secretary Rusk except for detail in version sent me to effect coincident arrival our troops could be “acutely embarrassing”.U.S. troops were scheduled to take part in a NATO exercise, “Checkmate.” Rusk may have delivered the message by telephone because no record of a conversation between the Secretary and the Turkish Ambassador has been found and Rusk’s Appointment Books contain no indication of a meeting. (Johnson Library) Sarper said immediately following telephone call from Washington he had gone to see Gursel who was in company of Oz Ilek and Ulay. Since CNU was due to meet shortly thereafter (i.e., 6 p.m.) Gursel asked Sarper to put message in writing as soon as confirmed and send text to him during CNU meeting. In my presence Sarper then dictated message to Gursel relating both to confirmatory telegram from Turkish Ambassador and message transmitted through me, stressing that I was at that time in his presence. (Message was being sent to Gursel as I left office.) I then asked Sarper if there was anything more I could do, noting that I had been instructed to see Gursel personally but circumstances seemed to have overtaken that. Sarper replied very categorically that there was absolutely nothing further that either my government or I could do. Our conscience should be clear in that regard. I asked Sarper if 6 p.m. meeting would be definitive and if so what outcome might be expected. He said Cabinet had been in virtually continuous session for past week and had met on two occasions with CNU. In course joint meetings Sarper, Minister Finance Kurdas and Minister Justice Turkoglu had expressed views on behalf Cabinet as quite strongly advising that possible death penalties should not be carried out. Sarper said, in addition to Cabinet, Gursel and all armed forces commanders shared this view. As regards CNU, committee was divided with “seeming majority on our side”. Everything possible being done and we could await results. Sarper added that present situation is turning point in Turkey’s history and both sides fully aware of that. Problem is that on one side is reason and experience and on other rashness and disposition resort to brute force. Concerning reported illness of Menderes, Sarper said Menderes had apparently kept supply sleeping pills for occasion and had taken overdose but that efforts now being made revive him. Sarper commented it was indeed ironic to be making such effort to save his life merely to be able to hang him. Sarper also noted that there had been irresponsible rumors that attempts might be made against his life and lives of other Ministers supporting cause of clemency but Cabinet members had not been impressed and were sticking to their positions. In conclusion Sarper requested that this frank discussion be held very closely since any leak could be quite disastrous.In telegram 400 from Ankara, September 16, Hare reported that Sarper had provided a detailed summary of the discussions within the CNU over clemency. (Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/9–1661) Ultimately, the Turkish leadership reached a compromise that commuted the death sentences of 11 former government officials. The CNU also agreed in a separate action to spare the life of former President Bayar because of his advanced age. Turkey executed former Foreign Minister Zorlu and former Finance Minister Polatkan on September 16 and former Prime Minister Menderes on September 17. Hare 371. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/10–2461. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Istanbul. Ankara, October 24, 1961, 2 p.m. 525. Deptel 366.Telegram 366, September 24, informed the Embassy that Tulga had sought U.S. endorsement of a military takeover and instructed: “In reply any responsible Turk inquiry, you may if you consider it desirable, privately suggest that second Turk military takeover could have most damaging effect on Turkey’s international position.” (Ibid.) In seeming contrast Tulga statement that acceptable four party coalition now impossible, question of nature of new civilian government still under negotiation in Ankara between military and political leaders according early morning reports. While we cannot rule out possibility of divisions within military, it seems likely Tulga generally reflects thinking top Ankara commanders but latter have not yet finally closed door to some acceptable resolution of issues between parties and military. CNU made clear its position in light election results week ago (Embtel 502)Telegram 502, October 17, reported on the likely composition of the Grand National Assembly and the political implications of the elections. (Ibid., 782.00/10–1761) Turkish elections were held on October 15. The Republican Party won 36.7 percent of the vote and 173 seats. The two parties constituted from the leadership of the Democratic Party, the Justice Party and New Turkey Party, received 34.8 percent (158 seats) and 13.7 percent (65 seats), respectively. and has continued pursue this approach in discussions ever since. We believe their position basically in accord with top military. In addition desire see Cabinet not under former DP control, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] military seeking agreement on following principles: (1) Gursel to be President, (2) No exploitation Yassiada verdict, (3) No amnesty for political prisoners, (4) Ataturk and CNU reforms to be supported, and (5) CNU decisions on military retirements and reforms to be maintained. Critical point has apparently been reached with impending opening GNA and military desire see satisfactory agreement prior that time but negotiations are still in process. Party leaders met with CNU and military commanders until early hours of morning lend [and?] [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] are back in session now with Gursel and Commanders. Until we know final decision it difficult tell just where we stand, but in light views attributed to Inonu in Embtel 519Telegram 519, October 21, commented on possible formulas for a governing coalition. (Ibid., 782.00/10–2161) one cannot rule out possibility of modus vivendi which would bridge gap for period of time. Critical questions would then be whether party leaders could bring newly elected deputies along with them and whether commanders have full control of military. As to its position we agree entirely with line set forth in reference telegram. At same time it important bear in mind that, failing agreement with political leaders, military likely take over on their terms aims become future government. [sic] Therefore any indication US views should be made with delicate touch so as not run risk needlessly exacerbating future relations. Tulga query in particular set forth in such terms that it does not lend itself to flat answer. Therefore reply should be in terms that US does desire stability and pro-Western orientation but we would hope these could be found within democratic traditions of Western world.In telegram 526, October 24, the Embassy reported that the military had offered a list of its candidates for governmental positions to Inonu and that negotiations were proceeding. It added: “At one point in discussion when Inonu suggested these issues be held for decision after GNA convened, Ulay, who participated in meeting as rep mil rather than CNU, is reported to have laughed and said GNA would not convene unless these points all settled first.” (Ibid., 782.00/10–2461) Turkish civilian leaders accepted the military’s conditions and signed a protocol confirming these accords on October 24. The Grand National Assembly elected Gursel as President on October 26. Hare 372. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Embassy in FranceSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/10–2661. Secret. Repeated to the Department of State as telegram 540, which is the source text. Ankara, October 26, 1961, 6 p.m. 68. Paris pass Stoessel from Ambassador. Your telegram 21.Not found. As indicated our telegrams 506 and 522Telegram 506, October 19, gave the Embassy’s analysis of the outcome of Turkish elections. Telegram 522, October 24, reported on negotiations for the election of a President. (Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/10–1961 and 782.00/10–2461, respectively) there is not in our judgment uniformity of thought and objectives between military forces and political parties in Turkey today. Basic conflict between parties and military has been important factor during election period, has been especially highlighted over past few days and could become decisive in future. Regret if our reporting has not made clear basis for this conclusion, but following analysis of forces at issue, as we see them, may help clarify. Essential difference between military and civilian concerns role of military forces in government. Party leaders and independent intelligentsia visualize Democratic system more or less as we know it in US, with military subordinate to duly elected civil authority. At same time, however, there is somewhat contradictory and perhaps grudging awareness of fact military on whole conceives of their role as protectors of Constitution and of future of Turkish people as they see it. As consequence most Turks initially welcomed May 27 coup as bloodlessly ending period of great strain and potential strife. Developments since, however, have in general alienated civil elements, who have come to desire end of military and return to civil rule. Military forces themselves are by no means united on political goals. There are those, probably encompassing present top commanders, who desire return to civilian government but with military holding watching brief on conduct that government. There is also group younger officers who are disenchanted with politicians, have never favored return to civil government. This group, probably unorganized in any formal sense, may include elements which per se favor military dictatorship and those which simply believe there remains basic job of reform and education before government can again be entrusted to civilians. Difficult specifically delineate these groups and reports regarding them vary widely [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] identifying individual officers representing various schools of thought within military. Among parties military as whole and CNU favored RPP since that party shared enmity for DP regime. As one major party surviving May 27, RPP went along with coup and subsequent military government, but determiners this policy always viewed it as best approach in terms national welfare and one most likely get military out of government. RPP therefore prepared accept CNU reforms, refrain from any punitive measures. As such it became party most acceptable to CNU and military. While many military officers and some CNU emotionally prejudiced in favor of RPP, area of support party recently won in these circles based far more on feeling party was safe, would preserve reforms on which military insist. This is not because RPP has been tool of military but because party leaders consider this course best means of gaining power and ultimately reestablishing proper balance between military and civil authority. Justice Party is something quite different. Original impetus for its formation came from retired officers who hated CNU because these officers were retired and took to political forum in hope reversing August 1960 purge of military. Furthermore and even more importantly as party, JP has successfully appealed to voters in wide areas of country as logical successor to former Democrat Party, whose members primarily interested in rectifying wrong of May 27 and some of whom desire avenge execution their leader. Party if it came to power would therefore offer little physical security for former CNU members, little support for so-called reforms CNU considered important. If RPP had won majority, transition to civil rule would probably have taken place without incident. Fact that elements basically opposed to regime of last seventeen months won majority maximized fears that reform may be reformed and even Yassiada repeated with new cast. Fact that no group won majority and future involves uneasy coalition strengthened elements in military which oppose return to civil rule, argue that average Turk voter not ready for democratic government. Military leaders (meaning leaders regular military establishment and not CNU) have in past few days pressed for four-party coalition which would have silent military backing and probably control. While this might appear minimize immediate concern within military over danger of hostile corrupt civilian politicians coming to power, it is but a temporary palliative and not solution and basic conflict between military and parties will remain of continuing concern. Hare 373. Memorandum for RecordSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.5–MSP/11–1461. Top Secret (Secret When Separated From Enclosure). Prepared in the Office of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The enclosure, General Sunay’s prepared statement, is not printed. Washington, November 14, 1961. SUBJECT Conversations Between General Lemnitzer, Chairman, JCS and General Sevdet Sunay, Chairman, Joint Staff, Turkish Armed Forces, 1100 Hours, 13 November 1961 PARTICIPANTS Turkey General Sunay, GJS Turkish Armed Forces Admiral Orkun, Turkish Naval attache Brigadier General Enginsoy, J-4 Turkish General Staff Colonel Naiboglu, Interpreter United States General Lemnitzer USA, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Major General Parker, USA, Special Assistant, CJCS Colonel McCaffrey, USA, Chairman’s Staff Group 1. General Sunay delivered a prepared statement outlining his views for the improvement of the Turkish Armed Forces. (Copy attached hereto.) In summary, General Sunay stated that increased effectiveness in MAP could be obtained through closer cooperation. The Military Assistance Program should be jointly prepared based on mutually agreed requirements and priorities. Otherwise, automatic supply would continue causing waste, delay, and misunderstanding. 2. MAP should be improved qualitatively and quantitatively. 3. US economic aid administered by agencies such as ICA should be directed primarily toward activities relating to defense posture. General Lemnitzer’s support on this measure was requested. 4. General Sunay suggested a conference as soon as possible with staff representation on the highest military staff level aiming at the attainment of an improved and accelerated MAP. He suggested this meeting could be held at General Lemnitzer’s convenience or on 15 December at EUCOM at the conclusion of the NATO meetings. In conclusion, General Sunay expressed appreciation for the meeting and the opportunity to make his views available. 5. General Lemnitzer stated that he was grateful for the statement of views by General Sunay. With respect to MAP, the Chairman stated he had had many years of experience in defending the program before the US Congress. Last year, Congress gave us less than we asked for and this required world-wide readjustments. The Turkish program is now the largest grant aid program in NATO. The US is, of course, not able to meet all the requirements advanced by all governments for military aid. However, within the resources allocated to Turkey, every effort is made to meet the most important requirements of Turkey. General Lemnitzer emphasized it was not a Washington program. Turkish requirements prepared in Ankara are the basis of the program. JUSMMAT was established there for this purpose. 6. In response to a question for specifics, General Enginsoy, J–4, Turkish Armed Forces, stated that some equipment (AF tires) of the wrong type had been delivered. He was also of the opinion that there was an improper balance in communications equipment furnished. The Turks desired a logistics system based on requirements, not on automatic supply. 7. In answer to General Lemnitzer’s query as to what would be the object of a meeting to be held at the conclusion of the NATO conference in Paris on 15 December, General Sunay stated the purpose of the meeting would be to achieve an effective and expedited military assistance program to meet the Berlin crisis in order to get the best results from the aid program. 8. General Lemnitzer stated that he had one or two problems to discuss with General Sunay. We would like to know how we could progress the establishment of a tropospheric scatter site in the vicinity of Ankara. This communication facility was essential to provide links to the US custodial sites in accordance with US law so that nuclear weapons can be prepositioned for use by the Turkish Air Force. General Lemnitzer made it clear that while these weapons were now available, they would not be delivered to US storage sites in Turkey until the communications problem was solved. 9. General Sunay stated that Turkey does not object to the US having custody of the radar and signal sites and to the US operation of them. They feel, however, that their own personnel should have access to these sites and to receive training in operating them. A second point concerned area acquisition. The US had contacted and made certain agreements with local people without the knowledge of the Turkish General Staff. Later the Turkish General Staff was requested to pay for the acquisition of land and in this way became aware of the problem. (Note: Ambassador Hare has reported that “after considerable research JUSMMAT and TUSLOG had been unable to locate examples unauthorized use of land as claimed Sunay …”—Ankara No. 262, 18 August 1961.Not printed. (Ibid., 711.52/8–1861) 10. General Lemnitzer suggested that two different problems were involved. One problem concerned telecommunications and the other referred to communications receiving sites. However, negotiations last July between Admiral Frost’s group and the Turkish General Staff did not work out well. General Lemnitzer suggested that negotiations be resumed as soon as possible. 11. With respect to the proposed conference after the December NATO meetings, General Lemnitzer stated he felt it would be unwise to delay this long and suggested a date as early as 24 November 1961 which was agreed upon as acceptable to Turkey. He suggested that General Enginsoy during his contacts with US staff could identify issues and work out solutions where possible. If any problems remain, they could be discussed between General Sunay and himself in Paris at the conclusion of the NATO meetings. 12. General Lemnitzer emphasized that the established channel from the Turkish General Staff to the Department of Defense via JUSMMAT and EUCOM was the one that should be followed in dealing with MAP matters. He stated it was his experience that whenever one tried to short circuit this channel it not only did not expedite matters but in fact delayed them. 13. General Lemnitzer summed up by stating that there was action required by both General Sunay and himself. General Lemnitzer stated he would make arrangements with Admiral Smith of the Joint Staff for Brigadier General Enginsoy to discuss specific MAP problems with appropriate US staff representatives. He urged General Sunay to take the necessary action in his area to resolve the problems related to the construction of the troposcatter communications facilities in order that this facility, which is so important to both countries and to NATO could be completed as soon as possible. General Lemnitzer felt the conference had been very helpful to him and he appreciated having the benefit of General Sunay’s views. 374. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 2004. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Fessenden and approved in S on December 30. The meeting was held in the office of the Turkish NATO Delegation. Paris, December 15, 1961, 7:30 p.m. US/MC/14 NATO MINISTERIAL MEETING Paris, December 13–15, 1961 PARTICIPANTS Foreign Minister Sarper Secretary of State Assistant Secretary Kohler Mr. Russell Fessenden SUBJECT Aid For Turkey Foreign Minister opened the conversation by recalling Ambassador Hare’s conversation with himself and President Inonu.Hare reported on this December 8 meeting in telegram 674, December 9 (ibid., Central Files, 811.0082/12–961) and in telegram 681, December 12 (ibid., 882.00/12–1261). After describing the relatively favorable post-election situation Turkey, Sarper outlines the following principal tasks facing the new Government: 1. Putting the Turkish Army back in the position “where it rightly belongs.” 2. Healing the wounds of the recent past such as the trials and hangings. 3. Instituting a regime of economic austerity in order to strengthen the economy. Sarper stressed that continued political stability in Turkey and the success of the newly-elected democratic government depends heavily on a sound economic situation. Austerity measures about to be instituted will be unpopular and can weaken the government. Hence US aid is most important. Military aid presently is inadequate in quantity and quality—especially in quality. It is impossible to carry out the tasks assigned to Turkey by SACEUR with aid at its present levels. Turkey needs $100 million additional military aid and $200 million additional economic aid over and above the level of past years. The situation is made more difficult because of $126 million repayment of consolidated debts under the OEEC program. Sarper said he was most anxious to be able to convey something encouraging to President Inonu as a result of the conversation with the Secretary. In response to the Secretary’s question, Sarper explained that the government’s Interim Plan for 1962 is completed and accepted. The Five-year Plan for 1963–68 has been written and is being translated into English. Sarper indicated the text would be available to Mr. Van Dyke of the US Embassy in Ankara. In response to the Secretary’s question as to whether IBRD would be brought into the picture, Sarper implied it would be, adding that he felt Eugene Black had been somewhat mistreated by the former government and that he hoped Black would be more prone to cooperate with the new government. The Secretary pointed out that limitations on the overall amount of aid of various types present very difficult problems in meeting Turkey’s requests. Supporting assistance in particular has been cut back. This type of direct budget support aid has been under very great pressure in Washington. The military aid situation is also tight. More flexibility has been obtained for DLF loans. In general the requested large increases over the present level will prove very difficult. The US will also want to see whether some other international agencies cannot help in Turkish situation. Re PL 480,Formally titled the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act, enacted July 10, 1954. For text, see 68 Stat. 454. Sarper said he had heard a rumor that US plans to work out a $90 million arrangement with Egypt, whereas only $70 million is contemplated for Turkey. Sarper complained that this seemed unreasonable. Nasser gets more for being “nasty.” Sarper made a strong plea for help to the new Turkish government, saying that Turkey itself desperately needs the new democratic government, and the US needs it just as much. Sarper said he had gone through the revolution and knew what it meant. The underlying problem for the new government will be economic. It is hard to say what will happen in Turkey if the new government does not succeed. The Secretary repeated that the major problem is the large figure for additional aid. He said he was unable talk in terms of specific figures at this time, but that the US will do the best it can. He wanted, however, to avoid saying something now that would lead to later disappointment in Ankara when the final figures become known. The Secretary pointed out that we had already made considerable aid commitments to the revolutionary government. This was, after all, still aid to Turkey. Sarper said this was true, adding that our aid to the revolutionary government had been instrumental in helping the elections come out as well as they did. Our aid has helped lay the basis for a good government now. In concluding the Secretary promised to do the best we can. Specifically: (1) The US will do what is possible on supporting assistance, although direct budget support type of aid is not looked on with favor in Washington and the amounts have been cut back. (2) DLF aid is another possibility. It will, of course, be better applied if there is satisfactory long-term Turkish planning. (3) As for PL 480, the US is ready to start talks immediately. (4) International agencies are yet another possibility. The OECD is important here. (5) As for MAP, end-item assistance is very important, and will receive due attention. The Secretary pointed out that Ambassador Hare will be the key man in dealing with this problem. The Secretary emphasized the important role which President Kennedy has assigned to Ambassadors in coordinating all programs. The Secretary concluded by saying Sarper could report complete assurance regarding our interest in getting the new Turkish government moving on a satisfactory basis. Although the amount in dollars may not be what the government feels it requires, we will certainly do what we can. 375. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.5/1–362. Secret. Repeated to Paris and Izmir. Ankara, January 3, 1962, 5 p.m. 736. Paris for USRO and Stoessel. Deptel 501.Telegram 501, December 21, 1961, provided the Embassy with specific guidance on military and economic policy regarding Turkey. (Ibid., 782.5/12–1361) Saw Inonu this morning and, with Sarper translating, gave him carefully prepared statement on military and economic assistance based on guidance from Department supplemented by locally generated information and argument. Spoke from “talking paper”, leaving copy for subsequent reference on understanding it not to be considered formal document but rather informal presentation subject to further explanation or elaboration as required. This deemed essential in view complexity of problem and difficulty otherwise of having anything approaching accurate record of what said. Inonu was very tentative throughout and frequently asked questions indicating he not only interested but had much better grasp of subject than at our first meeting.See footnote 1, Document 374. Somewhat unexpectedly, he was especially responsive to those parts of presentation emphasizing planning and self-help. He also seemed accept without question limitations under which we work in assistance field and to appreciate suggestions made to invigorate assistance program within our capabilities. At conclusion of presentation he made these observations. Firstly, he expressed appreciation for our effort to clarify aid situation. Said he now had some understanding of complexity of assistance processes and believed our presentation would be useful guide. He would turn it over to officials concerned with aid for study and necessary action. Secondly, he said he was still troubled regarding military situation. If by misfortune war should come, result could be quick and decisive. That meant advance preparedness at necessary level to meet responsibility. But war now extremely expensive and difficult see how Turkey can continue burden, even with present level assistance of US. While emphasizing his preoccupation with this subject he also indicated that his ideas not yet thought through but he said would want discuss again since he very troubled. Thirdly, he said wished make clear that Turkey, while wishing avoid needless provocation of Soviets, is firm adherent of Western bloc and will not change. At present time, Soviets conducting “aggressive peace offensive” which will foreseeably fail and be followed by concerted campaign of abuse by Soviets and their satellites but Turkey is used to such tactics and will know how to maintain its position in the future as it has in the past. In this connection, he gave summary his conversation with Soviet Ambassador Rijov which corresponded exactly with Sarper version as reported Embtel 731.Telegram 731, January 3, reported on Rijov’s efforts to pressure Turkey into abandoning its alliance with the United States. (Department of State, Central Files, 661.82/1–362) At conclusion, I mentioned recent spate of pernicious press articles on US aid, saying I had kept silent so far but would suggest might be counteracted by taking line that situation with regard aid good and merely question trying make it better as contrasted press tendency to discuss in terms of rectifying intolerable situation. Inonu agreed and asked which of us should take initiative. I suggested both of us and he acquiesced. Although nature of our response was in quite different vein from that of Inonu’s original request for large lump sums for supplemental assistance he not only refrained from pressing his original demands but actually seemed be appreciative of lengths to which we had gone in trying understand his problem and in taking action or making suggestions to assist. It is, of course, to be expected that development of specific points will involve tough bargaining later and that further demands will be made but would seem that we may have at least gotten Inonu back on track and in surprisingly good spirit. Hare 376. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.56340/1–1962. Secret. Repeated to Paris and Wiesbaden Air Force Base. Ankara, January 19, 1962, 8 p.m. 786. Department pass USIA and Defense. Paris pass Stoessel and McGuire. In conversation yesterday with Chief JUSMMAT, General Sunay stressed urgent desire Turkish armed forces continue maximum classification MRBM bases Turkey. He specifically asked him “make representations through Ambassador” indicating he was quite disturbed by stories on MRBM bases here appearing outside Turkey. He also asked “USIS and other information agencies” be requested “observe his desires in this matter.” While advantages revision Turkish attitude towards MRBMs in view our declassification clearly understood here, it is apparent General Sunay reflects strongest possible feelings Turkish armed forces on this point. Since this is request of Turkish military, we should give great weight to it. Since it is also exactly in accord with GOT policy vis-à-vis the Soviet Union, it deserves even more weight. Russians undoubtedly know missiles here, but publicity over matter like waving red flag at bull and would contradict the rather strong and very good statement Prime Minister Inonu made to Soviet Ambassador on Turkish-Soviet relations (Embassy telegram 731).See footnote 3, Document 375. As regards external press coverage Turkish MRBM, we have obviously little control. However, we should seek minimize coverage resulting from pending firings Turkish battalion Cape Canaveral and avoid official links or DOD releases which might suggest we are treating subject less discreetly in US than desired by General Sunay.In telegram 592 to Ankara, January 26, the Department of State requested that the Embassy inform Sunay that it would make “every effort” to minimize press coverage of Jupiter test firings but pointed out that the existence of U.S.-Turkish Jupiter deployment arrangements had been public knowledge for a “long time.” Department of State, Central Files, 782.56340/1–1962) Hare 377. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.00/1–2962. Secret; Limit Distribution. Ankara, January 29, 1962, 1 p.m. 823. Embtel 801.Telegram 801, January 23, analyzed the causes of plotting against the civilian government within elements of the Turkish military. (Ibid., 782.00/1–2362) In course informal talk with Foreign Minister Sarper evening January 27 he indicted awareness current unrest and plotting within military, saying rumor now circulating to effect this Embassy sympathetic military take-over. He said he knew us too well believe any such thing and had so told Prime Minister but wondered how such stories could get started. He speculated might be Soviet inspired or propagated by interested Turkish officers. I gave Sarper categorical assurance we completely support civilian government and this is line our entire staff instructed to take. Said he could so confirm to Prime Minister. Re origin of stories, I said nature our relationship such that we naturally have extensive contacts with Turkish military which might be adversely exploited if any such officers were of restive type as I suspected few might be. However, this would be gross misrepresentation since our stand absolutely clear. Sarper said Chief TGS Sunay aware of activities of what he termed military junta. He described it as having origins in loosely organized group of military officers who last summer became concerned that principles of May 27 coup would not continue be applied. He said at that time Sunay told those officers he supported same principles and asserted right as senior general to lead defense those principles by military. By inference he indicated however this not relationship existing today between Sunay and those anxious for military take-over. Sarper’s comments indicative fairly widespread knowledge and concern about military plotting among top commanders and civilian government leaders including Inonu. Evidence they actively trying counter this movement provided by Sunay’s current visit to Istanbul and his meeting with officers there January 25 [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. Inonu also went Istanbul January 28. Announced purpose his visit is contact with business community but it also reported [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. He may take opportunity present case for civilian government to military officers there. Press reports Inonu talked to Sunay for hours after his arrival Istanbul January 28. Hare 378. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 375/4–362. Secret. Repeated to Ankara. Paris, April 3, 1962, 8 p.m. 4677. From Stoessel. Following is report on General Norstad’s visit to Ankara April 2 at invitation Prime Minister Inonu. General Norstad concludes that primary purposes of invitation were (1) to re-emphasize strong Turkish ties with US and (2) to express concern regarding what Turks fear may be tendency of US to differentiate between “general war” and “local actions”, with result that US would not come to Turks assistance in event of latter. General Norstad also took occasion to stress his view of importance of stability in Turkey and role which armed forces could play in this. Details follow. General Norstad had long, extremely cordial talk with Prime Minister Inonu [who] said he wished give Norstad most positive assurances that Turkey would live up to its commitments to NATO, to the US and to West. He expressed himself in strong terms and reiterated this point several times. He spoke very warmly of US. He mentioned that one of problems in last two world wars was doubt as to whether US would enter conflict. Now uncertainly regarding US role has been prevented by membership of US in NATO. Nevertheless, he went on to say that Turkey is somewhat concerned about repeated discussions of difference between general war on one hand and, on other hand, incursions, infiltrations and local actions. One of Turkey’s great worries is that local aggression against her would not be regarded as important enough to warrant response by US or other NATO countries. General Norstad responded that NATO treaty does not differentiate between types of attack; if country can not deal with situation itself then other NATO countries would come to its aid. US had demonstrated amply its ability to support Turkey in event of attack, and he referred to presence of Sixth Fleet in Mediterranean, Exercise Checkmate, et cetera. He also mentioned development of mobile force. Dispatch of mobile force to assist in coping with local incident would serve to put defense against such incident on NATO-wide basis. General Norstad said there should be no question on part of Turkey about sincerity and determination of US in doing everything necessary to defend Turkey. Inonu picked up Norstad’s reference to requirement that country attacked should attempt to cope with attack by its own means in first instance. He said this raised question of status of Turkish forces and need for help in equipment and supply of forces. He thanked Norstad for US support in past and asked understanding for continuing Turkish need in this regard. Army requires increased mobility. Navy needs modernization. As for Air Force, Inonu said “it needs everything”. General Norstad said US is aware of Turkish problems concerning equipment. He reminded Inonu of extensive US aid to Turkey in past and said he was sure that US would continue to accord special consideration to Turkish needs. He mentioned that this also was NATO problem and that he would insure that other NATO countries were made aware of situation. General Norstad strongly recommended that Turkish authorities deal closely with US Embassy and JUSMMAT on aid problems. Inonu spoke very warmly of Ambassador Hare as good friend of Turkey with deep understanding of country. These comments concerning Ambassador were echoed in later conversations with Foreign Minister Erkin and General Sunay. General Norstad saw President Gursel in afternoon. General Sunay also participated in conversation. General Norstad found that there had been great change physically in Gursel since he last saw him about a year and half ago.Gursel had suffered a stroke on April 27, 1961. Although his mind seems clear, he appeared to speak with some difficulty and had lost his former animation. Gursel also spoke of ties with NATO and emphasized his view that NATO countries should stand together as one, “like a chain.” Gursel said that suppression of recent attempted revolt had left government in stronger position. He had been pleased with manner in which Constitution had been established and Parliament installed, remarking that these actions had caused less trouble than anticipated. For future, Gursel foresaw gradual improvement in situation. General Norstad in his remarks (which were particularly for General Sunay’s benefit) emphasized that political stability is essential to over-all improvement. Undoubtedly some public funds could be obtained for economic progress, but real requirement was for private capital. This could only come if confidence is established in government. He felt this was biggest task facing Turkish authorities, both military and political. Gursel readily agreed with these remarks. Sunay obviously took them in but showed no reaction. In separate talk with General Sunay, General Norstad likewise stressed importance of stability. He said armed forces have been successful in controlling situation and overcoming crisis; now attention should be given to building up strength and cohesion of armed forces, bearing in mind contribution they could make to stability of Turkish Government. General Norstad met briefly with Foreign Minister Erkin and Defense Minister Sancar. These conversations were quite general and no specific problems were raised. As in other talks, stress was on Turkish ties with NATO. In more general discussion, Inonu expressed concern about discussion of Rapacki plan in GenevaFor text of the Rapacki Plan for a Denuclearized and Limited Armaments Zone in Europe submitted to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee in Geneva on March 28, see Documents on Disarmament, 1962, vol. I, pp. 201–205. and mentioned news report that provisions of plan would result in limitations being placed on Greece and Turkey. Norstad said he was not aware of extension of plan to these countries, in any case, Rapacki presentation was simply new version of old plan which had been rejected in past by West. Gavin 379. Telegram From the Consulate in Istanbul to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–JO/8–3062. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Ankara, Athens, Baghdad, London, Nicosia, and Rome. There is no time of transmission on the source text. Istanbul, August 30, 1962. 55. CODEL Johnson.Vice President Johnson visited Ankara during a 5-nation tour of the Middle East and East Asia. [Here follows an account of Vice President Johnson’s meeting with President Gursel.] 2. Following is record of conversation between Vice President and PriMin Inonu in latter’s office August 27. Also present were FonMin Erkin, Ambassador Hare, Asst. Secretary Rowan, Chief of Protocol Erez, Komer and Ashford. VP voiced his happiness at being in Turkey, and great pleasure which visit had afforded him. Said he had just been in meeting with President Gursel in which Gursel had expressed concern over slowness modernization Turkish Armed Forces. VP observed that even in US, military cannot get all things it feels it needs. Aware there is concern in Turkey over type of aircraft possessed by Turkey as against those which Iraq has received from USSR. Noteworthy, however, that modern Iraqi plane had been shot down by what Turks described as old American supplied aircraft, showing what great fighters Turks are. VP said our represent military assistance plans, which will be discussed in more detail later, provide for delivery two squadrons F–104–G’s to Turkey. PriMin asked when these aircraft would be delivered. VP replied US officials would be able to talk about details later. Foreign aid bill itself is still under debate in Congress. Turkey would also receive 225,000 M–1 rifles. VP noted these are difficult years for US GNP and government revenues have been less than were anticipated. National debt limit must be raised by statute from $300 billion to 308 billion. There will be considerable deficit this year and next. New tax measure will be acted on in Congress this week, and President will send broad tax reform measure to Congress in January. We must spend in area of $60 billion in coming year for military and space programs. We also have commitments to provide foreign assistance in various forms, economic, military, or defense support in a few instances. Since World War II we have already spent more than $80 billion in various foreign programs. We have political problem much like one the Prime Minister would face if he wished to make large Turkish Government expenditure in some faraway place like Texas. In [omission in the source text] one with whom we would [garble] we have more confidence than we have in Turkish people. VP said he was proud of position he took as young Congressman on Greek-Turkish aid 15 years ago when former Vice President Wallace was opposing. His philosophy was that if you allow a bully to force you off the street and make you [garble] home down an alley, he will come up the next day and kick you off your front porch. We very proud of performance of Turkish people. Since passage of original foreign aid bill, we have put almost $4 billion into aid to Turkey. This is almost as much as total annual federal budget when VP first came to Washington. Times have chanced since then; in FY ’63 we are tentatively planning to provide Turkey in neighborhood of $185 million in military assistance and $140 million to $150 million in economic assistance as well as $50 to $60 million in defense support. All information from projected levels of aid for Turkey is highly classified and should it become known in other countries exactly what we are doing in Turkey there could be unfortunate consequences. These figures have been cited to indicate our great confidence and interests in Turkey. “They are not just conversation; we put our money where our mouth is.” VP concluded by asking Prime Minister for any thoughts and comments which could be taken back to Washington. At this point the PriMin asked his interpreter to take notes on the aid figures mentioned by the Vice President. VP repeated figures and added that he had approved $33 million development plan to Etibank for hydro-electric dam project, though we did not want to make public announcement of loan at this time. Moreover all projected aid figures are subject to change by Congress. These figures represented our thinking at time aid request was submitted to Congress, and amount projected for Turkey is about $400 million. This information extremely confidential. With regard development loans, cash flow may vary from year to year, depending on many factors, but this indicated range of our thinking. This information on US [aid] to Turkey does not constitute commitment. We are saying to Iran, Greece and to other NATO countries that we cannot give them defense support, but we are not saying this to Turkey. Prime Minister Inonu said VP had brought to Turkey an atmosphere of security. Fact that greetings of friendship from President Kennedy had been brought by such a distinguished representative constituted cause great happiness for all Turkish people. Vice President’s statements show US following Turkey’s problems closely. After passing through severe crisis, Turkey has reached solid decision to adopt democratic system and stick with it. VP knew that other countries passing through similar crises were unable recover in such short time. Results of past year are very promising. A second problem occupying Turkey, said Prime Minister, is institution of planned development. We have been working for a year to secure the agreement among our friends which implementation of our plans will require. We have found US a helpful friend in these matters in NATO and other international organizations. Securing the required legislation in connection with development plans is not easy. Just this morning he had discussed this problem with his colleagues and had talked to President Gursel about it. Prime Minister Inonu said President Gursel was taking advantage of the presence of so distinguished a visitor to explain Turkey’s military requirements. They had already discussed these requirements several times with distinguished military representatives and with Ambassador Hare. These discussions are continuing. They are asking several things from US and US is doing its best to meet these demands. Of course, US is trying to meet demands of other countries and has heard each one claim that it is more important than others. PriMin said he had one specific point to make in this connection, which is necessity of accelerating delivery of military aircraft to Turkey. In current attitudes of Iraq he perceived a dangerous situation which originated with the ideas of the Iraqi Head of State. NATO defense is a big problem, concerning aggression by major powers, and with the extensive planning required left in hands of NATO commander. The area of Iraq, however, is theroretically out of NATO, and Iraq is engaged in arms race with Turkey as concerns military aircraft. They have done well in first lap of this race. It should be expected that Turkey’s small neighbors might take advantage of smalll incidents which affect adversely their relationships with Turkey. We have plans for modernizing our armed forces, and some measures have been taken to implement these plans, however, we badly need acceleration of deliveries to provide our requirements in military aircraft. We touched by VP’s appreciation of skill of our armed forces, but strength of our military aviation is closely tied to quality of our equipment. Acceleration of delivery of M–1 rifles would be greatly appreciated, and we expect the two squadrons of F–104–G’s to arrive as soon as possible. In light of recent developments it would be desirable add another squadron these aircraft. With regard to economic plan, PriMin Inonu said situation has not matured sufficiently to explain latest developments even to Ambassador Hare. GOT believes strongly, however, that implementation of its plans will require closest interest and probably additional assistance on part of US. One of results of our determination to adopt a democratic system following revolution is that our social problems have become more important and more heated, and success of our system will depend largely on implementation of our development plans. We feel our political difficulties will be resolved if our planned economic development is successful. PriMin Inonu said US-Turkish relations were best possible. Ambassador Hare being regularly informed of our internal and external policies. We have nothing to hide. Two countries with mutual destinies require mutual confidence and understanding. VP’s visit has strengthened our confidence in America. Every word of VP’s has been very important to us. We request him take back to President word of our close friendship and partnership, our heartfelt greetings, and our warmest regards. Gradually, as our economic and military plans are implemented, our position will be better understood. We hope Vice President will take with him pleasant memories of Turkey. The VP replied that he would take away best of memories, particularly of PriMin. PriMin remarked he wanted find out from Ambassador Hare just when new aircraft would arrive. Turk military attached great importance to these aircraft. VP said that he would have US military talk to Ambassador Hare about it. We will have problems on delivery time but Ambassador Hare will find out what is best that can be done. Such aircraft are of course a highly competitive item. My authority to convey news of their programming indicates importance we attach to Turkey. In subsequent brief private discussion with Prime Minister Inonu and Foreign Minister Erkin, VP re-emphasized that the aid figures he had mentioned to President and PriMin should be recognized as those being considered by the Executive branch and still subject to cutting by the Congress. He cited difficulties that we are having with the Passman committee, indication it might cut as much as $90 million from new aid appropriation. He told FonMin Erkin that, as a former Turkish Ambassador in Washington, he would remember complications of our appropriations procedure and that as a result no aid figures could be taken as final. FonMin Erkin said that Turkish Government fully understood this problem. Mr. Komer added that VP had deliberately chosen to mention specific aid planning figures for Turkey in FY ’63 as unprecedented mark of confidence in Turkish Government. Turkish Government should bear in mind that (1) as indicated by VP, these are planning figures of what we hope to do, not what we necessarily could do; (2) it was most important that Turks regard such figures as highly confidential; if other Allies became aware of how much aid we plan to provide Turkey and which we are not planning to provide to these other countries, it could be most embarrassing for us. FonMin Erkin assured those present that full security would be observed, and that Turks well understood problems which publicity would create. Mr. Komer mentioned again to FonMin Erkin as VP was leaving that we had really leveled with Turks and they should realize that our final aid figures might perforce come out somewhat differently. 3. Above memoranda have been approved by VP and Ambassador Hare. Brown 380. Telegram From the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.56311/10–2562. Secret; Priority. Paris, October 25, 1962, 9 p.m. Polto 506. Eyes only for Secretary. Department may desire repeat Ankara and Rome eyes only Ambassadors. Policy. Reference: Department telegrams 2345 and 2349.Telegrams 2345 and 2349, both October 24, sought assessments of the implications of removing Jupiter missiles following the Cuban missile crisis. (Ibid., 611.3722/10–2462) 1. Turkish PermRep here has consistently made it clear that Turks set great store in Jupiters placed in Turkey. He makes very clear that Turkey regards these Jupiters as symbol of alliance’s determination to use atomic weapons against Russian attack on Turkey whether by large conventional or nuclear forces, although Turks have been most reluctant admit presence IRBMs publicly. Fact that Jupiters are obsolescent and vulnerable does not apparently affect present Turkish thinking. My impression is that symbolic importance represents a fixed GOT view, although of course Hare can comment much better than I on this point.Telegram 587 from Ankara, October 26, reported that Turkey would resist any removal of Jupiter missiles that appeared to take place in the context of the Cuban crisis and outlined alternative means for dealing with the problem. (Ibid., 611.3722/10–2662) 2. For above reason any arrangement of kind suggested reference telegram which would not have received prior complete support by GOT would, it seems to us, be most damaging. I emphasize prior consultation, and I think it should be an arrangement freely arrived at by them. My guess is that any arrangement that would not substitute some other considerable kind of atomic capability in Turkey for Jupiters would be rejected by them. See suggestions paragraphs 8 and 9 below. 3. I am sure Turkish delegation here would resent being openly equated in any deal with Cuba. They are very proud of being members of North Atlantic alliance, and particularly, I know personally, of their splendid role in Korea. Here again Hare can advise better than I as to GOT attitude. 4. In my opinion we must be most careful in working out any horse trade of this type to be sure it does not set pattern for handling future Russian incursions in other parts of world (perhaps in other western hemisphere countries). Unless we can avoid setting such pattern, this could foreshadow dangerous and divisive situation for NATO alliance because other members may wonder whether they too might not be asked give up some military capability at time of next Soviet manufactured crisis. Therefore, any deal re Cuba should be compensated for by other arrangements such as those suggested paragraphs 8 and 9 below. 5. In this connection, would appear preferable, since Cuba is by definition outside NATO area, to offer close down some US nuclear-capable base outside NATO area rather than making deal involving Turkey or Italy. Such deal would then be strictly US–USSR trade rather than involving one of our NATO allies in any deal. 6. I think that we must be fully aware there is real possibility that, outside of any arrangement made in over-all disarmament context, whole alliance might be dismayed by such a deal which would compromise and invalidate firm US action re Cuba which has received substantial approval from alliance. As all know, these weapons were put in Europe as result of heads of government decision in 1957 in response to boastful Soviet MRBM threat to Europe, and alliance might very well conclude that US was willing weaken nuclear defenses in Europe in order to remove threat in western hemisphere. However, cannot discount possibility that some members alliance might be willing accept Cuba-Turk deal “to avoid nuclear war”, i.e., Norwegians, Danes and maybe even British. 7. Re question of removal Jupiters accompanied by stationing of Polaris submarines in area, doubt whether mere deployment Polaris would be attractive to Turks since they really would have no say in use of Polaris in time of crisis and they turned down similar proposal in April 1961. Nevertheless, one might argue Turks really have no say over Jupiter use now because of custodial arrangements, but they feel some assurance in having weapons on their territory and somewhat in their hands. Turkish concern re Polaris substitution might be partially met by consulting them on targeting so as to assure that targets of interest to them are covered by Polaris. Also could point out that three Polaris submarines in area would effectively more than double coverage presently afforded by obsolete Jupiters. Doubt, however, above arrangements would adequately compensate Turks. 8. Re suggestion reference telegram concerning some other significant military offset such as NATO seaborne multilateral nuclear force, we believe most expeditious way do this would be set up small southern command multilateral seaborne force on a “pilot basis”. If such firm suggestion made this should be acceptable arrangement to Turks to compensate for loss of obsolete Jupiters. Such offer would take form of converting a number of merchant-type vessels to MRBM force, utilizing Polaris A–2 missiles along general lines of US studies and presentation to NAC by Smith on 22 October. Ships could be deployed in Eastern Mediterranean and could be manned by Turkish, Italian and American mixed crews and also possibly Greeks, with appropriate targets of interest to Mediterranean allies covered. Although implementation of this type of force could be realized in short period of time, it would be necessary, as interim step before comes into being, to station Polaris, as suggested reference telegram, in Eastern Mediterranean. Polaris deployment would then fill gap caused by removal of Jupiters, while southern command multilateral force was being put together. At same time, rest of alliance could be investigating possibility of setting up NATO-wide multilateral seaborne force. Southern command MLF might well serve as model for larger force and could be expanded as other allies indicated desirability to join arrangements this type. To make this whole alternative palatable to Turks and others would require clear US support to implement multilateral seaborne-type force, and if properly presented to Turks and Italians we could highlight flexibility and greater efficiency this type force over Jupiters. Our impression here is that Italians more prone to dismantle Jupiters if proper substitute can be found. 9. Such pilot arrangement, which would not come into being immediately, could permit US offer Soviets withdrawal obsolete Jupiters as face-saving device for Cuban withdrawal (Polaris deployment would cover in interval). Whether or not this would be acceptable to Soviets, the gesture could be made and might well look good in face of world opinion. Whether or not they accept this type of trade, we believe that in any event strong consideration should be given to withdrawing Jupiters and creating pilot MLF since this would strengthen NATO nuclear capability in Eastern Mediterranean. Although Turks didn’t agree to stop Jupiter program in 1961, even when faced with facts Jupiters obsolete, of no military value and good Soviet target, they might be willing now to accept substitute in MLF which more effective from all angles. Finletter 381. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.56311/10–2962. Secret. Drafted by Helseth. Washington, October 29, 1962. SUBJECT Turkish Missiles and the Cuban Crisis PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Turgut Menemencioglu, Turkish Ambassador William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary, EUR Irwin M. Tobin, Deputy Director, RPM GTI— William A. Helseth The Turkish Ambassador, acting on the urgent instructions of his Government, called on Mr. Tyler on October 29. First, he said, he wished to extend the thanks and gratitude of his Government for President Kennedy’s refusal of any “deal” with the Soviet Union regarding the missile bases in Turkey. Secondly, he wished to inform the United States Government that the Turkish Government had instructed its permanent representative in NATO to ask urgently for a special session of the North Atlantic Council. At this special session, the Turkish permanent representative would review the events which led up to the IRBM’s being stationed in Turkey and would emphasize that the IRBM’s were placed in Turkey not merely for Turkey’s defense but for NATO defense. The Turkish permanent representative would state that the Turkish Government regretted that, when dangers subsequently appeared, some seemed to regard Turkey as at fault. Turkey wished to discuss this turn of events with its allies. (The Ambassador the referred to press comments in various allied countries and to some non-United States personalities who spoke in the same tone.) Mr. Tyler stated his appreciation for the advance information the Ambassador had given us and said he wished to repeat and to reinforce what the Ambassador had said regarding the circumstances that led to the placing of the missiles on Turkish soil. The United States Government, he said, looked at these from the point of view of the NATO complex. These missiles were for the defense of the NATO area and that defense was indivisible. The United States viewed our commitment in all areas of NATO as being equal. Furthermore, he hoped that Ankara would not pay too much attention to our own press comment which had ranged far and wide. Even we, he said, wondered at times whether a given article had been inspired, was a trial balloon or what. Ambassador Menemencioglu interrupted to say that he recognized the freedom of our press but had noticed that it was disciplined when the facts were known and mentioned particularly that the line taken by the press today (October 29) was a very good one. Mr. Tyler said that the Secretary had recently talked with the press on a background basis. Mr. Tyler stated that the Cuban crisis was not yet settled and that we would know tonight if work on the bases had been stopped. We had, he said, resumed aerial surveillance today. Mr. Tyler stated that he wished to reassure the Ambassador again that there had been no “deal” regarding Turkey. The Ambassador responded that he had no doubt of that. He remarked upon the audacity of Khrushchev in drawing a parallel between Turkey and Cuba. Mr. Tyler said that there was nothing in the arrangement with the Soviets which implied a guarantee of the Castro regime. We had only stated we would not attack Cuba. We had based our action on the Rio Treaty. (Note: On the way out of the building, Ambassador Menemencioglu informed Mr. Helseth that his Government would be especially pleased with Mr. Tyler’s response to the Ambassador’s approach.) 382. Memorandum by the Policy Planning CouncilSource: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, NATO Weapons. Secret. Transmitted to the White House under cover of a memorandum from Rostow to Bundy, October 30. Washington, October 30, 1962. SUBJECT Turkish IRBM’s 1. Problem: To review planning regarding Turkish IRBM’s in the light of recent developments. 2. US Objectives: (a) To set in motion actions that will lead to removal of Turkish IRBM’s so that we will not continue to be embarrassed by a deployment of obsolescent and vulnerable weapons that is not, in fact, in the US interest. (b) To avoid clouding the appearance of US resolution conveyed by our recently demonstrated will and ability to get Soviet offensive weapons removed from Cuba without any trade-off of US and allied interests. 3. Discussions: One way of achieving these objectives would be through an arms control agreement involving reciprocal concessions, e.g., some general limitation on MRBM deployment or on offensive strategic nuclear bases. This possibility is being explored by ACDA. For purposes of the discussion that follows, however, it is assumed that this possibility is not sufficiently promising to obviate the need for now taking steps that would facilitate a unilateral Turkish decision to remove the IRBM’s. The Turks will only take such a decision in good grace if they feel that an adequate substitute is at hand. Deployment of US Polaris submarines to the Mediterranean would not constitute such a substitute, even if it were accompanied by such other steps as pre-stocking of US equipment in Turkey, rotation of US forces to Turkey, military aid to Turkey etc.—helpful though these steps would undoubtedly be. The heart of the matter is this: The Turks now have in the Jupiters a nuclear missile system which they own, which they are beginning to man, and in whose control they can participate. They would take poorly to any arrangement which deprived them of that system without equivalent participation in another nuclear missile system in return. Their reaction to such an arrangement would suggest urbi et orbi that their security had been sacrificed by the US for its own interests; a general suspicion that this was, in fact, the case could have an unnerving effect on the alliance as a whole and eat into the prestige dividends we have so far earned in Cuba. The only way to avoid this reaction would be to offer the Turks the alternative of either another national Turkish MRBM force or of a multilateral MRBM force, to replace the IRBM’s. Of the two, the latter is clearly to be preferred; another Turkish national force would generate the same Soviet and other pressures that are now being directed against Turkish IRBM’s. 4. Proposal: Ambassador Finletter has suggested a pilot NATO Southern Command multilateral sea-based force, in which the Italians, Turks, Greeks, and US (and perhaps the Canadians) might take part. We should now consult with the countries concerned about such a force, as part of the follow-up to the US October 22 MRBM presentation to the NAC. To this end, we should now send our travelling MRBM team on the road, as we indicated on October 22 that we would, beginning with Ottawa, Rome, Ankara, and Athens, where it could surface the concept of the small pilot southern force. While the team was thus doing business in home capitals, we would be consulting with the Embassies concerned here, and Ambassador Finletter would be consulting the appropriate PermReps in Paris. Since the size and cost of a pilot force would be limited, the Italians—who have been doing some work on their own in regard to sea-based deployment—might see an opportunity for alliance leadership in opening up this possibility in the NAC. It is not inconceivable that agreement in principle could be reached by the countries concerned fairly rapidly. Both the Turks and the Italians reacted favorably to the October 22 concept; they would also see the advantages of getting on with the pilot force, as a means of gracefully phasing out land-based IRBM’s, which they would expect to be the object of increasing pressures in the post-Cuban period. The Canadians have also shown themselves favorable to the multilateral concept. The US would have to participate, and to be prepared to evidence its oft-repeated willingness to bear its fair share of multilateral MRBM cost, if the pilot force were to come into being. This force might be about the size (48 missiles—6 ships) of the Turkish and Italian IRBM force that it would replace, instead of the 200 missiles and 25 ships that have been discussed for the total NATO force. We could make clear that the US contribution to this pilot force would be all that the US would contribute in the way of money to any NATO multilateral force, since the other European countries which might form a larger force after EEC negotiations should be able to pay their own way. (Indeed, these countries could buy out the US and Canada, if they wanted to set up an all-European force at that time.) In a force with the membership of the pilot force, pressures for a control formula excluding US participation would probably be minimal. US warhead custody could be maintained, as the Germans have suggested, while the problem of long-term control arrangements was being studied. This would ease our problem with the JCAE, although the problem would remain of the Committee’s past concern as to whether meaningful US custody is possible aboard non-US ships. The British ought not object to agreement now being reached on a small pilot Southern Command force, since this would not directly affect the politically sensitive issues of Germany’s nuclear status or of post-EEC Franco-British nuclear relations. The British will, furthermore, be as anxious as anyone to see Turkish IRBM’s phased out and the relation of a Southern Command force to such phasing out will not escape them. Once agreement had been reached in principle on the Southern Force by the countries concerned, it would probably not be difficult to move the Turkish and Italian governments to indicate, in the course of NAC discussion, that they would wish to phase out IRBM’s at an appropriate time, since they would not need and could not afford both to operate IRBM’s and to participate in the pilot force. These Turkish and Italian statements could then be made public, which should help to reduce pressures and agitation over Turkish IRBM’s. Once that agitation had died down, it might be possible to persuade the Turks to start taking out the IRBM’s long before the Southern Force came about, in view of the prospect of that Force and the interim coverage provided by US Polaris. In acting along these lines, the alliance would have not only met the Turkish IRBM problem in a constructive fashion; it would also have taken a concrete step toward strengthening nuclear aspects of the partnership. Such a step would be useful in meeting European concerns over the Soviet MRBM’s; these concerns are likely to grow in the wake of a crisis triggered by deployment in Cuba of one tenth as many MRBM’s as now threaten Europe. And such a step would establish a pattern and precedent, which would be extended after EEC negotiations, if the other NATO countries concerned were willing to pay the freight. 5. Conclusion. We should now consult with the Italians, Turks, Greeks, and Canadians about the concept of a pilot Southern Command multilateral force (i) in home capitals; (ii) with Embassies here; (iii) with PermReps in Paris. In light of this urgent consultation we can then determine when and how best to launch NAC discussion of this concept, in order to create a framework for appropriate Turkish and Italian IRBM statements. 383. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.56311/11–1362. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Athens, Rome, and Paris Topol. Ankara, November 13, 1962, 5 p.m. 619. Policy. Paris Polto 533 and 541 to Department.Polto 533, November 3, reported on discussions among the NATO Permanent Representatives on the MLF and Jupiter removal proposals. (Ibid., 740.5611/11–362) Polto 541, November 8, discussed the MLF. (Ibid., 375.75611/11–862) Concept seaborne nuclear fleet little known here and has not generated any particular interest so far. Following comments therefore based on our assessment not on any comments by local officials. 1. Location Jupiters Turkey considered by GOT symbol Turkish possession modern weapons, tangible evidence value NATO membership and key means strike at Soviets. They could not be lightly traded off without satisfactory quid pro quo. 2. While awareness obsolescence exists some quarters, this probably not sufficient offset factors listed above. Fact Jupiter first strike weapon and significance of this in terms NATO strategy probably not generally understood within government. 3. Soviet proposal US missiles be removed Turkey in conjunction Soviet removal missiles Cuba and continued airing similar proposals by prominent western journalists have introduced element rigidity into any GOT consideration removal Turkish-based Jupiters. Important that terms, presentation and timing any proposals to GOT avoid implication bilateral bargain with Soviets in which Turk security part of price we willing pay. 4. On other hand Turks have for some time sought minimize Turk-Soviet bilateral irritants and transfer this relationship into broad pattern East-West confrontation. Substitution local Jupiters for multinational area force could constitute contribution to this policy objective without being concession to Soviets. 5. Therefore if GOT could be convinced Jupiters obsolescent and seaborne force more modern effective weapons system, they would foreseeably be willing consider proposal presented in NATO rather than Cuban context. Important consideration would be persuade them that, by offering substantial participation in command, control, manning, force would actually come to their aid in event Soviet attack. 6. Presentation regarding any proposal phase-out Jupiters should illustrate sharp contrast Soviet action in committing removal Soviet missiles Cuba without apparent adequate consultation Castro. Process here should involve NATO decision with full knowledge and consultation GOT. Timing should be deliberate, step-by-step process with formation seaborne force ideally preceding removal Jupiters. 7. On basis above analysis I agree with Ambassador Finletter that Turks likely be responsive, if force adequate provide necessary symbol of NATO ability defend Turkey. I doubt participation of non-Mediterranean powers would be significant factor as far as Turks concerned. Essential minimum condition would be participation of US plus strong and evident NATO flavor. 8. Financial aspect of MLF would constitute real and perhaps most important issue. GOT now in situation where MAP deliveries do not fulfill [garble] NATO force goals and GOT unable economically supplement MAP deliveries. Resulting feeling of inadequacy is quite extreme, as brought out in connection Cuban crisis and also recent reports of arms build-up in Iraq. Turks do not have foreign exchange to invest in MLF and if agreed financing were in any way to mean reduction in current level MAP for Turk National Forces we could expect really strong opposition. 9. As to timing, I suspect it might well take some months for GOT reach executive decision, and if resulting decision involved some form of agreement, further loss of time and complication could result from seeking necessary legislation. This question cannot be answered with assurance prior consultation but one recalls Menderes Government severely criticized for not seeking ratification Jupiter Agreement and pres-ent Constitution does not provide for Executive-type agreements. At risk of underlining obvious, might also be mentioned that if, as has been adumbrated, removal Jupiters should be taken up in terms of relaxing East-West tensions, we could have presentation and public relations problem since plan acceptable Turks could hardly be expected relax Russians and vice versa. This would lead to conclusion that, if larger concept maintained, Jupiter-MLF plan might best be considered along with other moves in tension-reducing direction. Hare 384. Telegram from the Department of State to the Embassy in TurkeySource: Department of State, Central Files, 7821.56311/12–1862. Top Secret. Drafted by Weiss and Johnson; cleared by Talbot, Davis, Kitchen, Kent, and the Department of Defense (ISA); and approved by Johnson. Also sent to Rome. Washington, December 18, 1962, 8:17 p.m. 523. Eyes only for Ambassadors Reinhardt and Hare. Subject: Jupiter Missiles. 1. This message is strictly FYI. No distribution should be made of this message and tight security should be maintained. 2. The Secretary and Secretary McNamara, in separate conversations at Paris discussed subject of removal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey with Sancar and Erkin, and McNamara discussed removal of Jupiters from Italy with Andreotti.Rusk reported on his conversation with Erkin in ed Secto 3 from Paris, December 12. (Ibid., 811.82/12–1262) Memoranda of the McNamara–Sancar and McNamara–Andreotti discussions are ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 533, CF 2198. 3. Proposal advanced by McNamara was for dismantling of the Jupiters by April 1, with these missiles to be replaced by Polaris stationed in Mediterranean. Each government informed they could participate with SACEUR in targetting of Polaris. 4. Proposed replacement was explained in terms of a desire to modernize Alliance missile capability removing a highly vulnerable system which, during the Cuban crisis, provided inviting target to the Soviets should US have been forced to undertake military action against Cuba. In view of high vulnerability and advancing obsolescence, these systems should be replaced with more modern and effective system prior to onset of any new crisis which might, for example, occur in the near future over Berlin. In this way Alliance would have benefit of more effective deterrent force while denying to the Soviets an opportunity to bring political pressures to bear by threatening attacks against vulnerable Jupiter missiles. 5. Andreotti appeared not overly disturbed by the US proposal though he indicated to Secretary McNamara that Italy would not itself wish to raise question and that initiative would have to come from the US. Also stated important that action, if taken, should be prior to spring elections in Italy. 6. McNamara also indicated to Andreotti that while US was of view that SETAF should be taken over by Italians, US was prepared to continue support for at least an interim period and that we would be prepared to modernize SETAF by replacement of Corporals by Sergeants, such action to be related to Jupiter removal. 7. Turkish MOD Sancar appeared more cautious and reserved in his response. Though he agreed to “submit and expose” US views to Turkish government, he said substitution of more secure weapon system for Jupiter must take into account all political and military factors. Indicated that core of problem was Turkey’s confidence in its Allies; that there was need to avoid moral depression either in people or Army. Warned against creating impression that “best of Allies was leaving Turkey to a condition of aloneness.” McNamara indicated that replacement by more efficient and invulnerable Polaris system should preclude these concerns. 8. Sancar also raised question re delay in delivery of F–104–G’s. Requested acceleration of delivery. McNamara indicated dificult to accelerate but would work to resolve problem. McNamara stated that it would be appropriate to link announcement of an earlier delivery date with replacement of Jupiters. 9. At Lord Home’s dinner for NATO delegations, Turkish PermRep (with several NATO nationalities represented at same table) opened Jupiter question himself and in strong terms expressed resentment that Turkey had been victimized through being pressed to receive Jupiters when most other members NATO turned them down. Tenor his conversation was that Jupiters were no good, that they created special problems for Turkey and that NATO decision to deploy Jupiters was irresponsible in that other members did not really cooperate. 10. Following McNamara’s talk with Defense Minister, Erkin mentioned matter informally to Secretary in a friendly and relaxed mood saying that he saw no difficulty provided ways and means were found to make it clear that US was continuing a military presence in Turkey and was firmly committed to Turkey’s defense. 11. Importance of maintaining strictest security was emphasized in conversations with Turkish and Italian governments. Should you be queried by representatives of Turkish or Italian governments, Secretary does not think it advisable for you to attempt to amplify US proposal. We are now working out next steps for following up on US proposal. For example, we have in mind that Secretary of Defense McNamara might soon visit Southeast Asia and would stop off in Ankara for discreet talk with highest Turkish officials. If, therefore, matter is raised with you suggest you merely refer to talks in Paris and indicate will request further instructions. Rusk 385. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.56311/12–2662. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Ankara, December 22, 1962, 2 p.m. 693. Department telegram 523; Embassy telegram 692.Telegram 523 is printed as Document 384. In telegram 692, December 22, Hare reported that he had delivered the full text of the Kennedy–Macmillan Nassau statement to Sarper who would pass it to Inonu. (Department of State, Central Files, 741.5612/12–2262) For text of the December 21 Kennedy–Macmillan statement, see Department of State Bulletin, January 14, 1963, pp. 43–45. In discussing Nassau statement with Foreign Minister, only specific question he raised was what effect proposed British-American agreement would have in respect other NATO members. I called attention to part of statement specifying that allocated units of United States strategic forces, United Kingdom bomber command and tactical nuclear forces now in Europe would be assigned as part NATO nuclear force and targeted in accordance NATO plans, that same provisions also applied Polaris force, and that this seen as step toward multilateral NATO force. Foreign Minister said this clear and what he really had in mind was any possible pertinence of this development to his discussion with Secretary re removal of Jupiters from Turkey, i.e., would British-American agreement constitute means by which Polaris substitute might be made for Jupiters. I replied that, speaking personally, it would seem that, if a multilateral nuclear NATO force were immediately in prospect, Jupiter case might be considered in that context but, since even British-American agreement will take certain time to implement, I would assume that any early substitution for Jupiters would be made under different guise. Foreign Minister said this seemed logical but, since Jupiter question so important to GOT, he would appreciate any corroborative or supplemental comment which might be available from Washington. I said would be glad inquire, and would appreciate guidance as to reply which Department desires made. Hare 386. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in TurkeySource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.5611/1–563. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Cleared by Meloy, Hare, the Department of Defense, and Bundy; and approved by Kitchen and Ball. Washington, January 5, 1963, 7:31 p.m. 556. Verbatim text. There follows for immediate delivery to Minister of National Defense Sancar a letter from Secretary of Defense McNamara. Signed original being pouched. No public release planned. “5 Jan 1963. “Dear Mr. Minister: “You will recall that, during our conversation in Paris on December 13,See footnote 1, Document 384. I expressed the view that the Jupiter missiles should be replaced by improved missiles now becoming available. “In 1957 when the decision was made to install these missiles they, along with the Thors, were the only strategic ballistic missiles the Alliance had ready for operation. The Jupiters helped greatly to build up our early ballistic missile strength, but, with the rapid advances in technology and the accelerating growth of missile forces, they no longer form a major part of the Alliance’s missile strength. In this year alone, the number of operational strategic ballistic missiles in the Alliance will increase from about 450 to abut 850. More importantly, as a first generation missile these Jupiters are easily located by the enemy and vulnerable to both conventional and nuclear attack. It is questionable whether they would survive a Soviet surprise attack. Such a system today promises to be relatively ineffective and it presents a vulnerable and tempting target—conditions which we should seek to avoid if we can find an alternative weapon system which better meets our military needs. This is especially true since we must continue to anticipate Soviet stimulated crises of comparable or even greater intensity as for example might occur at any time over Berlin. “It seems to us desirable on these counts to replace the Jupiters with an alternative weapon system which better meets our common needs and, in connection with the replacement, to accelerate the delivery of another modern weapon system, the F–104Gs. “We believe the best available alternative to Jupiter would be the Polaris missile submarine system. In addition to being less exposed than the Jupiters, these missiles would have a very much higher probability of survival in the face of a sudden nuclear attack. We propose that Polaris submarines operate in the Mediterranean, be assigned to SACEUR and be targeted by him with Turkish participation. This Polaris force can be on station by April 1. “I strongly agree with the sense of your comment to me as to the importance of our Allies and our enemies understanding that the substitution of this modern weapon system creates a more formidable military posture for Turkey and for NATO. It has been our policy and will continue to be our policy to assist our Allies in the provision of increasingly effective military defenses through a measured and continued phase-in of modern weapons. In this way the Alliance can have the benefit of the most effective deterrent force we are capable of devising while denying to the Soviets an opportunity to bring political pressures to bear by threatening attacks against highly vulnerable weapons of more limited military value. “We wish it to be clearly understood that in advancing the proposal for substitution of Polaris for Jupiters, we envisage working out all aspects in closest harmony with the Turkish government and would of course be responsive to your view on how the substitution can most expeditiously be effected. Finally, we would believe that Alliance interests would best be served if the substitution were conducted in a low key as a natural evolution to a better weapon system, as in fact is the case, rather than having the substitution misrepresented in any way. In this connection, I think we might consider making clear to the Alliance that our two governments previously discussed this matter as far back as April 1961. “Since my return from Paris I have looked into the possibility of associating an acceleration of the delivery of F–104G aircraft to Turkey with the replacement of the Jupiters. By a series of emergency actions, I believe it would be possible to deliver sufficient aircraft to Turkey to equip the first squadron in April 1963; this could be done as part of this modernization program. “If your government agrees with these proposals, appropriate staffs of our two governments in cooperation with SACEUR could begin discussions immediately with a view to working out specific arrangements. Ambassador Hare shortly will raise this matter with the Turkish Government. “Sincerely” Ball 387. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in TurkeySource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.5611/1–863. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bowling; cleared by Meloy, Lubkeman, Hare, Talbot, S/S, EUR, RPM, the Department of Defense, and the White House; and approved by Kitchen. Repeated to Rome and Paris. Washington, January 8, 1963, 7:22 p.m. 566. Paris for Finletter and CINCEUR. Joint State–Defense message. For Ambassador. 1. USG desires replacement Jupiter systems in Turkey and Italy as soon as possible. You should therefore begin consultations at appropriate level GOT as soon as possible, following on letter from Secretary Defense to Turk MOD, and using approach outlined below. a) With decisions reached at Nassau Conference, process of revitalizing and modernizing nuclear defense of NATO area has begun. USG envisages staged evolution toward effective multilateral NATO force, integrating existing independent nuclear forces, and with eventual control and manning arrangements in which Turkey as well as other smaller NATO powers would participate. Precise shape and timing this evolution not yet certain, but it is inevitable conclusion train of events started at Nassau. USG, during coming years of evolution this force, intends utilize its influence to see that final configuration will include significant participation by Turkey, which we regard as an especially close and dependable ally and as a basic military pillar of NATO. We hope and expect that Turkey will, in the course of future movements toward more effective NATO nuclear defense concepts and structures, continue as it has in the past to give its best efforts toward strengthening of the NATO alliance. b) While many basic steps toward improvement NATO nuclear posture will of course require time for technical arrangements as well as cooperative re-thinking of problem on part of NATO allies, there are other steps which can be taken in near future which would not only improve present NATO defense posture but would provide valuable impetus toward re-examination of basic postulates by industrialized NATO countries which is a prerequisite for meaningful progress in new directions. One such step, on which we wish consult with Turkey, is the substitution of more modern weapons systems for the existing obsolescent Jupiters now stationed in Turkey and Italy. Simultaneous consultations are taking place in Italy. You might refer to the British decision to dismantle Thor IRBM’s as an example of the fact that the first generation of IRBM’s is obsolete. c) We are ready, as an interim arrangement toward the eventual NATO multilateral force envisaged at Nassau, to assign Polaris missiles under SACEUR to the Mediterranean with the intention of having at least three boats for the Mediterranean force. Missiles will be on station by April 1, 1963. This weapons system, with an extremely low degree of vulnerability to an enemy first strike, would, along with our own rapidly expanding Minuteman force, be able to cover the targeting assignments previously handled by the Jupiter system. Turkey and Italy, through SACEUR, would of course be expected to participate in the targeting of the Polaris system. Once the submarines force is assigned, we would be happy to make such arrangements as Turkey might feel desirable for short visits to Turkish ports, with attendant publicity, in order that the Turkish people may be reassured that they are constantly guarded by this undersea force. d) Some time in 1963, the United States will begin the dispersal to Turkish airfields of nuclear weapons under United States custody for use with Turkish aircraft. e) The U.S. will never forget, and will always be grateful for, Turkey’s swift response to collective security needs in agreeing to accept and man the Jupiter installations on Turkish soil. The need at the time was great, and IRBM’s were the best response the Free World could make to the Soviet threat as it was then apparent to us. The value of weapons systems changes, however. Nuclear delivery systems falling between the first efforts and the first generations of highly invulnerable, fast, accurate, and reliable systems such as Polaris and Minuteman have been shown to have a very short lifetime of military usefulness. We feel that the Jupiter system has simply been outmoded. Its vulnerability and relatively slow reaction time make it a standing temptation for an enemy first strike, nuclear or conventional, and its manning and maintenance make it a drain on resources which could be put to better use. The Jupiters on Turkish soil do not represent a military error; they have performed a perhaps critical duty in deterring aggression against the alliance. But, like all other weapons, they eventually reach obsolescence, as we mentioned to you in April 1961. The immense efforts we have devoted to the improvement of our nuclear delivery capacity have rendered their period of useful life shorter than is the case with other types of weapons. Jupiter was from the beginning a stop-gap. 2. You may during course of these discussions request the presence in Ankara of a senior U.S. military officer. You may also make reference to the importance of obtaining SACEUR’s views. You should be guided by following considerations: a) USG desires Turkish agreement as soon as possible for replacement of Jupiters at earliest time possible following stationing of the Polaris force in the Mediterranean. b) If Turkey agrees in principle, it should at earliest possible time after consultation with SACEUR (we will also consult SACEUR) approach NAC through SACEUR, and jointly with the US notify NAC of its intention dismantle Jupiters after Polaris missiles are on station. Timing of announcements, including possibility even of trilateral announcement, is subject to arrangement, and we would go as far as we could toward meeting Turkish preferences. We do not feel, however, that we can authorize announcements or inspired press comment until NAC has been formally notified, since we must avoid impression that three NATO states have altered NATO defensive arrangements without consultation with other NATO allies. c) Technical details of dismantling and withdrawal Jupiters could be discussed between Turkish General Staff and JUSMMAT. 3. Contingencies: a) Should Turks at any time intimate that they suspect they are being equated with Cuba, you are authorized respond such intimation that when Soviets, in course of Cuban crisis, attempted compare Jupiters in Turkey with Soviet missiles on Cuba, we responded flatly and publicly that we absolutely refused accept any such comparison; our position was and will unalterably remain just that. If it appears desirable to strengthen the presentation, you may in your discretion wish to indicate along the lines of Secretary McNamara’s December 13 conversation with Defense Minister SancarIn telegram 576 to Ankara, January 10, the Department of State noted that a portion of the guidance had been omitted from paragraph 3a. The missing portion reads: “If it appears desirable to strengthen the presentation, you may in your discretion wish to indicate along lines Secretary McNamara’s December 13 conversation with Defense Minister Sancar that the Cuban crisis did sharpen in our minds the dangers to NATO’s military posture and to world peace of the existence of obsolescent systems such as that of Jupiter within range of Soviet conventional forces. We naturally were forced to consider that Soviets might be tempted strike at Turkish Jupiters. Should this have occurred, we would have been forced respond with adequate countermeasures, and entire world would have been in imminent danger escalation to thermonuclear exchange which was not desired by either side.” (Ibid., 782.5611/1–1063) that the Cuban crisis did not even remotely inspire us toward making a deal with the Soviets involving the security of a faithful and trusted ally; it did bring home to us uncomfortably the dangers and incongruity of maintaining such obsolescent weapons systems as Jupiter when better and far less vulnerable systems are available in growing quantities. b) Should Turks indicate they may balk at Jupiter replacement unless further improvements are in sight for their conventional military capability, you are authorized to state that Turkey will be given first priority on F–104G aircraft as they come off the assembly lines. Fourteen F–104G’s will be delivered in April 1963 if the Turks agree to the Jupiter proposal. You may not make any commitment as to delivery of the second squadron. c) FYI. USG is reviewing current policy affecting following bilateral problems having connection with Turkish defense and Turkey’s status as U.S. ally: (1) Soviet chrome ore shipments to U.S. (2) U.S. support of Turkish consortium. (3) Interpretation of Status of Forces Agreement. (4) US attitude toward Turkish association with EEC. End FYI. Rusk 388. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.56311/1–1863. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Rome and Paris. Ankara, January 18, 1963, 8 p.m. 792. Paris for Finletter and SACEUR. Deptel 566, Embtels 765 and 788.Telegram 566 is printed as Document 387. Telegram 765, January 12, reported that Erkin agreed with the United States on removal of the missiles, but believed that his government faced a major public relations effort in explaining their withdrawal to the Turkish public. (Department of State, Central Files, 782.56311/1–1263) Telegram 788, January 18, reported that Erkin had repeated and endorsed the substance of the U.S. position in a statement before the Turkish Senate and expected to seek final government and military approval for withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles in a January 18 meeting. (Ibid., 782.65311/1–1863) FonMin Erkin has just given me account of meeting on Jupiter replacement this afternoon attended by himself, Defense Minister Sancar and Service Chiefs and presided over by Prime Minister Inonu. Results basically favorable by decision accept in principle but issue needlessly and disappointingly complicated by FonMin’s mistaken impression that Polaris submarines would be manned in some way by Turkish crews. In order avoid just some such difficulty I had given Erkin at our first meeting an informal memorandum of points covered and we know from questions asked that head of NATO section of FonOff who translated memo and has acted as Erkin’s adviser in matter clearly understood. Against this background, following are conditions for acceptance of our proposal; 1) Two submarines should be placed under Turkish commander in NATO capacity. 2) Two “spare” crews should be sent to the United States for training for duty on Polaris. 3) Number of 104G’s of first squadron should be increased to 18. 4) Training for 104G pilots should be furnished by sending US training group here and sending Turk pilots for training in US. 5) Date for second squadron of 104G’s should be set. Erkin also mentioned as “different matter” need of Turkish Navy for submarines, destroyers and patrol boats such as furnished Greece if Turk fleet not to cease being effective force by 1967 (this obviously part of current naval drive as reported A–647Airgram A–647, January 15, reported on discussions with the West Germans regarding assistance to the Turkish Navy. (Ibid., 882.5621/1–1563) and believe no necessity to consider as directly related Jupiters). Erkin said decision would be communicated immediately to three Deputy Prime Ministers and then submitted for Cabinet approval next week. He asked my reaction. I replied baffled by reference to subs under Turkish command with Turkish crews since there had been no such suggestion in our proposal. Erkin said in that case his presentation to meeting had been in error. He would however request that Turkish conditions be presented USG as given, presumably in order not be forced admit his error, although there is minimal possibility affair staged as tactical manoeuvre. At this point I felt very glum indeed but Erkin then proceeded say Turks want very much to avoid giving impression of having been outdistanced by Italians and, depending on what put out following Fanfani talks, would like make announcement of comparable action here, hopefully next week. In this connection, he also indicated that Turkish reaction regarding assignment and manning Polaris subs would foreseeably be influenced by nature our agreement with Italians. He asked we submit our views as soon as possible in order move ahead. I realize foregoing must sound grotesque but that is way it happened, and viewed in even such short retrospect, situation may not be as difficult as impossible Turk conditions would indicate. As matters stand our ace in hole would appear to be such agreement as reached with Italians and strong Turkish [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] urge not let appear that Italians beating out Turks in this particular field. Hare 389. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in TurkeySource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.56311/1–1963. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bowling; cleared by Meloy, Talbot, Rusk, McNamara, and the Department of Defense; and approved by Kitchen. Repeated to Rome and Paris. Washington, January 23, 1963, 12:17 p.m. 623. Paris for Finletter and SACEUR. Joint State–Defense message. Embtel 795.Telegram 795, January 19, provided the Embassy’s analysis of Turkish objectives and suggestions for U.S. negotiating strategy. (Ibid.) Following is USG response to Turk “conditions” on acceptance our proposal. You may use your own discretion as to timing and channel conveyance to GOT, and supplement as circumstances require with other background information in your possession. Re penultimate para Reftel, we continue share Turkish preference NATO channel. You will be informed on progress discussions with Italians. You may indicate to GOT general status these discussions and that there is no thought of giving Italians advantages over those offered Turks. 1. As set forth previously in Under Secretary’s talk to NATO and in recent State of Union message to Congress,For text of Ball’s January 23 statement on European unity, see Department of State Bulletin, February 11, 1963, pp. 195–197. For text of President Kennedy’s January 14 State of the Union Message, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 11–19. U.S. is aiming at creation of multilaterally-controlled and manned NATO seaborne nuclear force, and we count on Turk cooperation in forthcoming negotiations and discussions within NATO. We intend pursue this vigorously with our NATO allies, but process will doubtless be very long and involved. Acceptance of our proposal for replacement Jupiters with Polaris would, we feel, be important psychological step toward eventual agreement for force we envisage, but Polaris Mediterranean force now proposed is not model for multilateral force. Any attempt by US and Turkey to so shape the Mediterranean force might disrupt the process of reaching consensus on true multilateral force in NATO, and might set in motion process resulting in misunderstandings and jealousies. We cannot undertake to endanger and possibly undercut vast project of NATO multilateral nuclear force by considering at this time question of command and control on bilateral basis. Therefore Turk suggestion re command of Polaris vessels cannot be even considered at present time. We urgently request Turks to prevent leaks to effect that this subject was even brought up during course our discussions. 2. Turkish proposal for training of full spare crews Polaris submarines implies, as does Turkish proposal for specific command structure, bilateral decisions on future shape of NATO multilateral force, assuming as it does that Polaris submarines will be manned by Turkish crews. Question of eventual Turkish role in manning and control of projected NATO multilateral force must be resolved in larger context NATO-centered discussions. At present time US laws regarding access to nuclear propulsion plants constitute barrier which US must consider in context overall legislative requirements in moving toward multilateral force objective. 3. Question of Turkish observers aboard Polaris submarines remains to be worked out before commitments can be made. Program of observers would pre-empt and hamper effort toward NATO acceptance mix-manned concept eventual NATO nuclear force. There would be no objection to having SACEUR staff officers, including, of course, Turkish officers, as observers on board Polaris submarines from time to time at the discretion of the force commander. Turkish officers could participate, of course, in the targeting and operational planning of the Polaris submarines. 4. USG shares obvious Turkish concern re early operability in Turkey of F104G weapons system. Filling out of initial F104G squadron by four additional aircraft as desired by Turks will be done as rapidly as the aircraft are available, within a few months after arrival of the first 14 aircraft. Training of both pilots and maintenance personnel is a priority matter if early delivery date is not to be wasted. Turk instructor pilots will be sent to earliest opening US 104G school, and intensive training program contemplated for Turkey. At present moment, full mobile training unit with equipment which had previously been scheduled for overseas service in another country is being held in US on standby basis, ready to proceed to Turkey immediately upon conclusion of agreement replace the Jupiters. Turks are aware difficulty and complexity training program, we therefore confident Turks will understand seriousness our purpose in anticipating sensible date delivery second squadron F104G’s approximately one year following delivery first squadron. 5. Turkish Navy is vital element in defense of NATO area. USG has no intention abandoning Turkish Navy in allocating appropriations for military assistance. In fact, we are requesting appropriations for FY 64 which will permit us to fund additional vessels for Turkey. Rusk 390. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 782.56311/1–2763. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Ankara, January 27, 1963, 6 p.m. 845. Embtel 844.Telegram 844, January 28, transmitted the text of Defense Minister Sancar’s reply to the U.S. proposal for Jupiter replacement. (Ibid., 782.56311/1–2863) As result reftel we are in position of having two replies our proposal substitution Polaris for Jupiter missiles, one official government position conveyed by FonMin and one from MinDef. Both accept our proposal in principle but then raise different specifics in terms of reaching final agreement. Sancar letter gives endorsement our proposal but then makes four conditions first of which namely, delivery of nuclear weapons for F–100 strike squadrons before replacement Jupiters, can prove difficult if Turks really insist. Three numbered conditions are worded in general terms and possibly could be handled by general assurances and explanations. However, since these are termed “initial conditions”, paragraphs one and two may turn out have more concrete meaning as negotiation advances; for instance, mention of “modernization” of Turkish Armed Forces may raise question multi-year MAP with inclusion much-desired items and mention of “legal participation” in point two might, as previously indicated, raise question some form Turkish presence on Polaris force. Reference in last paragraph to “other NATO countries” obviously means Italy and tends to confirm our earlier assumption that fact negotiation not being confined Turkey is helpful factor. Transmission of letter would seem leave open two courses of action: (1) take governmental reply as given us and act thereon as soon as we have received additional instructions requested Embtel 831Dated January 25. (Ibid., 711.5611/1–2563) or, (2) having allowed several days for assumed transmission of letter, make reply of composite nature to Erkin, including reaction to points raised by Sancar. My feeling now is we should go ahead on basis (1) above and see what happens leaving open possibility of blending two channels on assumption that Erkin will reflect MinDef points if they become government policy.In telegram 651, January 29, the Department of State instructed the Embassy to proceed with the first alternative outlined here, using the Foreign Ministry as the direct channel for negotiations. (Ibid., 782.56311/1–2763) Hare 391. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 12 Tur. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Rome and Paris. Ankara, February 1, 1963, 5 p.m. 872. Paris for Finletter and SACEUR. Deptel 623.Document 389. Saw Foreign Minister Erkin this morning to deliver reply to Turkish “conditions”. Without attempting debate crew question Erkin said very disappointed we unable to agree to some sort of formula which would associate Polaris with Turkish Command. Said he under constant pressure and criticism by those who maintain that substitution of Polaris for Jupiter represents indication of reduced American interest in Turkey and that, when he attempts rebut such allegations, he is told that he is just saying what they would expect from a Foreign Minister and that his critics therefore remain unconvinced. While I recalled that fact is this is important move toward modernization in Mediterranean by which NATO generally and Turkey specifically will benefit, Erkin said he understood but this was not sort of argument that convinces critics. Problem is essentially psychological and something more obviously demonstrable required than visits to Turkish ports or visits Turkish officers to Polaris subs. I then suggested that, aside from continuing to point out that Polaris substitution is strengthening move, public relations line to counteract current criticism should be given positive twist by putting emphasis on multilateral force in which NATO partners, including Turkey, will in fact be given opportunity for different types of participation, including mixed manning. Erkin somewhat grudgingly agreed but still maintained something more tangible regarding Polaris would help out a great deal. I also requested as instructed that care be exerted to avoid any leak that Command question had even been discussed. Erkin said he absolutely agreed but had been distressed to note that there had in fact been such a reference in yesterday’s Aksam. He was at loss know how it had happened and I feel quite certain his unhappiness was not feigned. We next turned to 104–G’s and I transmitted supplemental information as instructed. Erkin said understood in certain Turkish quarters that original fourteen would be additional to two squadrons programmed and he would appreciate my inquiring if this correct. I replied unnecessary do so since I had knowledge that what we are doing is to respond to oft-repeated request of Turkish Air Force to expedite delivery of programmed planes; not question of expanding program at this point. Any such discussion would have to take its place in normal context of MAP procurement. Erkin then noted with approval that US training group being held for quick assignment to Turkey and asked if they would bring training planes with them since 104–G’s would not be arriving until later. I said uninformed of details but assumed training group would have what necessary to perform their function competently. I then noted that we had received letter from Minister Defense Sancar for transmission to Secretary Defense McNamara, asked if Erkin familiar with it and, if so, whether there was anything of significance in it which might have bearing on our discussions. Erkin said had read it and would send me copy. Regarding contents, he said nothing of importance going beyond what already communicated to us previously. In this connection he heartily endorsed idea of single channel of communication henceforth. Foreign Minister then asked what next to be done, mentioning presumed necessity of agreement to remove Jupiters to replace existing agreement. I said this also my understanding and also necessary supplement informal advice to NAC on January 30 by joint written communication. However, what is essential at this stage is clearly to establish that we are in agreement on the basis of our proposals as explained and supplemented today. Once this done, we could start wheels moving in respect formalities and also practical implementation and sooner this can be done the better. To this Erkin replied he assumed “we will have to accept” but he would have to consult Prime Minister first and would hope give me definitive answer some time next week. I took precaution of inquiring whether prospective reply would be definitive governmental position, referring in that connection to Sancar letter. Erkin said it would be governmental position. Later Erkin telephoned to say had acquainted Prime Minister Inonu with our discussion and would brief Turkish General Staff Monday, being himself occupied tomorrow by presentation budget to Parliament. Indicating also he had had some military contact he asked that 104–G training team come immediately and be sure to bring trainer planes since would be unable operate effectively otherwise. I suggested best reach definitive basic decision first and then proceed action phase. However, I would advise Washington of GOT interest in expediting training team in order that they might be alerted for action. Erkin said felt no doubt as to outcome and would expect give me final reply shortly after meeting with TGS. Hare 392. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in TurkeySource: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 12 Tur. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bowling and cleared by EUR. Repeated to Rome and Paris. Washington, February 2, 1963, 2:33 p.m. 670. Paris for USRO and Stoessel. Turkish acceptance in principle without unfulfillable conditions of replacement Jupiters is now a principal hinge point in moving forward toward completion entire weapons system modernization project. Italian acceptance accomplished, and Italians believed ready proceed next stage approach SACEUR. Your report on results your latest approach to GOT and your comments on general climate opinion key elements GOT are awaited. Rusk 393. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 12 Tur. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Rome and Paris. Ankara, February 16, 1963, 1 p.m. 959. Paris for Finletter and SACEUR. Embtel 944 and Deptel 721.In telegram 944, February 13, the Ambassador reported on discussions with Erkin regarding Defense Minister Sancar’s position on removal of the Jupiter missiles. (Ibid.) In telegram 721, February 13, the Department of State outlined the position it would take on Polaris deployment if the issue were raised by the press. (Ibid., Def 12 NATO) Erkin told me this morning that he discussed Sancar letterSancar’s February 12 letter to McNamara was transmitted in telegram 943 from Ankara, February 13. While accepting the U.S. proposal for Jupiter withdrawal, it raised a number of issues of linkage between Jupiter withdrawal and supply for the Turkish armed forces. (Ibid., DEF 12 Tur) at length with Inonu yesterday afternoon and had suggested matter be withdrawn because of confusion it causing. In so doing he presented my views on six numbered paragraphs of Sancar letter and said they also represented his understanding of situation. At end of conversation Inonu said he hesitated demand retraction of letter for fear of hurting feelings of military but suggested question might be resolved by making clear that points specified by Sancar were not conditions but rather expression of Turkish needs and desires. Erkin said he had agreed and said he would see Sancar and then advise me. He doubted if he could do so before first of next week due his own and Sancar’s immediate preoccupation with budget presentation to House. However, he would do so as soon as possible, using same arguments he had with Inonu and hoping Sancar might actually agree to revising letter. Meanwhile, however, it should be considered as having status suggested by Inonu. He also expressed opinion that points raised by Sancar would not in any event be appropriate for inclusion in bilateral agreement. I observed this latter point very important since Sancar letter as received had referred to possible “deadlocks” in implementation which I could only interpret as suggesting removal Jupiters could be held up if specified conditions not met. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Erkin said Sancar had no authority impose such conditions since decision exchange Polaris for Jupiters had been taken by Cabinet and represented government position. Erkin then inquired regarding approach to NATO saying he could understand Stikker’s impatience and indicating he was ready proceed as soon as he heard from us how we proposed going about it. I told him I was expecting information in this regard momentarily and would get in touch with him as soon as it was received. (Deptel 721 received after this conversation.) In light foregoing, I agree with suggestion in Deptel 721 that Secretary Defense reply to Sancar be deferred. Re contents, I would hope to be in better position submit suggestions after I have been advised of outcome Erkin’s talk with Sancar. Suggest we be advised soon as possible regarding nature approach to NATO so that we can proceed with joint approach as we originally proposed to Turks. Advantages joint approach might justify short postponement of presentation in NAC, should that be necessary obtain full understanding in advance. Also suggest Ambassador Finletter may wish keep Birgi informed in detail our plans for NAC presentation in order keep all lines clear. In making these suggestions we cognizant Polto 28Polto 28, February 14, reported Stikker’s views on how to present the Jupiter replacement to Turkey. (Ibid., Def 12 US/NATO) but, since notification of intention to NAC was on tripartite basis, we would assume this concept would be retained in some way in succeeding steps. Hare 394. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 12 Tur. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Paris and Rome. Ankara, February 18, 1963, 8 p.m. 973. Paris for Finletter and SACEUR. Reference: Deptel 721 and Embtel 968.Regarding telegram 721, see footnote 1, Document 393. Telegram 968, February 18, reported Sancar’s insistence that agreement on the removal of the Jupiter missiles was conditioned on the arrival of munitions and simultaneously pressed for the delivery of a third squadron of F–104s. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 12 Tur) Recommendations re content and timing Secretary Defense reply to Sancar messages require us step back momentarily from detail of negotiation and survey general course developments here. Although we do not know what if any suggestions Turks may have for textual changes beyond that mentioned Embtel 970,Telegram 970, February 18, reported on Hare’s conversation with Erkin in which Erkin stated that he had only one substantive change to suggest to the proposed draft of an agreement over Polaris deployment. (Ibid.) Erkin’s comments to me on draft NAC memoranda reported reference telegram indicate likelihood we can go ahead with joint presentation on schedule. Turkish willingness proceed in this way underlines firmness government’s decision accept substitution of Polaris for Jupiter missiles reported by Erkin February 9 (Embtel 928)Telegram 928, February 9, reported that Erkin had telephoned the Embassy to say that the Turkish Government approved the replacement of Jupiter missiles and had attached no conditions. (Ibid.) and indicates we may be approaching conclusion main elements of political negotiation. Concurrently with this political decisionmaking process Turkish military have raised number of points combining psychological and material elements which have appeared both in Sancar messages and in Foreign Minister’s conversations with me. While latter has made it clear on several occasions these points do not affect GOT’s major decision accept substitution, are nonetheless important. Thus, favorable political decision has left behind it turbulent backwash of unresolved questions which will affect both implementation our arrangement, including possibly exchange of notes, and our future relations, political as well as military, with Turkey. Moreover, we can go too far in considering military attitudes separate from main stream of official and public thinking here because attitudes of Turkish military reflect very much same psychological problem that Erkin has emphasized as GOT’s main concern (Embtels 872 and 944)Telegram 872 is printed as Document 391. Regarding telegram 944, see footnote 1, Document 393. and Turkish press has increasingly veered this direction over past three weeks. In above context SecDef reply to Sancar takes on basic significance for success of detailed negotiation and implementation of new arrangement, though not for essential political decision which now made. Key sentence second message underlying numbered points is that “it constitutes unavoidable necessity that during replacement of Jupiters obvious substitution should be made within Turk territory and in structure of Turk armed forces” (Embtel 943).See footnote 2, Document 393. Considering significance and strength these Turkish military feelings as well as limits to action US can take, we suggest consideration of following themes in SecDef reply to Sancar, which are arranged in order used Sancar’s last letter referred to above. “First”: Here we have excellent opportunity for complimenting GOT on its comprehension dynamics of modern war and constant changes in weaponry this requires as well as on cooperative spirit it has shown in this entire negotiation. “Second”: If it not possible move forward date delivery nuclear weapons under US custody to Turkish F–100 Strike Squadrons, we could at least point out that military actions which we plan to begin in April will take several months to complete (i.e., time needed for training of crews before Turks can utilize fully 104s, et cetera), and that delivery of bombs will be part of same general cycle of development. “Third”: We could remind Turks that TAF will be occupied some time in absorbing 104 Squadrons now committed. Similarly we busy making extensive preparations required consummate accelerated delivery schedule and making adjustments in delivery schedules to other countries in order provide planes for Turkey. Therefore, we cannot yet make promises for a third squadron, but TAF’s further requirements will be in forefront our thinking as we plan disposition future aircraft production. “Fourth”: Aside from requirements for rotational squadron which is now scheduled to be transferred from Incirlik to Cigli approximately 1 March and transfer of certain Air Force administrative facilities from Izmir to Cigli, which has already taken place, we do not know of any new US functions which it is essential be performed there. We recognize that American military would naturally like utilize at least some of installations previously devoted Jupiters, but this point does appear one area where US could make substantial adjustment in direction meeting Turkish desires and we recommend Secretary Defense reply reflect willingness be forthcoming as we possibly can. In fact, this may be key to success of implementation process. “Fifth”: We cannot be sure what interpretation place on this point and, unless State and Defense have further information, we suggest Secretary Defense ask for more specifics while pointing out review of force targets should be continuous process through SACEUR and NATO in which US always ready play active role. “Sixth”: We can only agree with objective Turks wish to achieve here and might well indicate willingness discuss this matter with them. In addition to questions raised these two letters, we should add anything we can of positive nature to our presentation. For instance, in view obstacles over Rota, use of Turkish base for Polaris, such as Marmaris, could be very helpful in meeting our psychological problem as Foreign Minister suggested to me. We did not actually use fall back position authorized Deptel 646 concerning inclusion Turkish Naval officers on NATO staffs at Naples and Ankara on some Polaris trips as thinking appeared then in process development but, if feasible, it might still prove useful courtesy to offer even though it would by no means fill Turk desire participation in Polaris system. Of more importance as material demonstration our continued interest in Turk military capability is possible formal offering of Hawk system to GOT in near future, which we understand CINCEUR is now appraising at Secretary Defense request. In other words, we should offer all concrete indications of interest within our power at this stage which will improve flavor of our general proposition. We recommend reply to Sancar come to him from Mr. McNamara since it now becoming clear our difficulties are focused in MOD and TGS and reply through less direct method would be correspondingly less effective. Secondly, GOT agreement to missile substitution and NAC approach mark transition from major decision which political in nature to implementation phase which, though it has strong political implications, is military in essence. However, in order avoid confusion of dual channels, I suggest reply be forwarded to me for transmission Sancar through Foreign Minister. We have been giving considerable thought over ways of meeting requirement voiced by Sancar for negotiations between American and Turk delegates, which in principle we believe may have merit. Personal discussions covering Turkish military desires and our reaction to them in greater depth than is possible by letter might clear air in MOD and TGS which has now apparently become pretty cloudy. Such meeting would also symbolize our continued interest in Turkish defense and give important boost in right direction to detailed phase our negotiation and perhaps play vital role in obtaining approval exchange of notes. As regards location of meeting, we can see certain advantages in having Turks go to Washington, but we believe GOT would have difficulty sending anyone with sufficient authority negotiate and in any case Turks would then have to come back with something quite significant in hand. While visit of US official here would not eliminate this problem, it would not arise in such compelling form, so that better plan might be for senior DOD official, who can speak with authority, to visit Turkey when NAC presentation concluded and Bayram holiday here is over on February 27.On March 8, General Robert Wood, acting as Secretary McNamara’s personal representative, flew to Ankara for talks with Defense Minister Sancar and other Turkish Defense Ministry and General Staff officials. In discussions with Turkish officials, Wood was able to achieve agreement on the outstanding issues relating to the withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles and Turkish supply requirements. After a stopover in Paris to report to NATO officials, Wood returned to Washington on March 15. Documentation concerning the Wood mission is in Department of State, Turkish Desk Files: Lot 65 D 325, Jupiter—March–April 1963. Hare 395. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Tur–US. Secret. Drafted by Komer and approved in the White House on October 30. Washington, September 30, 1963, 4:30 p.m. SUBJECT President’s Meeting with Deputy Prime Minister Alican of Turkey, September 30, 1963 PARTICIPANTS Deputy Prime Minister Ekrem Alican Turkish Finance Minister Ferit Melen Ambassador Turgut Menemencioglu The President Deputy Assistant Secretary John Jernegan R. W. Komer Deputy Prime Minister Alican said President Gursel and Prime Minister Inonu sent their best wishes to the President and had asked Alican and Melen to tell him about Turkey’s problems. The present Turkish Government was a coalition of three parties, which he described. Turkey’s situation was becoming more stabilized every day, even though coalition government was a new thing (it was actually the second in modern Turkish history). The Turks were also facing a new experience in planned economic life. The Five Year Plan was in its first year. Planned economy was not easy to run; there were difficulties—especially in external financing. However, the Consortium had come through, with United States help.At its July 5 meeting, the OECD’s Turkish Aid Consortium discussed increasing the aid pledges of its individual member nations with the objective of assisting Turkey to meet the goals of its Five-Year Plan. Alican asked the President to help continue the Consortium approach and resolution of such difficulties as existed. He stressed that Turkey’s very friendly feelings toward the United States were from the people, from the nation itself, and not just the government. Through all the events since May 1960, there had been no change in the friendship of the Turkish people toward the American people—no sign of animosity toward Americans. Turkey’s friendship came from the nation itself. Today Turkey was not hesitating at all in its basic political philosophy. It was loyal to Western principles, and loyal to NATO. But the economic problem remained—if Turkey could get through the Five Year Plan successfully, everything would go well. But if the Plan failed, there was trouble ahead. As to internal financing, the Turks had made every sacrifice and met Plan goals. They had levied 1.5 billion TL in new taxes in the first Plan year. While they understood the difficulties facing their European and American friends, they needed our help in the Consortium. Since things were going a little slowly, they were spending their own reserves. Alican said, “If the United States supports us, the rest of the Consortium will too. The economic problems of Turkey are vital in this phase of Turkish life; if the Five-Year Plan is a success, Turkey will turn the corner.” The President responded that “Our relations with Turkey are one of our strongest ties. We regard Turkey as essential.” He commented that we had put a lot of money into Turkey, but it was largely military aid, so the domestic economy had not been able to expand very much. Therefore, the President thought it proper we concentrate our energies on economic matters now. Turkey had greater military security today than ever before. Khrushchev was in trouble with China and at home. We had a hostage in Cuba—if he attacked elsewhere we could do the same in Cuba. This did not mean we could relax. We had been close to collision three times—Cuba, Laos, Berlin—in the last three years. The President did not see much hope of a real detente, but neither did he see much likelihood of Soviet attack. The United States was keeping our defenses strong, and would continue to do so. Next year’s United States military budget would be greater than this year’s. The President agreed with Alican we should concentrate on the economic front. Turkey should keep its guard up too, but the President did not see much military threat. He did see other risks, however. The Communists were still strong in Italy, there might be a popular front in France after De Gaulle, the Communist Party was still strong in Greece—here were the places where Khrushchev could make trouble. Turkey had not had these problems, but they might occur if the Turkish people did not begin to see a better life. The President then described his aid problems on Capitol Hill and the likely cuts. He said we would still regard Turkey as a major recipient, but we would not have the resources this year we had last year. We had balance of payments problems too, though we could manage these over time. In any case, our security commitment to Turkey was “strong”. We saw it as the keystone of the CENTO/SEATO system. We would continue to work with the Consortium. We should maintain our military strength but focus on the domestic economy. This was the most important battle for the next few years. We had helped Turkey a lot, especially militarily but had not helped much economically. Alican responded that United States economic aid too had helped. Also military aid had helped Turkey avoid trouble with small neighbors like Iraq and Syria. If Turkey could improve its economic situation, its army would be maintained at its present strong level. “Our most important program is the Five-Year Plan. If it fails, the Turkish nation’s hopes will decline. We have accepted economic planning, and are going for a 7% GNP rise annually. We are trying to maintain a balance between the developed parts of the country and the under-developed eastern parts where Kurds live. The Five-Year Plan is vital to Turkey.” There followed some discussion of the problems Turkey confronted in the Consortium. The $250 million first-year target had been met, but Alican complained that the terms offered by various Europeans were unsatisfactory. Ambassador Menemencioglu interjected that Turkey would probably be unable to use some of the credits for this reason. Alican concluded that for 1963 the Consortium contribution would be satisfactory but that this was less likely for 1964. He urged our help with the Europeans, saying if “the United States will support us, we will make it.” The President assured Alican, “We will work with you.” He said we too wished we could get the Europeans to give better terms. We had had the same trouble in the Indian and Pakistani cases; we would do the best we could. We thought Turkey was essential. Our chief problem now was to get aid through Congress so we could help. Our guarantees were strong and we were pretty sure we could avoid war, so we should give emphasis to economic problems. We would maintain our strength because Khrushchev was out to cause us what trouble he could. Alican wished the President every success in this endeavor. 396. Memorandum of ConversationSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Tur–US. Confidential. Drafted by Talbot and approved by the White House on December 2. Washington, November 26, 1963, 11 a.m. SUBJECT Turkish-U.S. Relations PARTICIPANTS President Johnson Under Secretary Averell Harriman Assistant Secretary of State Phillips Talbot Prime Minister Ismet Inonu of TurkeyThe Prime Minister and Foreign Minister were in Washington to attend the November 25 funeral of President Kennedy who had been assassinated in Dallas on November 22. Foreign Minister Feridun Erkin of Turkey Ambassador Menemencioglu of Turkey In a conversation marked by warmth of mutual confidence and respect, the principal exchanges were, in paraphrase, as follows: President Johnson: It is a great tribute to you as well as to the late President that you have come on this sad occasion. There is no one of the 92 representatives here I more appreciate having come than you, not only because of my great regard for your leadership, loyalty and convictions, but also because of our great affection for the Turkish people. We face many difficult problems, which seem to be constantly arising, but I am happy that we are resolving them together. Prime Minister Inonu: This great tragedy that has befallen the American nation has caused deep grief to the entire Turkish people. The sentiment dominant in Turkey now is to share your grief and to feel that if there are any duties we can carry we should be ready at this moment. President Johnson: I am grateful. That sentiment would be typical of the Turks and we know this to be your feeling. Prime Minister Inonu: I am aware that the entire world is represented here this moment and how busy you are. It is with great gratitude that I am received by you and I will tell the Turkish people of your kindness. President Johnson: I could not let you go back home without seeing you because I need the inspiration I always get from the Turks. One of the most stimulating experiences of my life was the reception given to me in Turkey. My feeling for Turkey has been of long duration. I was one of the first Congressmen, as a young man, to go into the well of the House to speak in support of the Truman Doctrine. Prime Minister Inonu: The fact that you have such contacts with the Turks is a source of consolation and confidence to us. Your visit is still warmly remembered. President Johnson: I was quite concerned when we started talking about the removal of the Jupiters last year for fear the Turks would worry, but I became convinced that the new arrangements would give you more modern protection and thus would be good for the people for whom I have such high respect. We realize that a great deal must still be done by your people but I want you to know that our commitments are complete and will be respected. Prime Minister Inonu: In our foreign policy Turkey has a series of commitments but for us the basis and cornerstone of them all is our close alliance with the United States. It is true we have had internal discussions and divergences in recent years. This can happen in any country. What is important and unshakable in our national life is what I have just mentioned to you. Whatever Government there may be in Turkey, its basis will be close association with the United States. President Johnson: I am confident the same is true of the United States. This Administration ends in January 1965. But whatever administration there may be, our friendship and alliance with you would be American foreign policy. Prime Minister Inonu: The second point I wish to express is that so far as our internal situation goes the one most important matter is the economic situation. The question of economic betterment is a vital problem for us. I beg of you to pay attention to this concern of ours. President Johnson: I certainly will, and you may be sure that we will do what we can, within the limits of what Congress permits. You know that we have the same problems in our country as you have in yours. Foreign aid has been going on for 17 years, taxes are high—as high as 90% for some, the people are tired, and we have our difficulties. But we also know that no one is participating in our common efforts more strongly than the Turks, and we are glad. You have come to see me in good company, with one of my dearest friends, Averell Harriman. If there is any detail of these problems that you wish to bring to our attention, mention them to Governor Harriman and we will try to do something about them. I hope you may come again to see us. Prime Minister Inonu: Thank you. That will be a fine day. 397. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, POL Tur. Secret; Priority. Relayed to the White House and repeated to Ankara, Athens, Nicosia, London, and Moscow. Rusk and Erkin were in Paris to attend the North Atlantic Council Ministerial Meeting December 16–17. Paris, December 15, 1963, 7 p.m. Secto 8. Following summary of Secretary’s December 15 conversation with Turkish Foreign Minister Erkin is uncleared, subject to revision and not for dissemination to foreign officials. Erkin called on Secretary alone; Tyler participated on US side. 1. Turkish political scene. Describing political situation in Turkey, Erkin made three points: (A) He had urged Inonu to form coalition government composed of Justice and Republican parties but Inonu reluctant to form such coalition; (B) if present impasse continued, early elections might be required; (C) whatever new government formed, Turkish foreign policy would remain unchanged. Erkin then raised following four topics with Secretary, speaking from paper which he left with Secretary and which will be pouched Department and Ankara: (A) NATO strategy; (B) NATO force planning exercise; (C) equipment requirements of Turkish army; (D) Turkish economic requirements as compared with her defense contribution. Also raised subjects Cyprus and Turkish-Soviet relations. 2. NATO strategy. Erkin said NATO military committee discussions on strategy (MC 100/1)MC–100/1 was a draft document of the NATO Military Committee outlining the long-term threat analysis facing the Alliance. were based upon assumption NATO’s conventional forces should be raised to levels necessary to resist any Soviet conventional attack. Turkey, however, was concerned because it was unlikely that NATO could reach required force levels. Problem for Turkey was distinction between conventional and nuclear war. Turks understood that aggression against Greece or Turkey would be met with conventional forces but questioned whether conventional response would be adequate if Turkey attacked. Secretary replied no one would accept injury to any NATO partner and alliance would respond with whatever weapons were required. Noted that attack on Turkey would lead to total war and emphasized there were no special geographic distinctions in NATO. Secretary recalled that NATO countries were still covered by Athens guidelines regarding use of nuclear weapons,Reference is to the NATO communique of May 6, 1962; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, May 28, 1962, pp. 862–863. showed Erkin copy of Athens guidelines, and pointed out that these guidelines made no reference to limited war. Erkin commented that main thing he wanted was reassurance. 3. NATO force planning exercise. Erkin questioned whether this was appropriate time to undertake basic study of alliance defense effort in view of economic differences between US and Common Market, among Common Market countries and between EEC and EFTA. Secretary noted we were interested in review of NATO forces, in part, because of questions being raised in the US about equitable burden sharing within alliance. US was only country which had met its force requirements on central front. There was feeling in US that if others did not meet commitments why should US. 4. Turkish military and economic requirements. Erkin cited deficiencies in Turkish military forces, especially in Thrace, and observed that domestic economic requirements limited Turkey’s ability to increase its defense expenditures. Situation could force Turkey to reconsider her contribution to NATO and, for this reason, he planned to raise at NATO Ministerial meeting methods by which NATO as whole could provide assistance to Turkey. Secretary, after observing that recent Turkish consortium had not been satisfactory, said we will continue to do whatever we could ourselves and would press our allies to do more. He urged Turkey also to press other NATO allies. In addition, Secretary agreed support Erkin proposal that Turkish requirements be studied by permanent council. 5. Cyprus. Erkin said Makarios’s proposals to amend Cyprus Constitution were highly unsatisfactory. Warned that if Makarios did not continue to respect Constitution, Turkey might find it necessary to request guarantor powers to intervene in Cyprus, either individually or collectively. Makarios’s proposal seemed designed to destroy Constitution, which recognized 2 separate groups on Cyprus, and instead to establish unitary state. If Makarios continued to press point, Turkey might be forced to ask for partition of island. Erkin urged US to make strong representation in Cyprus emphasizing to Makarios that his proposal endangered peace in area. Secretary was noncommittal. Said US took position that guarantor powers were ones which could best resolve the Cyprus problem. US already had enough problems on its agenda without taking on the Cyprus dispute. However, he agreed to discuss Cyprus with Butler and Venizelos and to talk again with Erkin before conclusion of NATO Ministerial Meeting. 6. Turkey and USSR. Erkin said he had been invited to USSR and planned to go to Moscow in March if he was still Foreign Minister. He had made it clear to Soviets that there would be no point in discussing Turkish adherence to the Western Alliance during his Moscow visit because Turks had no intention of changing any of her commitments. Erkin told Secretary, however, that his trip to Moscow might be valuable if he could play some helpful role as intermediary between West and USSR. Secretary did not respond directly to this point. However, he volunteered to send Ambassador Hare basic status report on East-West relations just prior to Erkin’s departure to Moscow, which he thought might be useful to Erkin during visit. Erkin expressed appreciation. During concluding discussion, Secretary briefly reviewed status of some of outstanding multilateral East-West problems—such as the proposed non-aggression arrangements and non-dissemination proposal—and also reviewed US-USSR bilateral negotiations. Rusk Index Abrams, Manuel, 627 Acheson, Dean, 696 Adenauer, Konrad, 72, 137, 383, 428, 611 Adoula, Cyrille, 268, 269 Adzhubei, Aleksei, 436, 504 Afghanistan, 185 AFL-CIO, 494 Africa, 198, 343 colonialism in, 184–185, 193–194, 197, 251, 268 Congo, 268–269 Soviet Union, relations with, 403–404 Agency for International Development (AID), 231, 242, 259, 310, 339n, 502–503, 523, 530n, 531, 629, 631 Aksal (Turkey), 705 Alankus, Gen., 689 Albania, 43, 268, 321, 329, 356, 382, 390 Algeria, 184, 194 Alican, Ekrem, 689, 760–763 Anderson, Eugenie, 27–32, 36–40, 41, 51–52 Anderson, George, 532n Andreotti, Giulio, 740 Andrews, Nicholas G., 23, 355 Angelis, Odesseus, 664n Angelov (Bulgaria), 27 Angola, 194, 404 Appling, Hugh, 382, 383, 385 Artukovic, Andrija, 251 Ashford, Howard J., 726 Atherton, Alfred L., 512 Atomic weapons. See Nuclear weapons. Austria, 330, 491 Berlin, 389–390 East-West contacts, 361 East-West issues, 389–390, 395–396 EEC, 361–362, 363–364, 368–369, 376–377 membership, 378–379, 387–388, 394, 396 EFTA, 379, 387, 388, 394, 396 Export-Import Bank, 366, 367, 370, 371, 372, 381 German reunification, 398–399 Gorbach visit to Soviet Union, 374, 376 Gorbach visit to U.S., 369 Hungarian refugees, 360 Italy, South Tyrol problem, 361, 362–363, 385–386, 392–393 Kreisky-Johnson talks, 393 Kreisky-Kennedy talks, 388–392 NATO, 379 Nuclear Test Ban Control Agency, 360 Soviet Bloc, relations with, 361, 374–375, 382–383, 388, 394 Soviet Union, 364, 374–379, 389–390 U.S. economic policy: credits for U.S. arms, 365–367, 370–375, 380, 381 P.L. 480 loan, 361, 395 Averoff-Tossizza, Evangelos, 608, 622, 637, 639 NATO, 660–661 Rusk, talks with, 658–661 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 542, 551, 558–559 Greek-U.S. relations, 605–608, 651–654 Avilov, Viktor Ivanovich, 364, 378–379 Ayub Khan, Mohammed, 185 Bakaric (President of Croatia), 336 Baker, John A., Jr., 47 Balaceanu, Petre, 10–11, 43, 44, 45, 49 Baldry, Col., 664, 665, 667 Balewa, Sir Abubakar Balewa, 198 Balkans (see also Albania; Austria; Bulgaria; Hungary; Italy; Romania; Yugoslavia), 611 Ball, George W., 123–124, 146, 158, 216, 221, 349, 368, 369, 695n Austria, 377, 386–388 Cyprus, 518 Finland, 451–454 Greece, 605–608, 657 Poland, 131–132, 142–144 Turkey, 743–744 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 555–557, 559–560, 562–564 Yugoslavia, 211–212, 262–263, 322–324 Barghoorn, Frederick C., 54 Barnsdale, William J., 120n, 335n, 341, 348n Barringer, Philip, 365, 366 Basgol (Turkey), 694 Bashev, Ivan K., 47–49 Battle, Lucius D., 120–122, 217, 234–235, 265, 515 Bayar, Celal, 710n Bayramoglu (Turkey), 578 Beam, Jacob D., 67–68, 103n, 104–106 Behrman, Jack N., 124, 125–126 Belgium, 56, 194, 653 Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States (1961), 517, 615 Soviet position, 253 Tito statements, 201–209, 213, 231, 232–233, 236, 241 U.S. reactions, 271, 272 Yugoslav-U.S. talks, 192, 197–198, 200 Bell, David, 310 Bendall, David, 682 Bennett, W. Tapley, 621–622, 666 Berger, Samuel D., 604n Bergesen, Alf, 530n Berlin, 18, 19–20, 269, 477, 490, 506, 761 and Austria, 389–390 Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States (1961), 203, 204 and disarmament, 111 and Finland, 397–400, 404, 405, 410, 412, 443, 462, 504 and Greece, 613, 640 and Poland, 79, 98, 111–112, 133, 135, 137, 177–179 Soviet position, 199–200, 201, 510 and Yugoslavia, 193, 196–197, 202–203, 281–284 Beyer, Roland K., 425n Bielka, Gen., 368 Bielka-Karltreu, Erich, 394–396 Birgi, Nuri, 756 Bitsios, Dimitri, 651 Bjorkenheim (Finland), 441, 444, 446 Black, Eugene, 718 Bloomfield, Alexander, 27, 36 Blumenthal, W. Michael, 77n, 109n, 122 Bock, Fritz, 364 Bohlen, Charles E., 463 Bolivia, 266, 342 Borba (Yugoslav publication), 249 Bowles, Chester B., 71–72, 196, 199n, 221, 232n, 362, 538, 695–697, 705n, 706n Bowling, John W., 535, 540n, 574, 595n, 755n Bracken, Kay, 540n, 569n, 585n, 682, 683 Brandt, Willy, 203, 390 Brazil, 191–192, 201, 266, 342 Brewster, H. Daniel, 632–636 Brezhnev, Leonid I., 389, 397, 399, 405 Briggs, Ellis O., 608, 609 Greek political situation, 613–614, 623 Greek-U.S. economic relations, 625–626 prewar foreign bonds, 604–605, 616 Greek-U.S. military relations, 614, 616–617, 622 Brimelow, T., 409–410 Brotherhood of the Cross, 335–336 Brown, Ben H., Jr., 730 Brown, L. Dean, 519 Brubeck, William H., 271–272, 346–347, 530–532 Bruce, David K.E., 463 Bucur, Nicolae, 43 Budinov (USSR), 52n Budway, Robert R., 32 Buell, William A., Jr., 161n Bulgaria, 27–28, 382 Balaceanu’s credentials presentation, 10–11 changes in government, 27–29 East-West issues, 42–43 El Al claims, 38 citizenship problems, 48, 51–52 cultural exchanges, 5–7 financial claims negotiations with U.S., 5, 23–25, 37, 47–48, 49 Claims Agreement, 47 German Democratic Republic, relations with, 36 Greece, relations with, 619, 659 Kennedy-Popov talks, 42–43 media attacks on Kennedy, 40 normalization of relations with U.S., 51–52 trade with U.S., 5, 39–40, 42–43, 48 U.S. Legation, access to, 51 U.S. Legation attacked, 63–64 U.S. Legation raised to Embassy status, 6, 38, 46 VOA jamming, 51–52 wheat purchases, 52 Yugoslavia, relations with, 36–37 Zhivkov-Anderson talks, 27–32, 35–41 Bundy, McGeorge, 120, 217, 256, 265, 271n, 359, 455n, 516, 529, 577, 657n, 675, 695, 703n Greece, 631–632 Yugoslavia, 309–310, 347–348 Burdett, William C., 409, 416n, 421n, 425n, 428n, 432n, 445n, 453n, 472n, 479n, 489, 490 Cabot, John, 123, 171 Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States (1961), 192 Polish-U.S. relations, 110n, 117–119 most-favored-nation status, 127, 130–131, 140–141, 158, 172, 180–181 P.L. 480 program, 144–145, 149–150, 153–154 trade, 124–126 travel of satellite officials in U.S., 173, 178, 181–183 U.S. Embassy (Warsaw) assessments, 161–170 Caccia, Harold, 463, 464 Canada, 97, 177, 259, 736 Canellopoulos, Panayotis, 614 Caramanlis. See Karamanlis Carle, Jack M., 49 Central Intelligence Agency, U.S., 532 Ceylon, 534 Chapin, Frederick M., 58 Chile, 266, 342 China, People’s Republic of, 43 Soviet Union, relations with, 115–116, 249, 261, 311, 320–321, 323, 329, 337–338, 341–342, 353–354, 355, 395, 492, 504, 506, 507, 509 United States, relations with, 356, 534 Yugoslavia, relations with, 88, 267, 312, 323 Christensen, Keld, 409, 421n, 425n, 428n, 432n, 445n, 453n, 455n, 456n, 472n, 479n Cicognani, Cardinal, 22 Clark (UK), 581, 584n Clausewitz, Karl von, 400 Claxton, Philander, 682 Clerides, Glafkos, 544 Colonialism, 184–185, 193–194, 197, 251, 268 Colonna (NATO), 660, 661n Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC), 166, 240 Common Market. See European Economic Community (EEC) Communist World Youth Festival at Helsinki, 458, 460, 468 Congo, 184, 194, 268–269 Congress, U.S.: Acts of: Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act (see also P.L. 480 subheadings under individual countries), 620n Agriculture Act of 1961, 101, 102 Battle Act, 65, 69, 71, 78, 143, 144, 169 Export Control Act of 1949, 125, 465 Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, 339n, 346 Johnson Debt Default Act of 1934, 125 Mutual Defense Control Act of 1951, see Battle Act above Mutual Security Act of 1954, 65 Mutual Security and Related Agencies Appropriation Act of 1961, 65 Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1951, 121, 122 Trade Expansion Act of 1962, 143, 176, 275, 284, 286, 314, 319, 344, 349, 356, 503 Trade Reform Act of 1962, 131n Polish most-favored-nation status, 120–122, 127, 130–132, 140–141, 176, 180–181 Yugoslav most-favored-nation status, 273–279, 285–292, 326–327 Conversations with Stalin (Djilas), 262n Cook, Eiler R., 416n, 425n Coombs, Philip H., 82 Coon, Carleton S., Jr., 515n, 518n, 523n, 530n, 542n Cottam, Howard R., 559n, 605 Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA), 44, 126, 364, 379, 387 Couve de Murville, Maurice, 384, 671 Cowles, Leon L., 688–691, 692–693 Crawford, William A., 43, 45 Crnobranja, Bogdan, 189, 191, 195, 196, 336 Cross, Samuel, 365 Crowley, Edwin D., 551, 552 Cuba, 66–67, 69, 106, 116, 135–140, 192, 268, 490, 491, 502, 504, 506, 609, 611n Czechoslovakia, relations with, 19, 20 and Turkey, 730n, 731–734, 740, 747 Soviet Union, relations with, 137–138, 282, 291, 352–353, 356–357, 486, 487 Yugoslavia, relations with, 285–286 Cyprus: American university in Cyprus, proposed, 529 Commonwealth membership, 513, 591 Communist Party, 533, 536, 538–540, 602, 610, 685–686 international economic assistance, 519–520 Johnson (Lyndon) visit, 532–536 Kyprianou-Rusk talks, 519–520, 590–592 Kyprianou visit to U.S., 517–518 labor movement, 528 London-Zurich agreements, 512, 541, 547, 557, 560, 574, 578, 601 Makarios-Kennedy talks, 525–528 Makarios visit to U.S., 524–529 right-wing political parties, 533–534, 537 Thorp Report, 513 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions: cease-fire, 601–602 constitutional amendments, 520–523, 558–559, 561, 564, 566–570, 572, 578, 581, 584, 586, 591–593, 601 Greek Cypriot position, 557n, 564–569, 572–573, 586–587, 600–601 Greek position, 542, 558–560, 571–572, 585, 686–687 Kyprianou-Rusk discussion, 590–592 Makarios June 1961 memorandum, 566–567, 568–569 Makarios public statements, 553–554, 555–556 Makarios November 1963 memorandum, 586–588 military intervention, possible, 598 municipalities issue, 539–540, 541, 542, 543–546, 553–555, 561–562, 574–575 NATO briefing, 597–598 taxation, 521–522 Treaties of Guarantee and Alliance, amendment of, 564–565, 567, 568, 570–571, 572, 578, 581, 601 Turkish Cypriot position, 535–536, 562n Turkish position, 540n, 542n, 546, 547–548, 550, 553–555, 574–576, 577–578, 587–590, 594–595, 596, 597–598, 599, 766–767 U.K. position, 518, 520–521, 549, 551–552, 581n, 582–583, 585, 592–593, 598 United Nations, 532, 555–556, 562–564, 574–576, 600–601 U.S. Embassy (Ankara) assessments, 547–548, 550, 582–583 U.S. Embassy (Nicosia) assessments, 546, 564–565, 573, 581–582, 586–587, 601–603 U.S. policy, 515, 516, 529, 530–532 U.S. position, 540–542, 548–549, 555–557, 559–560, 563, 569–570, 577, 579–580, 585, 591–593, 595–596, 600–601 U.S.-U.K. peace efforts, 592–594 violence, 594–597 United States, relations with: Turk Cypriot position, 535–536 U.S. position, 514–516, 518, 529–532 U.S. economic assistance, 517, 523–524, 525–527, 531–532, 534, 537n, 538n Technical Cooperation Agreement, 512–513, 532 VOA transmitter, 527, 533–534, 537n water resources development, 526, 529, 531 Cyrankiewicz, Jozef, 104–106, 174 Czechoslovakia, 382, 383, 394 Berlin, 19–20 Cuba, relations with, 19, 20 cultural exchanges, 8, 33 David-Rusk talks, 19–20 disarmament, 20 Duda’s credentials presentation, 53–54 economic negotiations with U.S., 7, 13–15, 20, 21–22, 53–54 embassy employees, harassment, 3–4, 9–10 normalization of relations with U.S., 8–9, 33 trade fairs, 8 trade with U.S., 7–8, 11–14, 20, 21–22, 54 travel restrictions on diplomats, 53–54 U.S. citizens visiting Czechoslovakia, 32, 34–35 David, Vaclav, 7–8, 12n, 19–20, 33–35 Davis, Richard H., 10, 26, 42, 49, 59, 61, 63–65, 109n, 133, 161n, 236n, 280, 331, 341, 348, 421n, 484, 740n de Gaulle, Charles, 137, 269, 384, 491, 611, 671, 762 EEC, 387, 391, 392 Defense, U.S. Department of, 271, 314, 450, 451, 453, 455, 489 Denktash, Rauf, 535–536 Denmark, 384, 433, 467, 510 Dennis, John M., 53 Denson, J.B., 409 Development Assistance Group (DAG), 520 Development Loan Fund (DLF), 206, 604, 605 Disarmament (see also Nuclear weapons): European nuclear-free zone, 111 nuclear test-ban treaty, 44, 175–176, 351–352, 503–504 Polish-U.S. talks, 110–112, 114 Rapacki Plan, 123–124, 155–156, 726 Romanian-U.S. talks, 17 Scandinavian nuclear-free zone, 496–498, 510 Soviet Union, 156, 264n, 343, 639–640 Djerdja (Yugoslavia), 204, 210 Djilas, Milovan, 262–263, 265 Dobrosielski, Marian, 108, 122, 145, 147, 155, 159, 174, 176, 179 Donnelly, William F., 77, 161n Dovas, Constantine, 620, 621n Drozniak, Edward, 76, 116, 117, 177 Polish-U.S.relations, 141–144, 159–160, 174–175 Rapacki Plan, 123–124, 155–156 travel of satellite officials in U.S., 179–180 most-favored-nation status, 158 P.L. 480 program, 122–123, 145–148, 175–177 Drzic, Barin, 285 Duda, Karel, 53–54 Duke, Angier Biddle, 42, 53 Dulles, John Foster, 105 Dutton, Frederick G., 276–278, 339–340 East Germany. See German Democratic Republic (GDR). East Europe (see also individual countries), 76, 506–507 Captive Nations Week proclamation, 17 cultural exchanges, 5–7, 8, 33, 69, 70–71, 82, 99, 153–154, 158 Legations raised to Embassy status, 46, 56–57, 60, 61 East-West trade (see also Most-favored nation status; trade under individual countries; U.S. economic policy under individual countries): Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), 363–364 Egypt, 404 Eichmann, Karl A., 251 Eisenhower, Dwight D., 65, 104, 121, 270n, 398 Ejvoda (Yugoslavia), 209 El Al Airlines, 38 Enckell, Ralph, 505, 507 Enginsoy, Gen., 714 Erez (Turkey), 726 Erhard, Ludwig, 384, 387, 390–391 Erkin, Feridun, 585, 686, 725, 726, 730, 740, 763 intermediate-range ballistic missile deployment in Turkey, 742, 748–749, 753–757 NATO, 765–766 Rusk, talks with, 765–767 Soviet Union, 767 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 551, 583, 595, 599, 765–766 Greek position, 571–572 Makarios public statements, 553–554 Turkish position, 547, 550, 587–588, 594–595 United Nations, 574–576 Erlander, Tage, 439 Europe. See East Europe; West Europe. European Economic Community (EEC): Austria, 361–364, 368–369, 376–379, 387–388, 394, 396 Finland, 401, 478 France, 387, 391, 392 neutral countries, 368–369, 427 Poland, relations with, 124–126, 132, 142 Soviet Union, 376–379 United Kingdom, 384, 387, 392, 401, 402 Yugoslavia, relations with, 132, 281, 288, 312, 321, 330, 331, 336, 356 European Free Trade Area (EFTA), 361–362, 388, 427 Austria, 379, 387, 388, 394, 396 European Space Agency (ESRO), 379 Evans, Rowland, 218 Export-Import Bank, 259, 288 Austria, 366, 367, 370, 371, 372, 381 Poland, 65, 80 Fanfani, Amintore, 137 Faure, Edgar R., 627, 628, 629 Ferguson (NATO), 627, 628, 629, 642 Fessenden, Russell H., 717 Finland, 97 agricultural production, 485 arms purchases, 484–485, 487–488, 505 Finnish position, 456–462, 476, 484–488 from Soviet Union, 441, 444, 471, 486–487, 500, 505 from U.K., 447–449, 453–456, 463–470, 472–474, 485, 498–500, 506 from U.S. (see also U.S. military assistance below), 452–453, 479–484, 489–490, 491 U.S. position, 450, 451–452, 463–470, 472–473 Berlin, 397–400, 404, 405, 410, 412, 443, 462 communism in, 438, 440–441, 504, 507 Cuba, 490, 491, 502, 504, 506 East-West issues, 403, 477–479, 506–507 EEC, 401, 478 EFTA, 427 Finnish Peace Treaty of 1948, reinterpretation of (see also arms purchases above), 448–452, 485–486, 500, 505–506 Johnson’s (Lyndon) visit, 501–505 Kekkonen-Gufler talks, 439–441, 477–479, 490–493 Kekkonen-Kennedy talks, 397–407, 422–424 parliamentary elections, 413, 415, 440, 443, 462, 464 Scandinavian nuclear-free zone, 496–498, 510 Soviet October 1961 note: Hallama assessment, 407–408, 411–412, 414–415 Karjaleinin assessment, 410–411, 416 Kekkonnen assessment, 429–431, 436–438, 439, 442–443 Kekkonen Novosibirsk visit, 422–424, 428, 429, 434, 455, 458 NATO briefing, 432–434 Nordic ambassadors, 425–426 U.K. position, 409–410 U.S. Embassy (Helsinki) assessments, 413–414, 416, 417–418, 426–427, 434–436, 439–440 U.S. position, 418–422, 428, 432–434, 443 Soviet Union, relations with (see also arms purchases; Soviet October 1961 note above), 401–403, 406–407 Soviet-Finnish Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Aid of 1948, 404, 423, 429, 466, 469, 470, 485–486, 489, 490, 505 trade with, 421n, 433, 457, 491–492, 502–504 United States, relations with, 406, 411, 423, 503 U.S. military assistance (see also arms purchases above), 446, 475 U.S. policy, 418–419, 493–496 Wennerstrom case, 499 Finletter, Thomas K., 597–598, 682, 730–733, 736, 756, 757 Fitch, Gen., 666 Fleischer, Jack M., 32 Foley, Arthur, 682 Folsom, Robert S., 661 Ford Foundation, 82 Foster, William C., 16, 110 France, 200, 762 Africa, 198 Austria, relations with, 387 De Gaulle’s power, 392 European cooperation, 384 Finland, relations with, 485, 491 Greece, relations with, 683 Poland, relations with, 76, 177 ustashi infiltration, 251 Yugoslavia, relations with, 607 Frank, Eugene, 386 Frederika, Queen of Greece, 619, 662–663, 684–685 Freeman, Orville L., 44, 170, 177 Friberg, Frank, 438, 483 Frontistis, Gen., 619, 630 Frost, Adm., 716 Fulbright, J. William, 327 Galbraith, J. Kenneth, 116 Garthoff, Raymond L., 16, 19, 110, 113 Gaston-Marin (Romania), 50, 55–56 Gaud, William S., 525, 526, 527, 528 Gavin, James M., 618–619, 639, 699–701, 724–726 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), 124, 288, 368, 402 Georkadjis, Polykarpos, 537 German Democratic Republic (GDR) (see also Berlin), 269 Bulgaria, relations with, 36 Poland, relations with, 111–112, 139 Soviet Union, relations with, 399 U.S. policy, 138, 398–399 German reunification, 113, 181–184, 203–204, 282–283, 398–399 Germany, Federal Republic of (FRG) (see also Berlin), 97, 170, 386, 390–391, 411, 531 Poland, relations with, 69–70, 72, 75, 111–113, 139, 159 Soviet Bloc, relations with, 383 Soviet Union, relations with, 424 Turkey, relations with, 705n, 749n Yugoslavia, relations with, 193, 202–203, 312, 330, 331, 335–336 Getz, John, 682 Ghana, 194 Gheorghiu-Dej, Gheorghe, 44, 45 Gizenga, Antoine, 269 Glenn, Edmund S., 133, 266 Goldberg, Arthur, 528n Gomulka, Wladyslaw, 73–74, 91, 98–99, 118, 133, 174 Goodpaster, Andrew J., 65 Gorbach, Alfons, 364, 369, 374, 376, 393 Gordon, Glenn, 508 Grant, James P., 540n, 542n Greece, 268, 330, 762 Averoff-Rusk talks, 651–654, 658–661 Balkans, situation in, 611 Berlin, 613, 640 Bulgaria, 619, 659 Cuba, 609, 611 disarmament, 639–640 EEC, 613 Queen Frederika-Johnson (U. Alexis) talks, 684–685 Hungary, 56 Karamanlis-Rusk talks, 639–644 Karamanlis-Kennedy correspondence, 612–613 Karamanlis-Kennedy talks, 608–612 Karamanlis visit to U.S., 604–612 NATO, 610–611, 618–619, 621, 631, 655, 657, 660–661, 682–683, 689–691 assistance for defense (see also U.S. support of Greek defense below), 622, 627–630, 637–639, 640–644, 650, 652–654, 655–657, 660–662, 682–683 defense exercises, 671 U.S. July 1963 aide-memoire, 679–681 Southern Command multilateral sea-based force, 736, 737 Wise Men’s report, see assistance for defense above OECD Consortium for Economic Aid, 655–656, 660, 672 political situation, 614, 632–636, 661, 674–679, 681, 685 Karamanlis’ resignation, 674 coup plans, 661, 664–668 elections, 615, 618, 621–622, 623, 684 Queen Frederika’s assessments, 662–663 Soviet Union, relations with, 688 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, see Greek subheadings under Cyprus U.S. economic policy, 613 assistance, 620–621, 625–626, 648 P.L. 480 program, 620, 648–649, 673 prewar foreign bonds, 604–608, 616, 624 U.S. Embassy (Athens) assessments, 620–621, 625–626 U.S. position, 679–681 U.S. guarantee of Greek security, 616–617 U.S. support of Greek defense (see also NATO above), 613, 630–632, 644–647, 651, 658, 669, 670–672, 688 Greene, Myles L., 588 Greenhill, Denis, 472, 473 Grigoriadis, Jean, 639 Gromyko, Andrei, 185, 264, 378, 379, 399, 407, 425, 506, 507, 510, 654 Gufler, Bernard A., 397, 445n, 480n, 496n Finnish arms purchases, 444, 446–448, 459–461, 473–474, 476, 481, 482–483, 488 Kekkonen-Kennedy talks, 422–424 Kekkonen, talks with, 439–441, 477–479, 490–493 Soviet October 1961 note to Finland, 407–408, 410–411, 412–415, 417–418, 426–427, 434–438 U.S. military assistance to Finland, 475 Guinea, 185, 194, 269 Gulen, Alseddin, 525, 527 Gursel, Cemal, 693, 694, 700, 705, 709, 712n, 725 Habsburg, Otto von, 395 Hajek, Jiri, 13–14, 19, 20 Hallama (Finland), 407–408, 410–415, 437 Hallstein, Walter, 368, 384 Hamilton, Fowler, 234–235, 527–528 Hammarskjold, Dag, 184, 194, 517 Hare, Raymond A., 726, 730 intermediate-range ballistic missile deployment in Turkey, 722, 725, 738–739, 742, 748–749, 752–754, 756–759 NATO, Southern Command multilateral sea-based force, 738–739 Turkish coup plans, 707–708, 723 Turkish government restructuring, 710–714, 765 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 547–548, 550, 553–554, 577–578, 582–583, 587–588, 594–595, 599 U.S. economic assistance to Turkey, 720–721 Yassiada trials, 693–694, 705–706, 709–710 Harrer (Austria), 372, 373 Harriman, W. Averell, 55–56, 58–62, 358, 600–601, 763 Hatzipetros, Alexander, 664n Heath, Donald, 624 Helseth, William A., 733 Herter, Christian A., 65 Hilliker, Grant G., 505 Hitler, Adolf, 426, 427 Hoctor, Thomas F., 680 Hodges, Luther H., 53n Home, Lord Alexander, 453n, 463–465, 469, 498–500, 741 Hont, Janos, 58 Horgan, Rogers B., 653 Horsey, Outerbridge, 32–35 Hungary, 321, 382, 394 Austria, relations with, 56, 360, 383 financial claims, 60 Mindszenty’s refuge in U.S. Legation, 1–2, 14–16, 22–23, 59, 60 Mod’s U.S. visit, 58–62 normalization of relations with U.S., 26, 58–62 U.S. Legation raised to Embassy status, 46, 56–57 Hussell, Adm., 630 Illek, Oz, 709 India, 114, 116, 185, 267, 353 Inonu, Ismet, 585, 717 intermediate-range ballistic missile deployment in Turkey, 755–756 Johnson’s (Lyndon) visit to Turkey, 726–730 NATO-Turkey relations, 726 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 542n, 548, 577–578, 594, 595n U.S. economic assistance to Turkey, 720–721 visit to U.S., 763–765 Yassiada trials, 693, 705 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 125n, 517, 531 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), 494 International Control Commission (ICC), 157 International Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, 87 International Monetary Fund (IMF), 125, 616n International Trade Union Secretariat, (ITS), 494 Interparliamentary Union Conference, 357 Iraq, 726–727, 729 Israel, 38 Italy, 312, 330, 762 Austria, South Tyrol problem, 361, 362–363, 385–386, 392–393 Greece, relations with, 653 Hungary, relations with, 56 NATO, Southern Command multilateral sea-based force, 736, 737, 738–739, 740–741 Rossi Commission, 385 Iwaszkiewicz, Edward, 108 Jakobson, Max, 397, 458–460, 473, 484, 496–497, 500–502, 505, 508 Jamieson (UK), 520, 551 Janczewski, Z., 133 Jarring, Gunnar, 425 Jedrychowski, Stefan, 124, 125, 170–171 Jernegan, John, 577, 588–590, 760 Johnson, Griffith, 122 Johnson, Lyndon B., 395, 501–505 Austria, 393 Cyprus, 532–537 Greece, 647–651, 684–685 Turkey, 726–730 Johnson, U. Alexis, 179–180, 421n, 425, 465n, 740n Joint Chiefs of Staff, U.S., 450, 451, 455 Jones, G. Lewis, 520–521, 551–552, 605, 608, 609 Jones, Owen T., 57, 285n Kadar, Janos, 59, 60 Kallai, Gyula, 14–15 Karamanlis, Constantine, 623 Greek elections, 632–636 NATO, 637–644 Johnson (Lyndon), talks with, 647–651 Kennedy, correspondence with, 612–613 Kennedy, talks with, 608–612 prewar foreign bonds, 604–608 resignation of, 618, 674 Rusk, talks with, 639–644 Rusk, letter to, 612–613 U.S. guarantee of Greek security, 616–617 Karasek (Austria), 376 Kardamakis, Vassilios, 633, 664–667 Kardelj, Edvard, 204, 248–249 Karjalainen, Ahti, 397, 407, 410–411, 415, 416, 437 Karman, Theodore, 26 Katz, Julius L., 66, 77n, 109n, 122, 142, 144, 145, 147, 271n, 273, 335n Kaysen, Carl, 108, 339n, 670 Kekkonen, Urho, 434n, 459, 469–470 Berlin, 397–400, 404, 405, 412 Finnish arms purchases, 446, 461–462, 476, 480, 481, 482–483, 488 Finnish parliamentary elections, 413, 415 Finnish-U.S. relations, 397–407, 422–424, 439–441, 477–479, 490–493 Gufler, talks with, 439–441, 477–479, 490–493 Johnson’s (Lyndon) visit to Finland, 501–505 Kennedy, talks with, 397–407, 422–424 Scandinavian nuclear-free zone, 496–497 Soviet October 1961 note, 429–431, 436–438: Kohler, letter to, 442–443 Novosibirsk visit, 422–424, 428, 429, 433, 434, 455, 458 visit to Soviet Union, 508–510 Kennan, George F., 88, 184n, 257, 266, 309, 314, 345, 349 Africa, colonialism in, 193–194, 197 Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States (1961), 192, 197–198, 200, 201–208 Cuba, 352 Djilas case, 265 Kardelj, talks with, 248–249 Kennedy, talks with, 186–187 Popovic, discussion with, 199–202, 250–251 Press Law question, 187–188, 189 resignation of, 284, 356n Rusk’s public statements, 257–258 Tito, discussion with, 332–334 Tito visit to U.S., invitation for, 190–191 Yugoslav-Soviet relations, 263, 264, 315–316, 353 Yugoslav-U.S. relations, 258–260 deteriorating relations, 217–220, 221 disagreements over U.S. policy, 260–261, 324n embassy employees, 189–190 most-favored-nation status, 274, 275–276, 278–279, 285–286, 288–290, 324–327 U.S. Embassy (Belgrade) assessments, 195–196, 198–199, 205–207, 211, 222–230, 231–234, 292–309, 317–319, 328–331, 336–339, 354–355 Kennedy, John F., 137, 292n, 672 assassination of, 393n, 508n, 585n, 763–765n Austria, 388–392 Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States (1961), 236 Berlin, 397–400, 404, 405 Bulgaria: Balaceanu’s credentials presentation, 10–11 Popov, talks with, 42–43 trade, 39 Cyprus, 514, 529–532 Makarios, talks with, 525–528 Czechoslovakia, 53–54 Finland: Finnish-Soviet relations, 419–420, 422–424 Johnson’s (Lyndon) Finland visit, 501–502 Kekkonen, talks with, 397–407, 422–424 military relations, 465n Greece, 157, 675, 679–680 Karamanlis, talks with, 608–612 Papaligouras, talks with, 669–670 Hungary, 62 Laos conflict, 157 NATO, 657 Poland, 71, 81, 83, 86 most-favored-nation status, 143, 158n, 160 Spasowski’s farewell call, 74–76 Soviet Union, 428 Adzhubei, talks with, 436 Khrushchev, talks with, 189n, 702, 704 wheat sales, 51 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 577 Turkey, 695, 719 Alican, talks with, 760–763 Yassiada trials, 709n Yugoslavia, 86, 211–212, 236, 255–256, 267, 314, 359 Kennan’s farewell call, 186–187 Micunovic, talks with, 341–343 most-favored-nation status, 158n, 275, 287, 290–291, 332 Popovic’s visit to U.S., 266–270 Tito, correspondence with, 344–346, 348–349, 355–359 Tito’s assessments, 338 Khrushchev, Nikita S. (see also Soviet Union and Soviet subheadings under other subjects), 62, 115, 137, 138, 249, 425, 434n Austria, 376 Berlin, 283, 397, 398, 491 China, People’s Republic of, 492 Finland, see Soviet subheadings under Finland Greece, 615 Kennedy, talks with, 189n, 702, 704 Laos, 157 nuclear issues, 343, 351, 497 Stalinist critics in Soviet Union, 338, 342 Soviet Bloc-Soviet relations, 382 United States, 189n, 702, 704 Yugoslavia, 310, 312, 323, 334, 342, 346 Tito, talks with, 185 Killick (UK), 549n, 551 King, Gordon D., 559n, 569n Kissinger, Henry A., 492 Kitchen, Jeffrey C., 271n, 740n Klaus, Josef, 373, 374, 375 Klein, David, 260–261, 644–645 Knight, William E., II, 362, 366 Knuth-Winterfeldt, Count Kield Gustav, 425 Koenig, Cardinal, 394 Kohler, Foy D., 16, 19, 20, 77n, 110, 113, 203, 218n, 231, 237, 266, 271n, 432n, 463, 627, 717 Finnish-Soviet relations, 442–443 Greece, 628 Poland, 66–67, 115 Soviet Union, 702 Yugoslavia, 212–216, 220–222, 242–247 Koht, Paul G., 425 Komer, Robert, 534, 535, 669, 670, 726, 730, 760 Korean war, 198 Kosygin, Aleksei Nikolaevich, 508 Kozlov, Frol R., 390, 508 Kranich, Robert H., 682 Kreisky, Bruno, 363–364, 371, 377–379, 382–383, 385–386, 387–388, 388–392 Kupinsky, Ruth, 627, 639 Kutchuk, Fazil, 524 Cypriot-U.S. relations, 535–536 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 543–545, 561–562, 584, 586, 592–593 Kuznetsov, Vasiliy V., 414–415 Kyprianou, Spyros, 517–518, 525, 527 Cypriot-U.S. relations, 519, 524n Rusk, talks with, 590–592 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 521–522, 586–587 Labouisse, Henry, 536, 549, 639 Cypriot-U.S. relations, 532–534 Greek coup plans, 664–666, 668n NATO, 656–657 Pipinelis rise to Prime Minister, 674–675 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 558–559, 571–572 U.S. support for Greek defense, 630–631, 644 Lachs, Manfred, 110 Ladner, Robert, 366 Lagoudakis, Charilaos G., 676n Lambert, Francis X., 393n, 394 Lambrakis, Georgios, 674 Lange, Oskar, 425, 434n Laos, 156–157, 171, 172, 176, 395, 506, 507, 761 Latin America, 192, 201, 266, 342, 352 Lekic (Yugoslavia), 350 Lemnitzer, Gen. Lyman L., 714–717 Liatis, Alexis S., 606, 607, 608, 612–613 Lisle, Raymond E., 209 Lissance, Arnold, 382, 383, 385 Littell, Pic, 153 Little, E.S., 122n Lumumba, Patrice, 184 Luns, J.M.A.H., 653 Lychowski, Tadeusz, 72, 73–74, 77n, 80–81, 116, 145, 152 Maakansa (Finnish publication), 492, 493 Macmillan, Harold, 137, 410, 513, 611 Macovescu, George, 16, 17 Magill, Robert N., 702 Magistretti, William L., 83–85 Makarios III, Archbishop, 203, 512, 517, 595n communism, 538–539 diplomatic travel, 517–518 Johnson’s (Lyndon) visit to Cyprus, 532–534 Kennedy, talks with, 525–528 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions: constitutional amendments, 520–523, 584 Greek Cypriot position, 557n, 564–569, 572–573, 586 Greek position, 558–559 June 1961 memorandum, 566–567, 568–568 military intervention, possible, 598 municipalities issue, 539–540, 543–545, 561 November 1963 memorandum, 586–588 public statements, 553–554, 555–555 taxation, 522 Turkish position, 766–767 U.K. position, 552 United Nations, 562–563, 575 U.S. Embassy (Nicosia) assessments, 573, 581–582, 602–603 U.S. position, 555–556, 560, 563, 570, 585 U.S.-U.K. joint peace efforts, 593 U.S. economic assistance to Cyprus, 517, 524n visit to U.S., 524–529 VOA transmitter, 537n Malin, Herbert S., 174, 177, 179 Malinovsky, Rodin Y., 374, 389, 508 Malita, Mircea, 43–45, 49 Manescu, Corneliu, 16–18, 49–51 Manfull, Melvin L., 515n Mangoldt, Hans Karl von, 627, 628, 629 Mansfield, Mike, 327, 395 Marcy, Oliver M., 518n, 523n, 605 Markezinis, Spyros, 623 Mason, Sir Paul, 463, 464–465 Mates, Leo, 207–208, 219, 248, 262 Matsas, Alexander, 653, 654, 669, 680–681, 685, 687 Matsch, Franz, 382, 383, 385 Matthews, H. Freeman, 363–364, 368–372 Maunula, A.A., 471 Mavromichalies, Stylianos, 681 McBride, Robert H., 360 McCaffrey, Col., 714 McGhee, George C., 32n, 262n, 518, 695n, 703–704 McGuire, Ralph J., 630, 722 McKiernan, Thomas D., 566–569 McNamara, Robert S., 347, 657, 754 Austria, 373 Finland, 452–453 Greece, 670, 672, 683 Turkey, 740, 743–744 McSweeney, John M., 376 Melas, George V., 637 Melen, Ferit, 760, 761 Menderes, Adnan, 710 Menemencioglu, Turgut, 588–590, 733–734, 760, 763 Merchant, Livingston T., 13 Merikoski, Veli, 473, 478, 483, 505–507 Finnish arms purchases, 459–460, 483, 484–488 Rusk, talks with, 489, 490, 492 Mexico, 342 Meyera (Greece), 535 Michalowski, Gen., 140–141 Micunovic, Veljko, 290–292, 341–344, 348, 355 Middle East, 343, 611 Mikoyan, Anastas I., 390, 395, 508 Mills, Wilbur, 158, 274, 275, 276, 277, 287 Mindszenty, Cardinal Joseph, 394 refuge in U.S. Legation (Budapest): Mod’s U.S. visit, 59, 60 Rusk’s recommendations, 1–2 Vatican involvement, 14–16, 22–23 Miner, Robert G., 512, 605, 627, 629 Mod, Peter, 58–62 Moffitt, George, Jr., 600n Molotov, Vyachaslav M., 390, 508 Morin, Gen., 689 Most-favored-nation status (MFN) (see also East-West trade): Bulgaria, 5, 39, 42 Congress, U.S., 120–122, 127, 130–132, 140–141, 176, 180–181 Czechoslovakia, 12 Finland-Soviet Union, 402 Poland, 42, 120–122, 125, 158, 171, 172, 178, 265 Congress, U.S., 176, 180–181 denial of status, 321–322 U.S. Embassy (Warsaw) assessments, 168–169 Yugoslavia-U.S., 42, 120–122, 130–132, 158n, 265, 280–281, 284, 314, 317, 319–322, 324–327, 331–332, 334, 338, 349, 350, 356, 338 denial of status, 273–279, 285–292, 321–322 Mudd, Robert C., 252, 262, 290, 322 Muftizade (Cyprus), 543, 544, 545, 593 Munro, Dana, 606, 624 Naiboglu, Col., 714 Nasser, Gamal Abdul, 718 Nastusescu, Stefan, 49 Naszkowski, Marian, 110, 112, 113, 115 National Security Action Memoranda (NSAM): No. 35, 695 No. 71, 514, 515 No. 74, 82n No. 75, 81 No. 79, 83 No. 98, 516, 529, 530 No. 123, 255–256 No. 169, 530 No. 212, 314 No. 251, 675–679 No. 257, 679–680 No. 266, 577, 579–580 No. 267, 359 National Security Council (NSC): meetings: 491st, October 13, 1961, 217 records of action: No. 2439, 96, 217 No. 2447, 631, 679 Nehru, Jawaharlal, 203 Netherlands, 387 Newman, George, 365–366 Nigeria, 198 Nikezic, Marko, 203, 218n, 237, 266, 292n, 350 Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States (1961), 253 Yugoslav-U.S. relations, 220–222, 252, 269–270, 273–274 Nitze, Paul H., 450, 699, 702 Norstad, Gen. Lauris (see also North Atlantic Treaty Organization), 630 Greece-NATO relations, 618, 619, 631, 637–639, 642, 689–691 Turkey-NATO relations, 697–703, 724–725 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) (see also NATO subheadings under other subjects), 95, 194, 198, 272, 378, 379, 519–520 Finnish-Soviet relations, 409, 425–426, 428, 432–434, 437 Finnish arms purchases, 468 Germany, Federal Republic of, 170, 193 Greece, see under Greece intermediate-range ballistic missile deployment, see under Greece; Turkey Southern Command multilateral sea-based force, 736–737, 738–739 Soviet Union, 417, 639–640 Turkey, see under Turkey Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 597–598 Wise Men’s Report, see under Greece Norway, 423, 433, 467, 510 Nuclear Power and Foreign Policy (Kissinger), 492 Nuclear weapons (see also Disarmament), 269, 492 Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States (1961), 202, 203–204 European nuclear-free zone, 111 Nuclear Test Ban Control Agency, 360 nuclear test ban treaty, 44, 175–176, 351–352, 503–504 nuclear testing, 199–200 Rapacki Plan, 123–124, 155–156, 726 Scandinavian nuclear-free zone, 496–498, 510 Soviet Union, 199–200, 343, 351, 401, 402, 497, 503, 639–640 Turkey, 731–760 Nykopp, Johan, 469 Ochab, Edward, 70, 170, 171 Olsen, G.R., 235n O’Neill, Con, 473 Orek (Greece), 535 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 336, 362, 628, 655–656, 660 Orkun, Adm., 714 Ormsby Gore, David, 455, 518 Owen, William M., 489, 695n Ozkol (Turkey), 546 Pakistan, 185, 353, 503 Palamas, Christian K., 605, 608, 617, 639, 658 Palmer, Donald K., 604n Papadopoulos, Georgios, 664n Papaligouras, Panayiotis, 635, 639, 658 Greek-U.S. relations, 649 Kennedy, talks with, 669–670 OECD Consortium for Economic Aid to Greece, 656, 657, 660 Rusk, talks with, 670–673 Papandreou, George, 615, 618, 674 cabinet debates, 636 election fraud, 622, 623, 635 Queen Frederika’s assessments, 662–663 resignation of, 684 Parker, Gen., 714 Passikivi (Finland), 408, 414 Paul I, King of Greece, 614–615, 618, 619, 623, 630n, 662, 674, 681 Pelaghias (Cyprus), 590 Petric, Yaksa, 217, 285–286, 350 Peynirdzhiev, Ivan, 36 Phoumi Nosavan, 156 Phrydas (Greece), 658 Piccioni, Attilio, 653 Pipinelis, Panayiotis, 571–572, 635, 674, 681 Pittermann, Bruno, 378, 379 Plan, Edgar, 366, 367, 395 Platzer, Wilfried, 365, 366–367, 382, 386, 388, 394 EEC, 361–362 Nuclear Test Ban Control Agency, 360 South Tyrol, 361 Plumar (Greece), 535 Podgorny, Nikolai Viktorovich, 508 Pohjala (Finland), 477 Poland, 321 agriculture, 80–81, 142–143, 144–145, 160 Berlin, 75, 79, 98, 111–112, 133, 135, 137, 177–179 Cuba, 66–67, 69, 106, 135–140 cultural exchanges, 69, 70–71, 82, 99, 153–154, 158 disarmament, 110–112 EEC, 124–125, 142 membership, 124–126, 132, 142 exchange rates, 107, 154 Export-Import Bank, 65, 80 German Democratic Republic, 138–139 Germany, Federal Republic of, relations with, 69–70, 72, 75, 111–113, 139, 159 Laos, 156–157, 178, 181 nuclear test ban treaty, 155–156, 175–176 personal freedoms, 91 P.L. 480 agreement (see also U.S. economic policy; U.S. most-favored-nation status below), 67–68, 69, 71–74, 75–76, 77–81, 93, 96–103, 108, 122–123, 155, 158, 162–169, 170–171, 175–177, 178 cotton, 108, 117–118, 152 grain, 80–81, 122–123, 144–145, 150, 152, 175, 176 negotiations with U.S., 83–85, 105–106, 107, 116–117, 128, 129, 142, 144, 145–154, 155 rice, 117–118 public recognitition of U.S. aid, 109–110, 119, 126 Rapacki-Rusk talks, 110–116, 133–140 Rapacki Plan, 111, 123–124, 155–156 Soviet Bloc, divergence from, 98–99 Soviet Union, 73–74, 91, 115–116, 138 Spasowski-Rusk talks, 68–72 Spasowski’s farewell call, 74–76 taxes on U.S. relief packages, 81 trade, 71–74, 77–81, 83–86, 92–96, 106, 124–126, 155, 158 travel restrictions on diplomats, 173, 178, 179–180, 181–183 United Kingdom, relations with, 76 United States, relations with, 104–106, 133–135, 138, 157, 159–160, 174–175, 178–179, 356 U.S. boycott of Polish goods, 158, 171 U.S. economic policy: export licenses, 71, 86, 90–96 economic credits, 65 prewar foreign bonds, 116–117, 128, 129, 136, 164 U.S. most-favored-nation status (see also P.L. 480 agreement; U.S. economic policy above), 42, 120–122, 125, 127, 130–132, 133, 136–137, 140–141, 143, 157–158, 160, 169–169, 170, 172, 178, 180–181, 274–275, 276–278, 321–322 U.S. policy, 90–96, 161–170 Polatkan, Hasan, 710n Polyansky, Dmitri Stepanovich, 508 Popov, Lyubomir D., 42–43, 47, 63–64, 88 Popovic, Koca, 185, 190–191, 195, 196, 257, 262, 265, 288–290, 351, 355 Kennan, talks with, 199–200, 250–251 Kennedy, talks with, 266–270 Rusk, talks with, 280–284 Popovic, Vladimir, 196, 291 Popper, David H., 682 Porter, Dwight J., 372–375, 378–379, 394 Portugal, 194, 269, 404 Presburger, Josip, 290, 341, 355 Quadros, Janio, 201 Raab, Julius, 376 Raczkowski, Stanislaw, 72, 73 Radio Free Europe, 178 Radvanyi, Janos, 26, 58, 61 Rainer, Col., 367 Rallis (Greece), 623, 635 Ramsbotham, Peter, 463, 464–465 Rankin, Carl, 184–185 Rapacki, Adam, 70, 133–134, 135–140, 146, 147, 159, 170, 174 disarmament, 110–112, 114 Rusk, talks with, 113–116 Rapacki Plan, 123–124, 155–156, 726 Ravndal, Christian, 3–4 Read, Benjamin H., 579–580 Reinhardt, G. Frederick, 740 Renner, Karl, 389 Rewinkel, Martin C., 409, 425n, 428n Riddleberger, James W., 380–381, 392–393 Rijov (USSR), 692, 721 Riza, Halit A., 583 Robinson, William, 365 Rockefeller Foundation, 7 Roesch, Otto, 365 Romania, 382 Balaceanu’s credentials presentation, 10–11 Berlin, 18 disarmament, 17 independence from Soviet Union, 44–45 Malita-Harriman talks, 43–45 Manescu-Rusk talks, 16–18, 49–51 trade with U.S., 10–11, 44–45, 49–51, 55–56 U.S. Legation raised to Embassy status, 46 Rood, Leslie L., 630, 692 Rossi, Paolo, 385 Rossi Commission Report, 385, 393 Rossides, Zenon, 512–514, 525, 527, 534, 562, 564 Rostow, Walt W., 73–74, 80–81 Rowan, Carl T., 496–498, 500–501, 508, 509, 726 Rusk, Dean, 174, 186, 347, 439, 453n, 483, 490, 527, 608, 657, 699n Austria, 360, 386, 383, 393 Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States (1961), 241, 253 Berlin, 135, 137, 159, 178–179 Bulgaria, 6–7, 23–25, 47–49 Cuba, 135–140, 352–353 Cyprus, 512–514, 519–520, 523–524 Czechoslovakia, 9–12, 20n disarmament, 110–112, 114 Finland, 505–507 arms purchases, 448–449, 455–458, 461–462, 463–465, 472–473, 479–481, 484–488 Soviet October 1961 note, 416, 418–422, 425–426, 432–434 U.S. military assistance, 445 Greece: Karamanlis, correspondence with, 612–613 NATO, 627–630, 639–644, 652–654, 658–661 Papaligouras, talks with, 670–673 prewar foreign bonds, 624 U.S. support for defense, 645n, 651 Venizelos, talks with, 685–688 Hungary, 1–2, 26 Poland, 107, 129, 133–134 most-favored-nation status, 176 P.L. 480 program, 77–79, 97–103, 109–110, 116–117, 145–148, 150–152, 176–177 Rapacki, talks with, 113–116 Spasowski, talks with, 68–72 Romania, 16–18, 49, 50, 55–56 Turkey, 627–630, 709n Erkin, talks with, 765–767 intermediate-range ballistic missile deployment, 702–703, 740–741, 745–748, 750–751, 755 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 540–542, 548–549, 569–570, 574–576, 585, 595–596, 598, 687 Kyprianou, talks with, 590–592 Western Europe, 384 Yugoslavia, 236–237, 238–239, 241, 249, 252, 253, 254–255, 331–332, 335–336, 351 deteriorating relations, 220–222 most-favored-nation status, 273–274, 287, 290–292, 350 P.L. 480 program, 239–240 Popovic, talks with, 280–284 public statements, 257–258, 269–270 Samuel, Ian, 463 Sancar (Turkey), 740, 741, 754, 755–759 Sarper, Selim, 692–693, 718–719 coup plans, 723 government restructuring, 717–718 intermediate-range ballistic missile deployment in Turkey, 699–701 Yassiada trials, 694, 709–710 Scandinavia, 384, 408, 410, 411n, 433, 443, 496–498, 510 Schaetzel, J. Robert, 639, 682 Schiff, Stanley D., 627 Schleinzer, Karl, 365–366, 370–373, 375 Schlesinger, Arthur H., Jr., 397 Schott, Robert R., 559n, 585n, 676n, 682 Schroeder, Gerhard, 369, 391, 660 Segni, Antonio, 363 Seppala, Richard R., 397, 461, 484 Finnish-Soviet relations, 416, 426, 429–431, 456–458 Finnish-U.S. relations, 406, 426, 487, 489–490, 502, 505 Sherer, Albert W., 128, 161n Shuckburgh, Evelyn, 463, 464 Simelius, Gen., 479, 480, 482–483, 488, 489, 490 Sligh, Frederick, 682 Smole, Dr. Joze, 249 Sokalski, Henryk, 110, 113 Sorvali (Finland), 492, 493 South Africa, 404 South Tyrol, 361, 362–363, 385–386, 392–393 Souvanna Phouma, 156–157 Soviet Bloc (see also Albania; Bulgaria; East-West exchanges; East-West trade; German Democratic Republic; Poland; Romania; Soviet Union; Yugoslavia), 132, 333 Austria, relations with, 361, 374–375, 382–383, 388 Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, 379, 387 Finland, relations with, 504 Kennedy-Tito talks, 357, 358–359 liberalization trends, 322, 394 Poland, relations with, 98–99, 114, 125 United States, relations with, 173, 178–183 Warsaw Pact, 90, 333 Yugoslavia, relations with, 87, 88, 90–91, 261, 312, 323, 329–330 ideological differences, narrowing, 315–316 U.S. most-favored-nation status, 321 Soviet Union (see also Khrushchev, Nikita S.; Soviet Union and Soviet subheadings under other subjects), 342, 509 Austria, relations with, 364, 374–379 Barghoorn arrest, 54 Berlin, 197, 199–200, 201, 397–400, 404, 405 Bulgaria, relations with, 43 China, People’s Republic, relations with, 115–116, 249, 261, 311, 320–321, 323, 329, 337–338, 341–342, 353–354, 355, 395, 492, 504, 506, 507, 509 Cuba, 133, 137–138, 282, 291, 352–353, 356–357, 486, 487 disarmament, 156, 264n, 343, 639–640 EEC, relations with, 376–379 Finland, see under Finland Germany, Federal Republic of, relations with, 424 Greece, relations with, 688 Iraq, relations with, 726 Kennedy-Khrushchev talks, 189n, 702, 704 nuclear test ban treaty, 351–352 nuclear weapons, 199–200, 343, 351, 401, 402, 497, 503, 639–640 Poland, relations with, 73–74, 91 Romania, relations with, 44 Turkey, relations with, 692–693, 767 United States, relations with, 51, 115–116, 249, 251, 261, 283–284, 389–390, 395, 506–507, 692, 761–762 Yugoslavia, see under Yugoslavia Spaak, Paul-Henri C., 137, 653 Spasowski, Romuald, 66–72, 74–76 Spear, Moncrieff J., 4 Spielman, Herbert, 682 Spiers, Ronald I., 682 Springsteen, George, 122 Spychalski, Marian, 141 Squire, Christopher A., 58 Stalin, Joseph, 310n, 358, 389 Stearns, Monteagle, 632n Steiner, Ludwig, 382, 383, 385 Stevenson, Adlai E., 13, 47, 133, 137, 382, 383 Stikker, Dirk, 622n, 641, 642, 682–683, 756 Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., 630, 637, 699, 702, 722, 724 Stone, Galen L., 377n, 386, 388, 393n Strauss, Franz J., 423 Sullivan, Charles, 682 Sulser, Jack A., 365, 366 Sulzberger, Cyrus, 250 Sunay, Cedvet, 700 coup plans, 723 intermediate-range ballistic missile deployment in Turkey, 722 Turkish force levels, 689, 690 Turkish-U.S. relations, 714–717, 725 Yassiada trials, 705 Swank, Emory C., 131, 326n Sweden, 379, 380, 388, 402, 433, 442, 443, 467, 485, 491 Switzerland, 97, 379, 380–381, 387–388, 402 Syria, 517 Talbot, Phillips, 525, 527, 528, 530n, 549n, 551, 555n, 577–578, 585n, 595n, 596, 600n, 667–668, 669, 676n, 680, 681, 684, 685, 702, 706, 740n, 763 Tarabanov, Milko, 47 Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D., 469, 489 Thacher, Peter, 280 Thalberg, Hans, 382, 383, 385, 386, 388 Thant, U, 23 Thee (ICC member), 176, 178 Theotokis, Spyridon, 635 Thompson, Llewelyn E., 331n, 441 Thorp, Willard, 513, 532 Thurston, Raymond L., 689 Tims, Richard W., 68, 159 Tito, Josip B., 88, 132, 337 Africa, colonialism in, 193–194, 197 Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States (1961), 192, 197–198, 202–207, 232–233, 236, 241 Bowles, talks with, 196–199 Kennan, talks with, 332–334, 355–356 Kennedy, correspondence with, 338, 341, 344–346, 348–349, 355–359 Kennedy, talks with, 355–359 Sino-Soviet dispute, 337–338 Skoplje speech, 232–234, 236, 241, 250 Soviet-Yugoslav relations, 264, 315–316, 323, 330, 334, 346 visit to Africa, 184, 185 visit to Soviet Union, 310–313, 315, 353 visits to U.S., 186–187, 190–191, 355–359 Yugoslav-U.S. relations, 192, 193–194, 197–198, 202–207, 232–233, 236, 241, 261, 293–295, 301–302, 310–313, 329, 331–332 Tobin, Irwin M., 733 Todorovic, Mujalko, 217–220, 221, 231, 355 Tonesk, William J., 42 Toure, Sekou, 185 Trampczynski, Witold, 104, 119, 123, 124–126, 147, 175 Treasury, U.S. Department of the, 102 Truman, Harry S., 309, 609, 610, 611 Tsankov (Bulgaria), 28 Tunckanat, Col., 689, 690 Turkes, Col. Alparslan, 707–708 Turkey, 502, 503, 611 Alikan-Kennedy talks, 760–763 Cuba, 730n, 731–734, 740, 747 defense guarantees, 724–726 disarmament, 726 Erkin-Rusk talks, 765–767 Germany, Federal Republic, relations with, 705n, 749n Inonu-Johnson (Lyndon) talks, 763–765 Johnson’s (Lyndon) visit, 726–730 intermediate-range ballistic missile deployment (see also NATO below), 692, 702–704 NATO position, 697–699 Polaris submarines substitution, 695–697, 732–733, 742–748, 750–754, 757–760 Turkish position, 699–700, 731–734, 741, 748–749, 753–756, 757–759 U.S. position, 692, 702–704, 735–737, 740–741 NATO (see also intermediate-range ballistic missile deployment above), 627–630, 644, 660, 718–719, 724–726, 765–766 consortium, 762, 766 Southern Command multilateral sea-based force, 736–737, 738–739 political situation, 765 coup plans, 707–708, 723 government restructuring, 704, 710–714, 717–718, 765 Sarper-Rusk talks, 717–719 Soviet Union, relations with, 692–693, 722, 767 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, see under Cyprus U.S. economic policy: assistance, 717–721, 728–730 P.L. 480 program, 718 support for Turkish military budget, 689–691, 700–701, 715–717 U.S. military policy (see also intermediate-range ballistic missile deployment above), 690, 700–701 assistance, 726–729, 749, 753–753 bilateral military talks, 714–717 U.S. Embassy (Ankara) assessments, 690–691, 722 U.S. position, 695–697, 735–737, 740–741, 743–748, 750–751 Yassiada trials, 693–694, 705–706, 709–710 Turkmen, Ilter, 588 Turkoglu (Turkey), 709 Tyler, William R., 77n, 120n, 160, 174, 175, 177, 234, 236n, 262n, 322n, 326n, 335n, 355, 377n, 382, 383, 385, 388, 389, 394, 395, 397, 416n, 455n, 733–734, 765 Ulay (Turkey), 709, 712n Ulbricht, Walter, 383, 398 Ulkopolitikka (Finnish publication), 492 United Arab Republic, 517n United Kingdom (see also United Kingdom and U.K. subheadings under other subjects), 272, 360 EEC, 384, 387, 392, 401, 402 Finland, see under Finland Greece, relations with, 683 Southern Command multilateral sea-based force, 737 Turkey, relations with, 742 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, see under Cyprus United Nations: China, People’s Republic of, 534 Cyprus, 512, 513 Hungary, 61 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 532, 555–556, 562–564, 574–576, 600–601 United States Information Agency (USIA), 530n, 531, 537 Vagnozzi, Monsignor Egidio, 14–16, 22–23 Valdes, Philip, 133, 280 Van Dyke, Stuart H., 718 Vatican, 1, 2, 14–16, 22–23 Vedeler, Harold C., 14–16, 22–23, 43, 45, 49, 58, 61, 103, 109n, 120n, 212, 236n, 266, 331n, 335n, 348n Vejvoda, Ivo, 257–258 Velletri, August, 14 Venizelos, Sophocles, 585, 594, 623, 636, 662–663, 685–688 Vietnam, 506 Vilfan (Vice President of Slovenia), 336 Voice of America (VOA): Bulgaria, 51–52 Cyprus, 527, 533–534, 537n Greece, 675 Poland, 91, 99 Voutov, Peter G., 4–7, 23–25, 36, 38, 64 Vracaric, L., 250–251 Vukmanovic-Tempo, 248–249 Wailes, Edward T., 7–9, 12n, 13–14, 21–22 Waldheim, Kurt, 386, 388, 392–393 Wallace, Henry A., 727 Warren, Fletcher, 689n Warsaw Pact, 90, 333 Weiss, Seymour, 682, 740n Wennerstrom, Stig, 499 West Europe (see also European Economic Community; European Free Trade Area; North Atlantic Treaty Organization), 111, 132, 391–392 cooperation in, 384 underdeveloped countries, aid to, 361 Yugoslavia, relations with, 246, 272, 321 West Germany. See Germany, Federal Republic of (FRG) Wheeler, Gen., 489, 630 Wheeler, Joseph, 680 White, Merrill A., 63 Wilkins, Fraser, 521n, 524–525, 526, 527, 534, 535, 537, 538–539 Johnson’s (Lyndon) visit to Cyprus, 536 Makarios, talks with, 516–518 Turkish-Greek Cypriot tensions, 521–522, 543–545, 546, 561–562, 564–565, 572–573, 581–582, 584, 586–587, 593, 601–603 Wilson, Woodrow, 62 Winiewicz, Jozef, 119, 123–129, 146, 178–179 Wood, Robert, 760 Wortzel, Arthur I., 109n, 120n, 155 Wuori, Eero A., 413, 414–415, 416, 437 Yepishev (USSR), 264 Youngquist, Eric V., 424 Yugoslavia, 611 Africa, 184–185, 193–194, 197, 268–269 agriculture, 205–206 Albania, 250 anti-Americanism, 198–199, 210–212, 249 Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States (1961), 192, 197–198, 200, 201–209, 213, 236, 241, 253 Berlin, 193, 196–197, 202–203, 281–284 Bulgaria, 36–37 China, People’s Republic of (see also Sino-Soviet dispute below), 88, 267, 312, 323 colonialism, 193–194, 197, 251 Communist Party, 336–337 Congo, 194, 201 Cuba, relations with, 285–286 disarmament, 343, 351–352 Djilas case, 262–263, 265 EEC, 132, 281, 288, 312, 321, 330, 331, 336, 356 emigre activities in U.S., 300–301, 350–351 German reunification, 181–184, 203–204, 282–283 Germany, Federal Republic of, 193, 202–203, 312, 330, 331, 335–336 Kennan’s resignation, 284 Micunovic-Kennedy talks, 341–343 military equipment purchases (see also U.S. military sales below), 263–264 nuclear testing, 199–200 Popovic-Kennedy talks, 266–270 Popovic-Rusk talks, 280–284, 350–351 Press Law question, 187–188, 189 Sino-Soviet dispute, 338, 341–342, 353–355 Soviet Bloc, relations with, 87, 88, 90–91, 261, 312, 321, 323, 357 ideological differences, narrowing, 315–316 U.S. Embassy (Belgrade) assessments, 329–330 Soviet military equipment, 263–264 Soviet Union, relations with (see also Sino-Soviet dispute above), 185, 248–249, 250, 264, 267–268, 310–312, 315–316, 334, 337, 342, 346, 353 U.S. Embassy (Belgrade) assessments, 328–331, 355 U.S. position, 320–323 Tito-Bowles talks, 196–199 Tito-Kennan talks, 332–334, 355–356 Tito-Kennedy correspondence, 338, 341, 344–346, 348–349, 355–359 Tito-Kennedy talks, 355–359 Tito Skoplje speech, 232–234, 236, 241, 250 Tito visit to Soviet Union, 310–313, 315, 353 Tito visits to U.S., 186–187, 190–191, 355–359 United Nations, 189 United States, relations with, 62, 356 deteriorating relations, 212–216, 217–224, 232–234, 257–258, 262–263, 269–270, 275–276, 292–310, 313, 317–319, 354 disagreements over U.S. policy, 234–235, 260–261, 303–304, 309–310, 324n Treaty of Commerce of 1891, 281 U.S. Embassy (Belgrade) assessments, 195–196, 198–199, 205–207, 211–212, 222–230, 231–234, 292–309, 310–313, 317–319, 328–331, 336–339, 354–355 U.S. position, 87–90, 212–216, 238–239, 242–247, 314, 320–324, 331–332 U.S. disaster assistance, 359 U.S. economic policy: assistance, 224–230, 231–232, 234–235, 236–237, 242–247, 248, 253, 254–256, 257–260, 319–320, 333–334 export licenses, 86, 89–90, 96, 217, 255 most-favored-nation status, 42, 120–122, 130–132, 158n, 265, 273–279, 280–281, 284, 285–292, 314, 317, 319–322, 324–327, 331–332, 334, 338, 349, 350, 356, 338 P.L. 480 program, 89, 205–206, 221–222, 233–234, 236–237, 238–241, 252, 318, 319 prewar foreign bonds, 607 technical assistance, 254, 255 U.S. military sales, 254, 256, 271–272, 309, 314, 339–340, 346–348, 351 ustashi activities, 251, 334 Vracaric case, 250–251 Western Europe, relations with, 132, 211, 246, 272, 288, 312, 321, 330, 331, 336, 356 Yugov (Bulgaria), 28 Zawadzki, Aleksander, 174 Zhivkov, Todor, 27–28, 29–32, 36–39, 40, 51–52 Zolotas, Xenophon, 616 Zorlu, Fatim R., 710n