filename	tr #	author pid	pub date	full textfrus1955-57v25.xml	Foreign Relations of the United States 1955–1957 Volume XXV Eastern Europe Department of StateWashington Editor in Chief John P. Glennon Editors Edward C. KeeferRonald D. LandaStanley Shaloff United States Government Printing Office Washington 1990 DEPARTMENT OF STATE PUBLICATION 9789OFFICE OF THE HISTORIANBUREAU OF PUBLIC AFFAIRSFor sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing OfficeWashington, D.C. 20402 Preface The publication Foreign Relations of the United States constitutes the official record of the foreign policy of the United States. The volumes in the series include, subject to necessary security considerations, all documents needed to give a comprehensive record of the major foreign policy decisions of the United States together with appropriate materials concerning the facts that contributed to the formulation of policies. Documents in the files of the Department of State are supplemented by papers from other government agencies involved in the formulation of foreign policy. The basic documentary diplomatic record printed in the volumes of the series is edited by the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State. The editing is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and in accordance with the following official guidance first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925: There may be no alteration of the text, no deletions without indicating the place in the text where the deletion is made, and no omission of facts which were of major importance in reaching a decision. Nothing may be omitted for the purpose of concealing or glossing over what might be regarded by some as a defect of policy. However, certain omissions of documents are permissible for the following reasons: a. To avoid publication of matters that would tend to impede current diplomatic negotiations or other business. b. To condense the record and avoid repetition of needless details. c. To preserve the confidence reposed in the Department by individuals and by foreign governments. d. To avoid giving needless offense to other nationalities or individuals. e. To eliminate personal opinions presented in despatches and not acted upon by the Department. To this consideration there is one qualification: in connection with major decisions it is desirable, where possible, to show the alternative presented to the Department before the decision was made. Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume XXV In preparing this volume, the editors have focused upon the principal expressions of major U.S. political and economic policy toward the Communist governments of Eastern Europe and the few significant bilateral diplomatic exchanges with those governments during the 1955–1957 period. The Government of Finland maintained its democracy and independence but in the shadow of the close Soviet presence. The documentation presented here exemplifies the kinds of information and insights available to U.S. policymakers in Washington and the conclusions and analyses that were drawn regarding the scope and significance of the Communist control of the populations of Eastern Europe. U.S. policymakers viewed Eastern Europe as part of the “Soviet bloc” and formulated their evaluations and options toward the “satellite” governments on a regional basis. The largest portion of the documents presented in this volume reflect that contemporary regional frame of reference. Major turning points in the long postwar period of Communist domination of Eastern Europe were the uprisings in Poznań in Poland in 1956 and the Hungarian rebellion of 1956. The editors have highlighted these historic occurrences and presented as separate chapters the documentation on U.S. understanding and perception of these events and official policies adopted toward them. The editors made a special effort to document the U.S. information policy toward the Hungarian rebellion and the development of policies regarding the broadcasts of the Voice of America during the crisis. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, usually working through Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and the National Security Council apparatus, exercised the decisive role in the definition of U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe. The editors had the fullest possible access to the Presidential and National Security Council materials for these years at the Eisenhower Presidential Library in Abilene, Kansas and in the Department of State. While the Presidential and NSC documents represent only a small portion (one-sixth) of the record printed here, they define the main line of American policy. They are presented here in relatively complete form although there have been significant deletions in some documents to protect national security information. The files of the Department of State were the primary source of records for this volume. Three-quarters of the documents printed here are from those files. The editors have emphasized diplomatic reporting and the evolution of U.S. official perceptions of the Eastern European regimes. It was not practical to document the details of the difficult and seriously circumscribed status of U.S. diplomatic missions in these countries. The activities of military, information, cultural, and economic representatives and officials in Eastern Europe at this time were even more constrained than those of the diplomatic missions. The editors chose, by and large, not to try to include official documentation regarding these minor activities in this volume. U.S. intelligence assessments of Soviet military, political, and economic intentions and of developments in the Eastern European nations were important factors in the formulation of U.S. official attitudes and actions during the period covered by this volume. The editors have been able to include some of the most significant high-level intelligence evaluations regarding Eastern Europe at this time, including National Intelligence Estimates and intelligence briefings to the National Security Council by the Director of Central Intelligence. The editors were not able and did not seek to document intelligence operational activities in Eastern Europe from the records available in the Department of State or those of any other government agency. The official record presented in this volume has been supplemented by information from some of the principal memoirs of government officials who served during the period. A complete list of documentary sources and printed volumes cited in the volume is printed on pages IX–XV. Editorial Methodology The documents printed in the volume are presented chronologically, but during the Hungarian uprising and its suppression telegrams and other documents originating in Eastern Europe are presented according to local time. Memoranda of conversations are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted. Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the Editor in Chief and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in footnotes. Obvious typographical errors are corrected, but other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an omission in roman type. Brackets are also used to indicate text that has been omitted by the compiler because it deals with an unrelated subject. Ellipses are inserted to replace material that remained classified after the declassification review process. Ellipses of three or four periods identify excisions of less than a paragraph; ellipses of seven periods spread across the page identify excisions of an entire paragraph or more. All ellipses and brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes. The first footnote to each document indicates the document’s source, original classification, distribution, drafting information, and, in the case of telegrams, the time of receipt in the Department of State. The source footnote also provides, whenever possible, background information and an indication of who read the document. Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in this volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Declassification Review Procedures Declassification review of the documents selected for publication is conducted by the Division of Historical Documents Review, Bureau of Diplomatic Security, Department of State. The review is made in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act, the Privacy Act, and the criteria established in Executive Order 12356 regarding: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations; 2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security; 3) foreign government information; 4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods; 5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States; 6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security; 7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities; 8) cryptology; and 9) a confidential source. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State and of other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and communication with foreign governments regarding documents or information of those governments. The principle of declassification review is to release as much information as is consistent with contemporary requirements of national security and sound foreign relations; some documents originally selected and portions of documents presented have been withheld. Edward C. Keefer and Stanley Shaloff edited the documents on U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe, while Ronald D. Landa edited the sections on the Balkan Pact, Chiefs of Mission conference, and Finland. The volume was compiled under the supervision of Editor in Chief John P. Glennon. Ornella S. Cavallo of the Historian’s Office prepared the lists of sources, names, and abbreviations. Rita M. Baker, Chief of the Editing Division of the Historian’s Office, performed the technical editing. Barbara A. Bacon of the Publishing Services Division (Paul M. Washington, Chief) oversaw production of the volume. Do Mi Stauber prepared the index. William Z. SlanyThe HistorianBureau of Public Affairs Contents Preface List of Sources List of Abbreviations List of Persons Balkan Pact United States interest in the alliance among Greece, Turkey, and Yugoslavia Chiefs of Mission Conference Eastern European Chiefs of Mission Conference in Vienna, May 10–11, 1957 United States policy toward Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Romania U.S. consideration of detachment of a major satellite in Eastern Europe; assessment of the situation in Hungary Impact of the Geneva Heads of Government Meeting, July 18–23, 1955, and the Geneva Foreign Ministers Meeting, October 27–November 16, 1955; consideration by the U.S. Government of a rapprochement with Romania Destalinization, February-June 1956 U.S. Government response to the riots in Poznań, June 28, 1956: adoption by the National Security Council of NSC 5608/1, July 18, 1956; Rákosi’s resignation as head of the Hungarian Communist Party, July 18, 1956; restoration of political rights to Gomulka in Poland, August 1956 The Polish crisis and the Hungarian rebellion, October 20-November 3, 1956: the advent to power of Gomulka in Poland and Nagy in Hungary; Soviet military intervention in, and subsequent temporary withdrawal from Hungary; discussion of the Hungarian situation in the U.N. Security Council Suppression of the Hungarian rebellion by the Soviet Union, November 4-13, 1956: the fall of the Nagy government and the rise to power of Kádár; discussion of the Hungarian question in the U.N. General Assembly Aftermath of the Polish crisis and the Hungarian rebellion, November 1956-February 1957: inquiries into the alleged role of U.S. radio broadcasting in the Hungarian rebellion; U.S. relief assistance to Hungary and the refugee problem; U.S. economic assistance to Poland; adoption by the National Security Council of NSC 5616/2, November 19, 1956 Negotiations in Washington Between Poland and the United States, February 26-June 7, 1957, and the conclusion of an economic agreement, June 7, 1957; adoption by the National Security Council of NSC 5706/2, March 8, 1957 Report of the U.N. Special Committee on Hungary, June 20, 1957; discussion of the Hungarian question at the reconvened 11th Session of the U.N. General Assembly, September 1957 Continuing reevaluation of U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe Finland United States policy toward Finland Index List of Sources Unpublished Sources Department of State 1. Indexed Central Files. The principal source of documentation for this volume was the indexed central files of the Department of State. The most important of these files were the 500 (cultural relations), 600 (international relations), 700 (internal political and national defense affairs), and 800 (internal economic and social affairs) series. Other files and related subfiles searched included 033 (official visits), 110.11 (Department of State senior officials files), 123 (Department of State personnel files), and various files in classes 300 (international organizations and conferences) and 511 (information programs). Most of the documents from the central files were selected from the following files: 748.00: Poland, political files 764.00: Hungary, political files 611.48: U.S.-Polish relations 611.49: U.S.-Czechoslovak relations 611.64: U.S.-Hungarian relations 611.66: U.S.-Romanian relations 611.69: U.S.-Bulgarian relations 661.48: USSR-Polish relations 661.49: USSR-Czechoslovak relations 661.64: USSR-Hungarian relations 661.69: USSR-Bulgarian relations 661.66: USSR-Romanian relations 100.4–OCB: files of an interagency committee on Soviet and related problems operating under the aegis of the Operations Coordinating Board 748.5–MSP: U.S.-Polish economic negotiations 2. Lot Files. Documents from the central files have been supplemented by materials from decentralized office files, the lot files of the Department of State. A list of the lot files used or consulted for this volume follows: Bohlen Files: Lot 74 D 379 Records maintained by Charles E. Bohlen, 1942–1970. Budapest Embassy Files: Lot 75 F 163 Classified and unclassified files relating to Cardinal Mindszenty, 1956–1972, as maintained by the U.S. Embassy in Budapest. Conference Files: Lot 60 D 627 Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State for the years 1953–1955, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State. Conference Files: Lot 62 D 181 Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State for the years 1956–1958, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123 Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State for the years 1955–1958, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. Daily Summaries: Lot 60 D 530 Master set of the Department of State classified internal publication Daily Secret Summary and Daily Top Secret Summary for the years 1953–1958, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. EE Files: Lot 57 D 514 National Security Council documents relating to Soviet and satellite vulnerabilities, as maintained by the Office of Eastern European Affairs. EE Files: Lot 67 D 238 Economic and political files relating to Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, and Poland for the years 1946–1965, as maintained by the Office of Eastern European Affairs. EE Files: Lot 76 D 232 Economic files relating to Eastern Europe and Poland, 1951–1960, including the U.S.-Polish economic talks, 1956–1957, as maintained by the Office of Eastern European Affairs. EE Files: Lot 79 D 55 Miscellaneous files pertaining to Hungary, 1945–1971, as maintained by the Office of Eastern European Affairs. EUR Files: Lot 59 D 233 Files of the Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs for the years 1945–1957. Hungary Desk Files: Lot 75 D 45 Miscellaneous Hungarian files, 1949–1972, including material on the trial of Cardinal Mindszenty and his asylum in the U.S. Mission. INR Files: Lot 58 D 776 Miscellaneous files of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research for the years 1946–1957. INR Files: Lot 61 D 67 Miscellaneous files of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research for the years 1950–1957. INR-NIE Files Files of National Intelligence Estimates, Special Estimates, and Special National Intelligence Estimates retained by the Directorate for Regional Research, Bureau of Intelligence and Research. INR Files, Soviet Affairs Master set of the classified Department of State monthly publication, Soviet Affairs, December 1948-May 1959, as maintained by the Office of Research and Analysis for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, Bureau of Intelligence and Research. IO Files Master files of the Reference and Documents Section of the Bureau of International Organization Affairs of the Department of State, comprising the official U.N. documentation and classified Department of State records on U.S. policy in the U.N. Security Council, Trusteeship Council, Economic and Social Council, and various special and ad hoc committees for the period from 1946 to currency. OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385 Master set of administrative and country files of the Operations Coordinating Board for the years 1953–1960, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430 Master files of the Operations Coordinating Board for the years 1953–1960, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. P Files: Lot 61 D 318 Files of the Deputy Assistant Secretaries of State for Public Affairs, 1954–1959, accessioned by the Federal Records Center, Suitland, Maryland, as part of FRC 64 A 867. P/PG Files: Lot 60 D 605 Files of the Policy Plans and Guidance Staff, Bureau of Public Affairs, 1952–1959, accessioned by the Federal Records Center, Suitland, Maryland, as part of FRC 72 A 248. P/PG Files: Lot 60 D 661 Subject files containing OCB and NSC documents retired by the Policy Plans and Guidance Staff in the Bureau of Public Affairs. Poland Desk Files: Lot 58 D 386 Files of the Poland Desk Officer, 1955–1956. Poland Desk Files: Lot 60 D 55 Files of the Poland Desk Officer, 1955–1956. Poland Desk Files: Lot 61 D 77 Files of the Poland Desk Officer, 1957. PPS Files: Lot 65 D 101 Master file of documents, drafts, records of meetings, memoranda, and related correspondence of the Policy Planning Staff for the year 1954. PPS Files: Lot 66 D 70 Subject files, country files, chronological files, documents, drafts, and related correspondence of the Policy Planning Staff for the year 1955. PPS Files: Lot 66 D 487 Subject files, country files, chronological files, documents, drafts, and related correspondence of the Policy Planning Staff for the year 1956. PPS Files: Lot 67 D 548 Subject files, country files, chronological files, documents, drafts, and related correspondence of the Policy Planning Staff for the years 1957–1961. Presidential Correspondence: Lot 64 D 174 Exchanges of correspondence between President Eisenhower and heads of foreign governments, excluding the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and the Soviet Union, for the years 1953–1960, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204 Exchanges of correspondence between the President and heads of foreign governments for the years 1953–1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. President’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149 Chronological record of memoranda of conversations between the President and foreign visitors for the years 1956–1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. S/P-NSC Files: Lot 61 D 167 Serial file of memoranda relating to National Security Council questions for the years 1950–1961, as maintained by the Policy Planning Staff. S/P-NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1 Serial and subject master file of National Security Council documents and correspondence for the years 1948–1961, as maintained by the Policy Planning Staff. S/S-NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351 Serial master file of National Security Council documents and correspondence and related Department of State memoranda for the years 1947–1961, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95 Administrative and miscellaneous National Security Council documentation, including NSC Records of Action, for the years 1947–1963, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199 Chronological collections of the Secretary of State’s memoranda of conversation and the Under Secretary of State’s memoranda of conversation, for the years 1953–1960, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75 Chronological collection of the minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meetings for the years 1952–1960, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. SOV Files: Lot 69 D 162 Subject files of the Bilateral Political Relations Branch of the Office of Soviet Union Affairs on various aspects of Soviet-U.S. relations, 1943–1966. State-JCS Meetings: Lot 61 D 417 Top secret records of meetings between representatives of the Department of State and the Joint Chiefs of Staff for the years 1951–1959 and selected problem files on the Middle East for the years 1954–1956, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. USIA/IAE Files: Lot 60 D 439 Files of the Office of Eastern European Affairs, U.S. Information Agency, 1955–1957, accessioned by the Federal Records Center, Suitland, Maryland, as FRC 63 A 190. USIA/IAE/E Files: Lot 64 A 536 Miscellaneous files of the Office of Eastern European Affairs, U.S. Information Agency, 1955–1961, accessioned by the Federal Records Center, Suitland, Maryland, as FRC 64 A 536. USIA/IBS Files: Lot 59 D 242 Files kept in the Office of the Director, International Broadcasting Service, U.S. Information Agency, covering all phases of the Voice of America for the years 1948–1957, accessioned by the Federal Records Center, Suitland, Maryland, as FRC 63 A 190. USIA/IOP/G Files: Lot 70 D 398 Alphabetical subject files containing Policy Guidance records as maintained by the Policy Guidance Staff, Office of Policy and Plans, U.S. Information Agency, for the years 1952–1967, accessioned by the Federal Records Center, Suitland, Maryland, as FRC 72 A 5121. Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas CFEP Chairman Records Records of the Office of the Chairman, Council on Foreign Economic Policy (Joseph M. Dodge and Clarence B. Randall), 1954–1961. Dulles Papers Papers of John Foster Dulles, 1952–1959. Dulles was Secretary of State, 1953–1959. Hagerty Papers Papers of James C. Hagerty, Press Secretary to the President, 1953–1961. President’s Appointment Books Daily appointment books of Dwight D. Eisenhower as President of the United States, 1953–1961. Project Clean Up Project “Clean Up” collection. Records of Gordon Gray, Robert Cutler, Henry R. McPhee, and Andrew J. Goodpaster, 1953–1961. Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Records Records of the Office of the Special Assistant, 1952–1961, including records of Robert Cutler, Dillon Anderson, and Gordon Gray. White House Office, Office of the Staff Secretary Records, 1952–1961 Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary (Paul T. Carroll, Andrew J. Goodpaster, L. Arthur Minnich, and Christopher H. Russell), 1952–1961. Whitman File Papers of Dwight D. Eisenhower as President of the United States, 1953–1961, as maintained by his Personal Secretary, Ann C. Whitman. The Whitman File includes the following elements: the Name Series, the Dulles-Herter Series, Eisenhower Diaries, Ann Whitman (ACW) Diaries, National Security Council Records, Miscellaneous Records, Cabinet Papers, Legislative Meetings, International Meetings, the Administration Series, and the International File. Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland See the following under Department of State: P Files P/PG Files: Lot 60 D 661 USIA/IAE Files USIA/IAE/E Files USIA/IBS Files USIA/IOP/G Files Princeton University Library, Princeton, New Jersey Dulles’ Appointment Book Daily appointment books of John Foster Dulles as Secretary of State, 1953–1959. Published Sources Documentary Collections Gruliow, Leo, ed. Current Soviet Policies: The Documentary Record of the 20th Communist Party Congress and Its Aftermath(New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1957) House of Commons. Parliamentary Debates, 5th Series. Royal Institute of International Affairs. Documents on International Affairs, 1955. (London: Oxford University Press, 1958) ___. Documents on International Affairs, 1956 (London: Oxford University Press, 1959) ___. Documents on International Affairs, 1957 (London: Oxford University Press, 1959) Russian Institute, Columbia University, ed. The Anti-Stalin Campaign and International Communism: A Selection of Documents (New York: Columbia University Press, 1956) U.S. Department of State. American Foreign Policy, 1950–1955: Basic Documents. 2 vols. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1957) ___. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1956 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1959) ___. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1957 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1961) ___. Department of State Bulletin, 1955, 1956, and 1957, Vols. XXXIII, XXXIV, and XXXV (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1955–1957) U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1955 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1957) ___. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1956 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1958) ___. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1957 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1959) Zinner, Paul E., ed. National Communism and Popular Revolt in Eastern Europe: A Selection of Documents on Events in Poland and Hungary, February-November 1956 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1956) Memoirs Note: The following memoirs were consulted at the time this volume was prepared in 1980. The Department takes no responsibility for their accuracy nor endorses their interpretation of the events. Bain, L.B. Reluctant Satellites (New York: Macmillan, 1960) Beam, Jacob D. Multiple Exposure (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1978) Bohlen, Charles E. Witness to History, 1929–1969 (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1973) Cline, Ray S. Secrets, Spies, and Scholars: Blueprint of the Essential CIA. (Washington, D.C.: Acropolis Books, 1976) Eden, Anthony Full Circle: The Memoirs of Anthony Eden. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1960) Eisenhower, Dwight D. The White House Years. Mandate for Change, 1953–1956 (New York: Doubleday & Company, 1963) ___. The White House Years. Waging Peace, 1957–1960 (New York: Doubleday & Company, 1965) Hughes, Emmet John The Ordeal of Power. (New York: Atheneum, 1963) Talbott, Strobe, ed. Khrushchev Remembers: The Last Testament (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1970) Micunović, Veljko. Moscow Diary, translated from Serbo-Croatian by David Floyd (New York: Doubleday & Company, 1980) List of Abbreviations AA, anti-aircraft ACEN, Assembly of Captive European Nations ACSI, Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence AF of L, American Federation of Labor AFN, Armed Forces Network AFOIN, Air Force, Office of Intelligence a.i., ad interim AK, Armia Krajowa (Home Army), military arm of the Polish Government-in-Exile during World War II AMA, American Military Adviser AMAS, American Military Assistance Staff ASME, American Society of Mechanical Engineers AT, anti-tank; Atlantic Treaty AVH, Allam Vedelmi Hatosag (State Security Authority) (Hungary) AWD, Allen W. Dulles BBC, British Broadcasting Corporation BIS, Bank of International Settlements BK, Balli Kombetar (National Front), Albanian émigré political group BNA, Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State BP, International Business Practices Division, Office of International Trade and Resources, Department of State CA, circular airgram CCC, Commodity Credit Corporation CEMA, Council for Economic Mutual Assistance CFEP, Council on Foreign Economic Policy CIA, Central Intelligence Agency CIO, Congress of Industrial Organizations COCOM, Coordinating Committee of the Paris Consultative Group Contel, Consulate telegram CP, Communist Party CPSU, Kommunisticheskaya Partia Sovet-skogo Soyuza (Communist Party of the Soviet Union) CY, calendar year DA, Department of the Army; Soviet designation for long-range aviation DDR, Deutsche Demokratische Republik (German Democratic Republic) Delga, series indicator for telegrams from the U.S. Delegation at the United Nations General Assembly Depcirctel, Department of State circular telegram Depintel, Department of State instruction telegram Deptel, Department of State telegram DFS, direct forces support DISZ, Magyar Kommunista Ifjusagi Szovetseg (Hungarian Communist Youth League) DOD, Department of Defense DP, Democratic Party; Deutsche Partei (German Party); displaced person DRN, Division of Research for Near East, South Asia, and Africa, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State Dulte, series indicator for telegrams to Secretary Dulles from the Department of State E, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State ECE, Economic Commission for Europe ECOSOC, Economic and Social Council of the United Nations EDAC, Economic Defense Advisory Committee EDC, European Defense Community EDST, Eastern Daylight Savings Time EE, Office of Eastern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State Embtel, Embassy telegram EPU, European Payments Union EUCOM, European Command EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State EURATOM, European Atomic Energy Community EXIM, Export-Import Bank FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation FBIS, Foreign Broadcast Information Service FDP, Freie Demokratische Partei (Free Democratic Party) FE, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs FN, Division of Financial Affairs, Department of State; Federation Nationale FOA, Foreign Operations Administration FonMin, Foreign Minister FonOff, Foreign Office FP, Freedom Party FY, fiscal year FYI, for your information G, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State G-2, U.S. Army Intelligence Division, Intelligence section of the general staff of a large unit GA, General Assembly of the United Nations Gadel, series indicator for telegrams to the U.S. Delegation at the United Nations General Assembly GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade GC, General Committee GDR, German Democratic Republic GNA, Grand National Assembly (Romanian) GNP, gross national product GOE, Government of Egypt GOG, Government of Greece; Government of Germany H, Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations HMG, Her (His) Majesty’s Government HWP, Hungarian Workers Party IAC, Intelligence Advisory Committee IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development IBS, International Broadcasting Service ICA, International Cooperation Administration Icato, series indicator for telegrams originating with the International Cooperation Agency IMF, International Monetary Fund INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State IO/UNP, Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State ISA, Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense ITR/TAD, Trade Agreements and Treaties Division, Office of International Trade and Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State JUSMAG, Joint United States Military Advisory Group KVP, Kasernierte Volkspolizei (Garrisoned People’s Police) LDU, Liberal Democratic Union LS, Division of Language Services, Department of State MA, military attaché MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group MDAP, Mutual Defense Assistance Program ME, Middle East MEDO, Middle East Defense Organization MEEOC, Middle East Emergency Oil Committee METO, Middle East Treaty Organization MRC, Munich Radio Center, International Broadcasting Service MSP, Mutual Security Program MVD, Ministerstvo Vnutrennykh Del (Ministry of Internal Affairs) (Soviet Union) NAC, North Atlantic Council; National Advisory Council for International Monetary Affairs NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization NBC, National Broadcasting Company NCO, non-commissioned officer NE, Near East NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs, Department of State NEP, new economic policy niact, night action; communications indicator requiring action or attention by the recipient at any hour of the day or night NIE, National Intelligence Estimate NSC, National Security Council NSCID, National Security Council Intelligence Directive O, Office of the Under Secretary of State for Administration OCB, Operations Coordinating Board ODM, Office of Defense Mobilization OEEC, Organization for European Economic Cooperation OIR, Office of Intelligence Research, Department of State ORM, Office of Refugee and Migration Affairs, Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs, Department of State OSP, offshore procurement P, Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs; series indicator for telegrams from the Commander in Chief, United States Forces in Austria PAP, Polish political party P.L., public law PM, Prime Minister POL, petroleum, oil, and lubricants Polto, series indicator for telegrams from the United States Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Council PPF, Patriotic Peoples’ Front (Hungary) PRU, Public Relations Unit PZPR, Polish United Workers’ Party R, Office of the Special Assistant for Intelligence, Department of State RA, Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State reftel, reference telegram RFE, Radio Free Europe S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State SACEUR, Supreme Allied Commander, Europe SCA, Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs, Department of State SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State (or his delegation) at international conferences to the Department of State SHAPE, Supreme Headquarters, Allied Forces, Europe SOF, status of forces SYG, Secretary-General TASS, Telegrafnye Agentstvo Sovetskogo Soyuza (Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union) TE, technical exchange; table of equipment Tedul, series indicator for telegrams from the Department of State to Secretary Dulles tel, telegram TO&E, Table of Organization and Equipment Topol, series indicator for telegrams to the U.S. Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Council Tousfo, series indicator for telegrams to the Foreign Operations Administration U/MSA, Special Assistant for Mutual Security Affairs, Office of the Under Secretary of State U/OP, Operations Coordinator, Office of the Under Secretary of State UB, Urzad Bezpieczenstwa (Security Office) (Poland) UN, United Nations UNP, Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs, Bureau of International Affairs, Department of State UP, United Press urtel, your telegram USAF, United States Air Force USAFE, United States Air Force, Europe USAREUR, United States Army, Europe USARMA, United States Army Military Attaché USCGS, United States Coast Guard ship USCINCEUR, Commander in Chief, Europe USDel, United States Delegation USDOCOSOUTH, Documents Officer, Allied Forces, Southern Europe USDOCOSOUTHEAST, Documents Officer, Allied Forces, Southeastern Europe USEP, United States Escapee Program USIA, United States Information Agency USIBS, United States International Broadcasting Service USIS, United States Information Service USNMR, United States National Military Representative USOM, United States Operations Mission USRO, United States Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations; United States Regional Organizations USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations VFC, Volunteer Freedom Corps VOA, Voice of America VOKSI, Russian All-Union Society for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries List of Persons Editor’s Note: The identification of the persons in this list is generally limited to circumstances and positions under reference in this volume. All titles and positions are American unless indicated otherwise. Where no dates are given, the official held the position throughout the period covered by this volume. Adams, Sherman, Assistant to President Eisenhower Adenauer, Konrad, Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany and, until May 1955, Minister of Foreign Affairs Aldrich, Winthrop W., Ambassador to the United Kingdom until February 1957 Amory, Robert, Jr., Deputy Director (Intelligence), Central Intelligence Agency Anderson, Dillon, Special Assistant to President Eisenhower for National Security Affairs, April 1955-September 1956; thereafter Consultant to the President Anderson, Robert B., Deputy Secretary of Defense until August 1955; Special Emissary of the President, January-March 1956; Secretary of the Treasury from July 1957 Armstrong, W. Park, Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Intelligence until May 1957 Barber, Willard F., Counselor of the Mission in Poland, April 1956-July 1957 Barbour, Walworth, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until November 1955; Minister-Counselor of the Embassy in the United Kingdom, November 1955-February 1956; thereafter Deputy Chief of Mission Barnes, N. Spencer, Counselor of the Mission in Hungary from January 1955; member, Policy Planning Staff, from September 1957 Baxter, William O., Director, Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until August 1956 Beam, Jacob D., Director, Office of Eastern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, March 1955-October 1955; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, October 1955-June 1957; Ambassador to Poland from August 1957 Bennett, W. Tapley, Jr., Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, August 1955-September 1957; thereafter Political Counselor in the Embassy in Austria Berding, Andrew H., Assistant Director, Office of Policy and Programs, U.S. Information Agency, until March 1957; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs Bernau, Phyllis D., Secretary of State Dulles’ Personal Secretary Blake, Robert O., International Relations Officer, Office of Eastern European Affairs, Department of State, until August 1957 Bohlen, Charles E., Ambassador in the Soviet Union until April 1957; Ambassador in the Philippines from June 1957 Bowie, Robert R., Director of the Policy Planning Staff, Department of State, until August 1955; Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning and Department of State representative on the National Security Council Planning Board, August 1955-October 1957 Brownell, Herbert, Jr., Attorney General of the United States Bruce, David K.E., Consultant to the Secretary of State, January 1955-March 1957; thereafter Ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany and Chief of Mission in Berlin Bulganin, Nikolai Aleksandrovich, Soviet Minister of Armed Forces until February 1955; thereafter Chairman of the Council of Ministers and member of the Presidium of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Burris, Philip H., Policy Coordinator, Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, from October 1955 Cabell, General Charles P., Deputy Director, Central Intelligence Agency Campbell, Laughlin, Chief, Plans and Policy Division, Embassy in the Federal Republic of Germany Colbert, James L., Office of Eastern European Affairs, Department of State Conant, James B., High Commissioner in Germany until May 1955; Ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany and Chief of Mission in Berlin, May 1955-February 1957 Corbett, Jack C., Director of the Office of International Financial and Development Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State Crittenberger, General Willis D., Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee for NSC 143 (Volunteer Freedom Corps), 1953–1954 Cutler, Robert, Special Assistant to President Eisenhower for National Security Affairs from April 1955 and from January 1957 Delaney, Robert Finley, Office of Policy and Program, Soviet Orbit Divison, U.S. Information Agency, until February 1955; thereafter Attaché and Information Officer, Legation in Hungary Dillon, C. Douglas, Ambassador to France until January 1957; thereafter Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Dirksen, Everett McKinley, Republican Senator from Illinois Dowling, Walter C., Deputy High Commissioner for Germany until May 1955; Counselor of Embassy in the Federal Republic of Germany, May 1955-May 1956 Dulles, Allen W., Director of Central Intelligence Dulles, John Foster, Secretary of State Eden, Sir Anthony, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs until April 1955; Prime Minister, April 1955-January 1957 Eisenhower, Dwight David, President of the United States Elbrick, C. Burke, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, March 1956-February 1957; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs Erskine, General Graves B., Director, Office of Special Operations, Office of the Secretary of Defense FitzGerald, Dennis A., Deputy Director for Operations, Foreign Operations Administration (International Cooperation Administration after July 1955) Flemming, Arthur S., Director, Office of Defense Mobilization, until February 1957 Freers, Edward L., Director, Office of Eastern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, from July 15, 1956 George, Walter F., Democratic Senator from Georgia; Chairman, Senate Foreign Relations Committee, January 1955-January 1957; Special Assistant to President Eisenhower, January-August 1957 Gleason, S. Everett, Deputy Executive Secretary of the National Security Council Gomulka, Wladyslaw, First Secretary of the Central Committee, Polish United Workers’ Party Goodpaster, Colonel Andrew J. (Brigadier General from January 1957), Staff Secretary to President Eisenhower Gromyko, Andrei Andreevich, Soviet First Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs until February 1957; thereafter Foreign Minister Hagerty, James C., Press Secretary to President Eisenhower Hammarskjöld, Dag, Secretary-General of the United Nations Hanes, John W., Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs from April 1957 Henderson, Loy W., Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration from January 1955; Officer in Charge, Hungarian Refugee Operations, from December 1956 Herter, Christian A., Consultant to the Secretary of State, January 1957-February 1957; thereafter Under Secretary of State and Chairman, Operations Coordinating Board Higgs, L. Randolph, Deputy Operations Coordinator until December 1956 Hill, Robert B., Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations, March 1956-June 1957 Hollister, John B., Consultant to the Secretary of State, May-July 1955; Director, International Cooperation Administration, July 1955-July 1957 Hoover, Herbert C., Jr., Under Secretary of State and Chairman, Operations Coordinating Board, until February 1957 Horváth, Imre, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Member of the Politburo of Hungary from July 1956 Howe, Fisher, Deputy Special Assistant for Intelligence, Department of State, until March 1956; therafter Director of the Executive Secretariat Hughes, Rowland R., Director, Bureau of the Budget, until April 1956 Humphrey, George M., Secretary of the Treasury until July 1957 Ismay, Baron Hastings Lionel, Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization until April 1957 Jackson, C.D., Special Assistant to President Eisenhower, February 1953-March 1954 Jackson, William H., Special Assistant to Secretary of State Dulles, September 1955-January 1956; Special Assistant to President Eisenhower, January-September 1956; Acting Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, September 1956-January 1957 Jacobs, Joseph E., Ambassador to Poland, April 1, 1955-July 23, 1957 Jernegan, John D., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs, until October 1955; thereafter Minister-Counselor of Embassy in Italy Johnson, U. Alexis, Ambassador to Czechoslovakia until December 1957 Kádár, János, General Secretary of the Hungarian Workers’ Party; Prime Minister of Hungary from November 1956 Kalijarvi, Thorsten V., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs until March 1957; Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, March 1957-September 1957; thereafter Ambassador to El Salvador Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich, First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Kirkpatrick, Sir Ivone A., British Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs until February 1957 Klosson, Boris, Deputy Chief, Division of Research for U.S.S.R. and Eastern Europe, Department of State; Acting Chief from August 1955; Chief from December 1955; National War College from August 1957 Lacy, William S.B., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for East-West Exchanges until 1957 Lay, James S., Jr., Executive Secretary of the National Security Council Leverich, Henry P., Deputy Director, Office of Eastern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State Lister, George T., Office of Eastern European Affairs, Department of State, until September 1957 Lloyd, Selwyn, British Minister of Supply until April 1955; Minister of Defense, April 1955-December 1955; thereafter Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs Lodge, Henry Cabot, Jr., Permanent Representative at the United Nations Luce, Clare Boothe, Ambassador to Italy until December 1956 MacArthur, Douglas, II, Counselor of the Department of State until December 1956; Ambassador to Japan from February 1957 McCardle, Carl W., Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs until March 1957 McCarthy, Joseph M., Republican Senator from Wisconsin McKisson, Robert M., Office of Eastern European Affairs, Department of State, until July 1957; thereafter Officer in Charge of Balkan Affairs Malenkov, Georgiy Maksimilianovich, Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers until February 1955 Mark, David E., Office of Eastern European Affairs, Department of State, until June 1957; thereafter First Secretary and Consul of the Embassy in the Soviet Union Meeker, Leonard C., Assistant Legal Adviser for United Nations Affairs, Department of State Merchant, Livingston T., Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until May 1956; thereafter Ambassador to Canada Merrill, Frederick T., Director, East-West Exchanges Staff, Office of Public Affairs, Department of State, from July 1956 Mićunović, Veljko, Yugoslav Ambassador to the Soviet Union from March 1956 Mikoyan, Anastas Ivanovich, First Deputy Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers, 1955 Moghioros, Alexzandru, First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Romania Molotov, Vyacheslav Mikhailovich, Soviet Foreign Minister until May 1956 Murphy, Robert D., Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Nixon, Richard M., Vice President of the United States Nunley, William T., Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, from January 1955; Acting United Nations Adviser, Bureau of European Affairs, from September 1955 Palmer, Joseph, II, Deputy Director of the Office of European Regional Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until September 1955; Acting Director until September 1956; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Perkins, George W., Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Council, March 1955-October 1957 Phleger, Herman, Legal Adviser, Department of State, until April 1957 Prochnow, Herbert V., Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, November 1955-November 1956 Radford, Admiral Arthur M., Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, until August 1957 Randall, Clarence B., Special Assistant to President Eisenhower for Foreign Economic Policy and, from July 1956, Chairman, Council on Foreign Economic Policy Revey, E. Louis, Chief, Soviet Orbit Policy Staff, Office of Policy and Programs, U.S. Information Agency, and Officer, Office of the Special Assistant to the President’s Representative on the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems Richards, Arthur L., Consul General at Istanbul until 1956; Operations Coordinator, Department of State, from January 1956 Richards, James P., Democratic Representative from South Carolina; Member, House Foreign Relations Committee until January 1957; thereafter Special Assistant to President Eisenhower Robertson, Walter S., Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs Rockefeller, Nelson A., Special Assistant to President Eisenhower until December 1955; Chairman, President’s Advisory Committee on Government Organization, until 1957 Rountree, William M., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs from August 1956 Salt, Barbara, First Secretary of the British Embassy in the United States Shepilov, Dmitrii Trofimovich, Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, June 1956-February 1957 Široký, Viliam, Prime Minister of Czechoslovakia Sobolev, Arkady N., Soviet Representative at the United Nations Staats, Elmer B., Executive Secretary, Operations Coordinating Board Stassen, Harold E., Director, Foreign Operations Administration, until June 1955; Special Assistant to President Eisenhower from March 1955 and U.S. Deputy Representative to the United Nations Disarmament Commission and Subcommittee from August 1955 Stelle, Charles C., Member, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State, until 1956; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Plans, August 1956-August 1957 Stevens, Francis B., Director, Office of Eastern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until July 1956 Stevenson, Adlai, Democratic candidate for President, 1956 Stoessel, Walter, International Relations Officer, Department of State, until 1956; detailed to White House, March-June 1956; First Secretary and Consul of the Embassy in France from June 1956 Streibert, Theodore C., Director, U.S. Information Agency, until December 1956 Sutterlin, James S., Office of Eastern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, from September 1956 Thompson, Llewellyn E., High Commissioner to Austria until May 1955 and Ambassador to Austria until July 1957; thereafter Ambassador to the Soviet Union Timmons, Benson E.L., III, First Secretary of the Embassy in France and Director, Foreign Operations Mission, until July 1955; Minister for Economic Affairs, July-September 1955; thereafter Director of the Office of European Regional Affairs, Department of State Tresize, Philip H., Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning Trivers, Howard, Officer in Charge of Polish, Baltic, and Czechoslovak Affairs, Department of State, June 1955-July 1957; thereafter Political Officer in the Mission in Berlin Twining, General Nathan F., Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, until July 1957; thereafter Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Wadsworth, James J., Alternate Permanent Representative to the United Nations and Deputy Chief of Mission at the United States Mission at the United Nations; Representative for International Atomic Energy Agency Negotiations from January 1956 Wailes, Edward T., Minister to Hungary after July 26, 1956 Wainhouse, David W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until September 1955; First Secretary of the Embassy in France, September 1955-July 1956; Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, July-October 1956; thereafter Counselor of the Embassy in Austria Walmsley, Walter N., Jr., Minister-Counselor of the Embassy in the Soviet Union until October 1956; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Washburn, Abbott M., Deputy Director, U.S. Information Agency Waugh, Samuel C., Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs until August 1955; Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, August 1955-October 1955; thereafter President and Chairman of the Board of Directors, Export-Import Bank White, Lincoln, Assistant Chief, News Division, Department of State, until 1955; Deputy Chief from March 1955; Acting Chief from December 1955; Chief from July 1957 Wilcox, Francis O., Chief of Staff, Senate Foreign Relations Committee, until September 1955; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Wilson, Charles E., Secretary of Defense until October 1957 Young, Kenneth T., Jr., Director of the Office of Philippine and Southeast Asian Affairs, Department of State, January 1955-April 1956; thereafter Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs Zhukov, Marshal Georgiy Konstantinovich, Soviet Minister of Defense, February 1955-October 1957 Balkan Pact United States Interest in the Alliance Among Greece, Turkey, and YugoslaviaFor previous documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, pp. 590 ff. 1. Editorial Note The Balkan Pact, formalized by the Treaty of Bled of August 9, 1954, soon became dormant as a result of Yugoslavia’s rapprochement with the Soviet Union, culminating in the visit of Soviet leaders to Belgrade in May 1955, and of the conflict between Greece and Turkey over Cyprus, especially after the anti-Greek riots in Turkey of September 1955. Documentation on the activities of the Balkan Pact during the early months of 1955, including the meeting of the Pact’s Permanent Council of Ministers, February 28–March 3, is in Department of State, Central File 760.5. Chiefs of Mission Conference Eastern European Chiefs of Mission Conference in Vienna, May 10–11, 1957Regarding the previous Eastern European Chiefs of Mission meetings in Paris, March 3–5, 1952, and in Vienna, September 22–24, 1953, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, pp. 12 and 86. 2. Editorial Note During spring 1957, the Department of State developed plans to hold a conference of the United States Chiefs of Mission in the Soviet Union and the Eastern European countries. On April 5, circular telegram 807 to Budapest, Bucharest, Moscow, Prague, Bonn, Paris, Warsaw, and Belgrade presented an informal agenda for such a meeting and invited comments from the recipients. Based on the responses, the Department transmitted a revised agenda in circular telegram 843, April 19, to the same addressees. These telegrams and responses to them are in Department of State, Central File 120.1451. The work of an interagency Committee on Radio Broadcasting Policy, chaired by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs E. Allen Lightner, in preparation for the conference, was described in Lightner’s memorandum of April 25 to Elbrick. (Department of State, EUR/SOV Files: Lot 69 D 162, EE Chiefs of Mission Conferences, 1952–1958) According to Lightner, the committee was established in February 1957 to provide “standards for ensuring that US controlled broadcasting media carry out the objectives of US foreign policy,” “definitions of the roles of the respective broadcasting media, including VOA and covert-supported media,” and “priorities as between these media in terms of geographic areas and target groups.” A package of materials entitled “Conference Documents of Mr. Clarence B. Randall” for the Eastern European Chiefs of Mission Conference is in Eisenhower Library, CFEP Chairman Records. The package includes a nine-page paper, dated April 1, 1957, entitled “RFE Broadcasting Policy Toward Bulgaria.” The conference was held in Vienna, May 10–11, 1957. The final agenda for the conference included the following: (I) The Current Political Situation in Each Country, (II) Soviet Intentions, Long Term and Short Term, with Particular Reference to Eastern European Developments, (III) U.S. Economic Relations with the Bloc Countries, Including Aid Prospects Where Applicable, (IV) Role and Effectiveness of Radio Broadcasts to Eastern European Countries (VOA, RFE, and RL) and Prospects for Information Activities, (V) East-West Exchange Programs, and (VI) Refugee Problems, Including Defection and Redefection. Participating in the conference were the following: from the Department of State, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs C. Burke Elbrick, Director of the Office of Eastern European Affairs Edward L. Freers, Director of the Office of European Regional Affairs Benson E.L. Timmons, John Horner of the Office of the Under Secretary, Frederick Merrill of the East-West Exchanges Staff, and Thomas B. Larson of the Office of the Special Assistant for Intelligence; from the White House, the President’s Special Assistant Clarence B. Randall; from the United States Information Agency, Assistant Director for Europe William L. Clark; from the Office of the Special Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Ambassador George W. Perkins and First Secretary William C. Trueheart; from the Embassy in France, First Secretary Walter J. Stoessel, Jr.; from the Consulate General at Munich, Consul General Edward Page, Jr.; from the Embassy in the Federal Republic of Germany, Ambassador David K.E. Bruce and Second Secretary David R. Thomson; from the Embassy in Austria, Ambassador Llewellyn E. Thompson, Minister-Counselor David W. Wainhouse, and First Secretary Alfred Puhan, who served as secretary of the conference; from the Embassy in Yugoslavia, Ambassador James W. Riddleberger; from the Embassy in Prague, Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson and Counselor Harold C. Vedeler; from the Legation in Hungary, Chargé N. Spencer Barnes and Second Secretary Anton Nyerges; from the Embassy in Poland, Ambassador Joseph E. Jacobs and First Secretary Richard G. Johnson; from the Legation in Romania, Minister Robert E. Thayer and Second Secretary Edward E. Segall; and from the Embassy in the Soviet Union, Chargé Richard Davis. A copy of the final agenda and a list of participants, as well as a 10-page summary of the conclusions reached and the recommendations made at the conference, were sent to the Department as enclosures to despatch 1111 from Vienna, May 13. (Ibid., Central Files, 120.1463/5–1357) A 45-page summary of the discussion at the meeting was sent to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 1106 from Vienna, May 10. (Ibid., 120.1463/5–1057) Two briefing papers on the agenda items, prepared by the Legation in Hungary, as well as two other papers it prepared for possible discussion, entitled “Consular Affairs” and “Economic Situation in Hungary”, were sent to the Department as enclosures to despatch 561 from Budapest, May 16. (Ibid., 120.1463/5–1657) United States Policy Toward Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and RomaniaFor previous documentation of this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, pp. 1 ff. U.S. Consideration of Detachment of a Major Satellite in Eastern Europe; Assessment of the Situation in Hungary 3. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Merchant) to the Under Secretary of State (Hoover)Source: Department of State, EUR Files: Lot 59 D 233, Subject Files, IV. Top Secret. Drafted by Stevens. Washington, January 4, 1955. SUBJECT OCB Working Group Paper on Possible Detachment of a Major European SatelliteDated December 30, 1954; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, p. 142. Annex A, entitled “East Germany”, is printed ibid., vol. VII, Part 2, p. 1707. Annex B, entitled “Czechoslovakia”, is not printed. In August the OCB instructed the Working Group on NSC 174For text of NSC 174, “United States Policy Toward the Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe,” December 11, 1953, see ibid., vol. VIII, p. 110. to prepare an analysis of the possibility of detaching a major European satellite of the Soviet Union. The Working Group has throughly canvassed the situation in each of the major European satellites (excluding Albania) and has come to the following conclusions:Conclusions a. and b. are identical to those in paragraphs 4a and 4b of the December 30, 1954, OCB Working Group paper cited in footnote 3 above. a. At present, given the strength of the Soviet position, no major Soviet satellite presents vulnerabilities of such extent that their exploitation can be expected to result in its detachment from the Soviet bloc. b. U.S. capabilities under present conditions are not sufficient to accomplish the detachment of any major Soviet satellite by means short of war. Assuming that the purpose of the OCB in making this assignment was to accomplish, if possible, the detachment of a major European satellite, the Working Group further concluded that “unless the power balance between the United States and the Soviet Union changes drastically in our favor, there is little likelihood of detaching a major satellite at any time without grave risk of war except by negotiation. The only satellite which now lends itself to possible detachment by this means is East Germany. If an effort against this satellite were to be undertaken with any hope of success it would require a concentration of political, economic and psychological measures directed to this end.” A study of the requirements of such a concentrated effort should now be undertaken with East Germany as the target in order that advantage may be taken of any future development making possible the unification of Germany by negotiation on terms acceptable to the United States. With respect to general policy toward individual satellite countries looking toward the accomplishment of U.S. objectives, the Working Group further expressed the view that soft treatment cannot be expected to effect the basic changes in the nature of communist regimes which would conform to U.S. objectives; and that, therefore, except when relaxations are calculated to obtain carefully defined limited objectives within a short time span or to protect the people against the regime under special circumstances of internal tension, pressures should be increased against any part of the Soviet orbit where suitable opportunities appear. The importance of this subject justifies study of appropriate implementing actions consistent with U.S. policy as it develops. The summary of the paper contains in Paragraph 4c, last sentence, the following statement “Such a concentrated effort should now be undertaken with East Germany as the target.” This sentence was added after consideration of the paper by the Board of Assistants and since it constitutes a policy recommendation should not be considered to be a recommendation of the Working Group. Recommendations: It is recommended (a) That you concur in conclusions a and b. (b) That you support the studies recommended in 4 c and 5.There is no indication on the source text whether Hoover accepted these recommendations. Hoover subsequently remarked on the OCB Working Group paper during the OCB meeting of January 5; see infra. 4. Notes on the Meeting of the Operations Coordinating Board, Washington, January 5, 1955Source: Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Preliminary OCB Minutes. Secret. Drafted by Bishop (U/OP) on January 6. Washington, January 5, 1955 Item 1. Approval of Minutes of December 29, 1954 Meeting The Minutes were approved. Item 2. Special Analysis with Respect to Satellite Areas—NSC 174 Mr. Staats gave a rather full introduction to this paper,See footnote 4, supra. pointing out its genesis and stating that copies had been made available to the Planning Board Members through the Board Assistants and drawing the Board’s attention to the conclusions on pages 15 and 25.The reference to page 15 is to the last page of the OCB Working Paper of December 30, 1954; the reference to page 25 is to Annex A of the paper, “East Germany”; see footnote 4, supra. General Cutler stated that the purpose of the working group was to study the possibility and feasibility of detaching a satellite. The conclusions 4a and 4b are responsive to the terms of reference but 4c deals with making a concentrated effort with a view at some future time to detaching East Germany; that this is not within the charter of the working group; that with reference to East Germany one really means “unification” and not “detachment”. General Cutler went on to say that paragraph 5 is an expression of an opinion by the working group on a matter which is really one of high policy. He said this opinion was neither consistent nor inconsistent with the NSC policy which had just been adopted this morning.Reference is to the discussion at the 230th meeting of the NSC, January 5, on “Basic National Security Policy”; see vol. XIX, p. 9. It was General Cutler’s feeling that certainly the working group should not deal with this policy question and he doubted whether the OCB itself should deal with such a policy question. In summary, General Cutler said he felt that 4a and 4b were acceptable, that 4c should be referred to the “committee” about which he had informed the OCB at luncheon and that paragraph 5 should be dropped.The reference to the “committee” is unclear. Mr. Anderson remarked that perhaps paragraph 5 would be a natural task for the Presidential committee which General Cutler had mentioned. Mr. Hoover stated that he understood that the last sentence of paragraph 4c had been added after the paper had been considered by the working group and by the Board Assistants and that it was not agreed to by anyone. He suggested that the sentence be changed to call for a study to be made. General Cutler said that he liked the change which the Department of State had suggested but he still felt that the “committee” should handle this item. At this point, Mr. Dulles said that CIA is continually needing guidance on this question of “soft” versus “provocative” courses of action. He added that he for one believed that Czechoslovakia would never have been lost if someone had been there doing something about it. . . . He emphasized that the so-called completely “soft” policy is subject to misinterpretation and we are apt to lapse into a do nothing policy. General Cutler remarked that he still did not like paragraph 5. Mr. Hoover suggested one or two minor drafting changes in paragraph 5 which were discussed briefly. Following this, Mr. Stassen stated that it is not OCB which is expressing this opinion but it is merely the working group and that the working group, contrary to what General Cutler had said, was not outside its terms of reference in making such a suggestion. He said he felt the OCB should encourage rather than discourage the working groups to make such suggestions. Stassen pointed out that the Board was only asked to concur in 4a, 4b and 4c and that 5 remained merely the view of the working group. Mr. Dulles then suggested that paragraph 5 be taken out of the summary and left in the paper as it now is in paragraph 38.Paragraph 5 of the summary section of the Working Group paper of December 30, 1954, and paragraph 38 of the “Conclusions” section of the same paper are similar, except paragraph 38 contains additional comments about Hungary being a case in point of a satellite facing setbacks and internal problems as well as a concluding sentence that reads: “Only by maintaining a firm position based on strength can the U.S. preserve the balance which is essential to prevent war and hope to exploit to its advantage Soviet weaknesses as they develop.” General Cutler thought that paragraph 4c should be referred to the Presidential committee when it is appointed. It was finally agreed that paragraph 5 would be put in as paragraph 4, ahead of recommendations in which the Board is asked to concur. This was generally accepted. [Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.] Max W. Bishop 5. Summary Paper Approved by the Operations Coordinating BoardSource: Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430, Soviet Satellites. Top Secret. Submitted to the OCB under a covering memorandum by Staats, January 11, with the instruction that the OCB specified “minimum distribution” of this summary paper. Staats also stated that the OCB “noted the attached subject paper” (apparently the January 5 revised summary of the December 30, 1954 paper) and approved the recommendations in the summary. Washington, January 5, 1955. ANALYSIS OF THE SITUATION WITH RESPECT TO POSSIBLE DETACHMENT OF A MAJOR EUROPEAN SOVIET SATELLITE Summary 1. Acting on the suggestion of the Board Assistants, the OCB, at its meeting of August 25, 1954, requested the Working Group to review additional possible actions to implement NSC 174, particularly a major coordinated effort by appropriate agencies designed to detach one of the important European satellites from the Soviet bloc. The Working Group was requested to submit a preliminary staff analysis to the Board which would point up the policy and strategic implications and feasibility factors that would be involved in such an effort. At their meeting of August 13, 1954, the Board Assistants agreed that Albania should not be considered as an “important” satellite for the purposes of this study. 2. The Working Group first reviewed existing intelligence estimates of the political situation concerning all of the Eastern European satellites. Then a study was made of the methods that might be used to detach a satellite. U.S. capabilities for such action were reviewed and conclusions flowing from the analysis were drawn. Studies on the vulnerabilities of East Germany and Czechoslovakia were prepared especially for this review. 3. The analysis indicates that the instrumentalities of Soviet dominion in the political, economic and cultural fields, backed by military force, continue to be effective in maintaining control over the satellites. The progressive sovietization of the political, social and economic structure of the satellites, the orientation of the local economies towards the East and the concentrated effort at indoctrination of the rising generation have served further to support Moscow’s control over the satellite areas. The Soviet orbit nevertheless has vulnerabilities which are susceptible to exploitation by the United States. 4. Without attempting to be categorical, it is the opinion of the Working Group that soft treatment cannot be expected to effect the basic changes in the nature of communist regimes which would conform to U.S. objectives; and that therefore, except when relaxations are calculated to obtain carefully defined limited objectives within a short time span or to protect the people against the regime under special circumstances of internal tension, pressures should be increased against any part of the Soviet orbit where suitable opportunities appear. The importance of this subject justifies study of appropriate implementing actions consistent with U.S. policy as it develops. Recommendation It is recommended that the Board concur in the following: a. At present, given the strength of the Soviet position, no major Soviet satellite presents vulnerabilities of such extent that their exploitation can be expected to result in its detachment from the Soviet bloc. b. U.S. capabilities under present conditions are not sufficient to accomplish the detachment of any major Soviet satellite by means short of war. c. Unless the power balance between the United States and the Soviet Union changes drastically in our favor, there is little likelihood of detaching a major satellite at any time without grave risk of war except by negotiation. The only satellite which now lends itself to possible detachment by this means is East Germany. If an effort against this satellite were to be undertaken with any hope of success it would require a concentration of political, economic and psychological measures directed to this end. A study of the requirements of such a concentrated effort should now be undertaken with East Germany as a target in order that advantage may be taken of any future development making possible the unification of Germany by negotiation on terms acceptable to the U.S. 6. Memorandum from Robert F. Delaney of the Office of Policy and Programs, Soviet Orbit Division, United States Information Agency, to Francis B. Stevens of the Office of Eastern European AffairsSource: Department of State, Central Files, 760.00/1–2455. Secret. Washington, January 24, 1955. SUBJECT Analysis of Actions to be Taken in Event of Eastern European Uprising Based upon the January 18 NSC 174 Working Group discussions of my December 1, 1954 draft statementNeither a report of the Working Group on January 18 nor Delaney’s December 1, 1954, draft statement has been found in Department of State files. of courses of action open to the U.S. in the event of future Eastern European uprisings I submit the following draft for your study. In attempting to discuss the possibility of an Eastern European uprising a certain realistic framework must be adopted. For purposes of this paper, therefore, the following conditions are assumed: 1. The conclusions reached in the OCB Detachment Study of January 5, 1955Supra. are considered valid in this instance. 2. It is realistic to assume explicit Soviet control over the captive peoples of such a degree as to prevent successful uprising, and 3. An uprising within the Soviet army itself or elements thereof is considered without the scope of this paper since it raises problems of a scope and complexity which is quite beyond the Working Group’s terms of reference. It is our considered judgment that should an uprising similar to the abortive East Berlin riots of June 17, 1953 occur in the near future in Eastern Europe, the position which the U.S. Government must take would not differ materially from the stand we assumed in 1953. Specifically, the courses of specific action to be taken by the U.S. are severely circumscribed by over-riding presently applicable policy considerations. Basically this means that the U.S. must not adopt any course of action which would 1) precipitate hostilities (e.g. armed aid, logistic support, etc.). 2) cause the premature uprising and consequent annihilation of dissident elements on the basis of exhortations or promises which we are not able to support. 3) alienate our allies. Since any active courses of action embarked upon by the U.S. in such a rebellious situation would likely cause one or more of the above reactions, and since such actions are clearly not in concert with established U.S. national policy, positive activity by the U.S. is not feasible. Thus, should a situation of revolt develop, the U.S. would have to confine itself (1) to dissemination of the facts of the ensuing action and (2) to expressions of sympathy, passive encouragement and moral support coupled with whatever political steps would be deemed feasible and effective in the light of the actual circumstances. No attempts to encourage the participants could justifiably be made which would result in needless loss of life. 7. Editorial Note At its 234th meeting on January 27, the National Security Council discussed and approved with slight modifications NSC 5505, “Exploitation of Soviet and Satellite Vulnerabilities.” NSC 5505, January 18, was based on a lengthy report on the subject prepared by a committee chaired by Max F. Millikan of the Center for International Studies of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and submitted to the Council on November 30, 1954. report. The report is filed as an annex to NSC 5505 in Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 5505 Series. For text of NSC 5505/1, the approved version of NSC 5505, see volume XXIV, page 20. 8. Diary Entry by the President’s Press Secretary (Hagerty)Source: Eisenhower Library, Hagerty Papers. Washington, March 4, 1955. Released at 10:30 a statement by the President offering emergency food supplies to Albania through the League of Red Cross Societies.For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1955, pp. 316–317. At a meeting on February 9, the OCB discussed and reluctantly approved the proposal of sending food to Albania: “It was finally agreed that members of the OCB all approved the project subject to the ability of the Department of State to negotiate an agreement assuring delivery to the consumers, that delivery to be in the hands of trustworthy and reliable agents and not ‘Albanian Red Cross’.” (Notes of the OCB meeting by Bishop, February 9; Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430, Preliminary Notes) Last night, with the President’s approval, our State Department informed our embassies in Yugoslavia, Greece and IndiaIn telegram 740 to Belgrade, sent also to Athens, London, Paris, and Rome, but not New Delhi, March 3. (Ibid., Central Files, 867.49/3–355) of this move so that they would not be surprised by it. Albania is an Iron Curtain Communist country and its food supplies are dwindling seriously. The President’s statement said we were offering this food through the Red Cross and such a move would put the Albanian Government on the spot. If they refuse,As reported in a memorandum from Stevens to Bishop, March 9, the offer was rejected. (Ibid., OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430, Albania) their peoples will know of it and Russia will then be forced to ship in some food. If they accept, our packages will clearly be labelled as coming from the United States and the Albanian people will know where the food comes from. This is similar to the move we made last year in the Danube flood countries which was very effective propaganda in those countries. [Here follows discussion of other subjects.] 9. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/3–1755. Secret. Also pouched to Moscow. Budapest, March 17, 1955—4 p.m. 434. Broad outlines of developments in Hungary past few months—apparently in fairly close step with those elsewhere in Soviet empire and at times visible in advance—now more clearly discernible. Basic elements in trend seem to be: Shift so far conclusively evident only in propaganda towards heavy and war industry; slight actual upward revision certain industry goals with increasing emphasis on over-all efficiency and (apparently) on machine industry; increasing discrimination favoring Socialist sector agriculture; and more repressive measures against population. These first perceived in December, distinct after first of year and now confirmed by latest Central Committee resolution. Seems evident shift brought about by doctrinaire, Muscovite and anti-western elements, with Rakosi at present leading this camp. Practically certain that Rakosi element has firm support of group now dominant in Kremlin. In assessing cause of above, obvious that situation here closely connected with that in USSR. Less clear, however, is exact relationship between two; that is, whether situation in USSR prime cause of changes here, or whether former merely such as to allow developments in Hungary to mature. On one hand growing international tension, with threat German rearmament major component, presumably important and perhaps dominant factor in determining recent course events in Soviet Union and so indirectly of those here. At same time, recent output strongly suggests that ideological struggle over basic Communist dogma itself, involving role of Party in Communist society, rights of individual within framework of Party’s role and extent individual’s and nation’s independence relative to system (latter including growth liberal and nationalist tendencies with undertones of Titoism) represents powerful underlying local factor. Furthermore, relatively meager results achieved under new course in Hungary—in turn largely function of inherent weakness in Communist system—doubtless played significant role. In any event regardless of how such factors weighted, some combination of these influences evidently allowed present Hungarian leaders to gain upper hand over advocates of new course and international détente in continuing struggle for power. Struggle itself not new, signs being apparent in June 1953Reference is to the events of late June 1953 and the power struggle between Rákosi and Nagy culminating in the June 28 meeting of the Hungarian Workers Party at which Rákosi admitted previous mistakes and resigned the premiership (although not the first secretaryship of the party) in favor of Nagy. See telegram 22 from Budapest, July 8; Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, p. 72. and October 1954Reference is to the October 1–3, 1954, meetings of the Central Committee of the Hungarian Workers Party at which the Rákosi–Nagy conflict over one-man rule and direction of economic policy seemed to swing in Nagy’s favor. but antagonism permitted to flare into open coincident with major policy reorientation; while latest events suggest that Rakosi may be taking personal revenge on Nagy for latter’s anti-Rakosi statements October 20In an October 20, 1954, article in Szadbad Nep, Nagy publicly attacked Rákosi and one-man rule. The article is summarized in telegram 188 from Budapest, October 20, 1954. (Department of State, Central Files, 964.61/10–2054) and perhaps for his entire role in new course. Looking ahead, we anticipate general tightening up in all fields. Party discipline will doubtless be strengthened, class warfare pushed more openly, increased force employed bring backsliders and recalcitrants into line and action initiated put brake on “liberalism” and freewheeling criticism which particularly apparent in recent months. Effects these policies will probably include increased popular antagonism toward regime, due to increased police repression and downward pressure on living standards. In addition, individuals (probably great majority) within party and government who had sincerely believed in or hoped for new course as long-range policy rather than tactical move, as well as individuals (also great majority) within regime who underneath inclined put national Hungarian interests above Moscow dictates, should feel growing antagonism to ruling faction not only from conviction but also from considerations personal security. In economic field, efforts modify reorientation toward increased output consumer goods, although only partially affected, should produce further dislocations; and major effect will probably be felt in countryside as regime put screws on private peasants. As already reported, we see little reason believe policies which failed once can achieve greater success on second run. Limiting factors moreover much greater today than when this policy first began to falter and new course emerged. Should above developments take place, and if meanwhile Paris Agreements ratifiedReference is to the protocols on the termination of the occupation regime in the Federal Republic of Germany, the tripartite agreement on the exercise of retained rights in Germany, the convention on the presence of foreign forces in the Federal Republic of Germany (all signed at Paris on October 23, 1954, and entered into force on May 6, 1955), the treaty on the Western European Union, and the agreement on the accession of West Germany to NATO. and West German rearmament begun, seems not improbable that situation will arise which in sense reverse of present: i.e., those making policy for Hungary during this period, both in Moscow and Budapest, will face failure on both international and domestic fronts. Then particularly should Western powers show readiness to negotiate outstanding differences, on reasonable basis but from position greater strength and without yielding on essentials, ground should be much more favorable for recapture influence by moderates and nationalists. In addition, independent of relations between USSR and West, failure Rakosi group attain satisfactory economic objectives and popular response on second try would probably threaten this group’s prominence. (This excellent point for media build-up.) Impossible now judge how poor conditions would have to become before Soviets might feel obliged take remedial action, but we believe downhill slide towards this point will probably continue and may even accelerate. Undoubtedly this factor present in Rakosi’s mind and will affect his actions. Above would suggest period greater strain and increasing exacerbation in relation with Hungarian authorities for a time, with chances for improvement dependent primarily on developments in larger spheres east-west relations but with reasonably good outlook for rather sharp swing-back later. Implications for US policy might include: Period relative inaction vis-à-vis Hungarian regime on official level in immediate future; avoiding giving or receiving provocation except in so far as necessary react against clear-cut harassment, when our stand should be firm and our action retaliatory on same plane when means available; maintaining foothold for use later; focusing media attacks more on specific doctrinaire element in regime and anti-nationalist tendencies of this leadership; and attempting devise programs and actions which will reach and benefit Hungarian people directly, such as food, medical aid offers, giving away information on advanced agricultural methods, etc. Even if refused by regime, such actions would be known to Hungarian public and hit responsive cord. Then when and if grip of doctrinaire Muscovites weakens, renewed pressure for concessions, accompanied by increasing gestures goodwill toward Hungarian people as appropriate, could probably have some success in affecting Hungarian policy orientation. Barnes 10. Telegram From the Department of State to the Legation in HungarySource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/3–855. Secret. Drafted by S.M. King (IBS/PME); cleared in IOP and EE. Washington, March 21, 1955—1:04 p.m. 272. Ref: Legtel 418, March 8.In telegram 418, the Legation suggested repetitive propaganda characterizing Hungarian officials, particularly Rákosi, as Soviet officials or Soviet citizens, thus playing on Hungarian nationalism and possibly exacerbating tension among Communist Party ranks in Hungary. In addition, the Legation suggested stressing the “swing back to the tough line” in both Hungary and the Soviet Union. (Ibid., 764.00/3–855) VOA planning make limited use suggested approach labelling few selected officials each satellite as “representing Soviets”. Rakosi is, of course, logical target in Hungary. In this connection has been longstanding VOA practice miss no opportunity remind listeners satellite regimes as whole represent interests of Kremlin rather than those of local populations. Do not feel, however, this appropriate time overplay theme of “swing back to tough line”. VOA treatment recent developments USSR and satellites, especially Hungary, cannot but leave impression immediate future inevitably somewhat darker, but care taken not destroy hopes and morale of populations. Nor do we wish leave impression recent changes necessarily viewed as forerunners increased deterioration US-Soviet relations. VOA greatly appreciative Legation’s many suggestions and guidances. Hoover 11. National Intelligence EstimateSource: Department of State INR–NIE Files. Secret. National Intelligence Estimates (NIEs) were high-level interdepartmental reports presenting authoritative appraisals of foreign policy problems. NIEs were drafted by officers from those agencies represented on the Intelligence Advisory Committee (IAC), discussed and revised by interdepartmental working groups coordinated by the Office of National Estimates of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), approved by the IAC, and circulated under the aegis of the CIA to the President, appropriate officers of cabinet level, and the National Security Council. The Department of State provided many political and some economic sections of NIEs. Washington, March 29, 1955. NIE 12.5–55 CURRENT SITUATION AND PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN HUNGARYThe following note appears on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. “Concurred in by the Intelligence Advisory Committee on 29 March 1955. Concurring were the Special Assistant, Intelligence, Department of State; the Assistant Chief of Staff, G–2, Department of the Army; the Director of Naval Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, USAF; and the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff. The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the IAC, and the Assistant to the Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.” The Problem To assess the strengths and weaknesses of the Hungarian Communist regime, to evaluate the regime’s policies and probable courses of action, and to estimate the ability of the Communists to continue in control through mid-1956. Conclusions 1. Hungary has in recent years shown consistent evidence of political disharmony and economic dislocation, accompanied by popular unrest, and will probably continue to be the most troublesome of the East European Satellites. Much of the popular dissension arises from the Hungarians’ deep-seated hostility toward Communism and toward the Slavs who have imposed Communism upon them. They do not have the antagonism toward the Germans displayed by the Czechs and the Poles. However, the security forces at the disposal of the government, plus the presence of Soviet forces, are sufficient to cope with any active resistance. In any event, we believe that the Kremlin will take all measures necessary to keep Hungary in the Bloc. (Paras. 7–15, 19–28, 34) 2. Although the Communist regime restored the economy and, in some directions, notably heavy industry, expanded it, Hungary’s economic difficulties multiplied. The introduction of the “New Course” in 1953 failed to resolve the problems in industry and agriculture. In industry the failure is attributable to an inadequate raw materials base, inexperienced management, and inability to provide sufficient worker incentives. In agriculture, mismanagement coupled with general peasant resistance to agrarian policies accounted for most of the difficulties. Living conditions did not improve during 1954 and, in the urban areas, were clearly below prewar levels. (Paras. 7–9, 14–15) 3. Improvement in the Hungarian economy is unlikely to take place unless a substantial increase in agricultural production can be achieved. Prospects for this are poor under existing Communist policies. (Paras. 16–18) 4. The Hungarian Army and Air Force are capable of participating in a Bloc campaign against neighboring countries although sustained operations would require extensive Soviet logistic support. The reliability of the Army and Air Force is considered to be sufficiently high for them to serve in occupation duties, to guard rear areas, or to serve as integrated elements of a Soviet field force. The combat effectiveness of the Hungarian Army is as high as that of any other European Satellite, except Bulgaria; its primary limitation being the questionable reliability of some of the troops. (Paras. 29–30) Discussion I. Introduction 5. Of all the European Satellites, Hungary has in recent years shown the most consistent symptoms of political disharmony, economic dislocation, and popular unrest. These symptoms have not extended to open revolt, such as occurred in East Germany in June 1953, but they have been sufficient to arouse doubts, from time to time, as to the ability of the Communists to maintain power. We do not believe that the regime is, in fact, seriously threatened. Nevertheless, Hungary is almost certainly the most troubled of all the European states subject to the USSR. Its population is overwhelmingly hostile to the Communist government, and is apathetic and uncooperative toward the economic program. The economy has been dislocated by unrealistic plans and by incompetent management. By mid-1953, persistent failures led to the introduction of a “New Course.” After about 18 months of operation, the new policies had failed to bring about the hoped-for improvements. In early 1955, certain modifications of “New Course” policies were initiated. In spite of efforts by the Communists, the situation has not been resolved. II. Economic Situation and Probable Developments [Here follows a summary of Hungarian economic policy from 1945 to 1954.] 15. Thus, the Hungarian economy remains in a state of serious dislocation. The standard of living of the people is generally low and in the urban areas, except for the privileged, is substantially below prewar levels. There is a very considerable number of black market dealers who obtain much of their merchandise as a result of widespread pilfering by workers. Agricultural machinery has thus far had little effect because of poor maintenance, lack of spare parts, and the fact that its use has been largely limited to the 30 percent of the land comprising state and collective farms. Factories are badly planned, and some of them are left unfinished. Those in operation produce generally inferior goods at a high cost which makes it difficult to compete with more efficient producers in foreign markets. The marked increases in GNP represent almost entirely capital equipment which, thus far, has contributed very little toward the improvement of the welfare of the people. Probable Economic Developments 16. According to recent policy statements regarding the 1955 plan, some of the former emphasis upon industrial production is to be restored. Industrial production is scheduled to increase over 1954 by nearly six percent and agriculture by slightly more than seven percent. National income is to rise by nearly eight and one-half percent. The planned increase in industry is made dependent largely upon raising productivity and that in agriculture is to be achieved through larger acreage and modernization. Hungary’s prospects for achieving these 1955 increases are, at best, poor. 17. Hungary will almost certainly be unable to achieve any substantial economic growth during the next few years under the present course, and unless there is a significant modification in it, no improvement in living standards is likely. Some temporary improvement may be obtained through extended credits or import loans from either the USSR or the West. The two basic difficulties impeding economic development—an inadequate raw materials base and the stagnation in agriculture—have not been resolved, and the regime has been unable to reduce the widespread apathy and passive resistance of the people. Continued general emphasis upon agricultural production, and particularly upon increasing the amount of agricultural equipment and chemical aids available to both collective farmers and individual peasants, might lead to some increase in production, providing the weather is favorable. The latest expression of economic policy, which may have been dictated by USSR, suggests that there is little likelihood during the next few years of any appreciable increase in the proportion of national product assigned to meet current consumer needs. The outlook after 1955 will be influenced by the role assigned to Hungary by the USSR in the coordinated Bloc-wide planning period due to commence in 1956, but it will be even more dependent upon basic Hungarian capabilities. 18. Over the long term, Hungary’s basic economic problem is that of maintaining its industrial plant and importing a large part of the raw materials essential to the operation of that plant. These imports can be paid for by proceeds from the export of an agricultural surplus or, alternatively, but less probably, manufactured products. Hungary had been a predominantly agricultural country, but this basic pattern changed as a result of the rapid industrialization and the lag in agriculture since 1949. At present, Hungary’s industry will have difficulty competing in world markets. Thus, of the two alternatives, agriculture is probably the more economic means of paying for the needed imports, but prospects are poor for achieving a significant surplus under Communist agrarian policy. III. Political Developments Nature and Impact of the “New Course” 19. Political developments in Hungary have been strongly influenced by the independent character and traditions of the Hungarian people. They have a deep-seated hostility toward Communism and toward the Slavs who have imposed Communism upon them. The Hungarians feel that their ancient parliamentary customs, Roman Catholic and Protestant heritage, and their cultural tradition bind them to Western Europe. These factors, coupled with the peoples’ recollections of Hungary’s earlier (1919) Communist dictatorship, increase the regime’s difficulties in its efforts to bolster its limited popular support. 20. Although the “New Course” laid primary emphasis upon economic policy, it also offered a number of concessions of a political nature. Specifically, it promised: (a) broader religious freedom; (b) a radical change in police methods to increase individual security; (c) cessation of deportation and liquidation of detention camps; and (d) a general amnesty. The implementation of these promises has been both limited and belated with resultant popular disillusion. 21. The promises and concessions of the “New Course” produced dissension within the Communist Party. Some Party elements considered the new program to be contrary to the principles of Communism. Many functionaries feared that their own positions or authority might be reduced, and that, in any case, control of the Party over the Hungarian people would be substantially impaired. On the other hand, the adherents of the “New Course” considered that implementation of its liberal policies had become essential, if the Hungarian economy was to be preserved from disaster and the goals of the Communist Party achieved. Party leaders attempted to restore unity by a series of public statements. Shortly after a plenum meeting of the Central Committee of the Party in October, 1954, members of the Committee declared that leaders who were unable or unwilling to carry out the “New Course” would be replaced. 22. During 1954 and early 1955, Matyas Rakosi, Secretary of the Hungarian Communist Party, became identified with the members of the Party faction resisting what they considered to be the extremes of the “New Course,” while Premier Nagy remained its chief defender. Since December, 1954, Rakosi’s influence appears to have increased steadily, and the recent shifts in Soviet economic priorities and leadership indicate that his views are again dominant. Nagy’s disappearance from public view in early 1955 and the subsequent public attack by the Central Committee on his “rightist incorrect emphasis” during the “New Course” furnish additional evidence of this trend. Although dissension and vacillation over the “New Course” have diminished the stature and prestige of the Party, we believe that the party will continue to maintain effective leadership and control. 23. The initial reaction of the Hungarian people in general to the political promise of the “New Course” was a combination of opportunism and unrealistic expectations. Public reaction was sharp when it developed that many of the regime’s concessions fell far short of meeting these high expectations. Even though the “New Course” did remove a few of the political causes of popular dissatisfaction, the hostility of the Hungarian people toward Communism and the Communist regime continues. 24. The vast majority of Hungarians feel that their country was stolen from them by a Communist minority, which gained power and retains it only through the backing of Soviet armed forces. Even among the industrial proletariat and youth—groups from which Communism has generally drawn most of its adherents—the prevailing attitude ranges from hostility through resentment to apathy. Prospects for Continued Communist Control 25. Active and organized resistance is virtually impossible because of elaborate and effective police controls, but popular resentment is expressed in open criticism of the regime and in widespread passive resistance. This resentment manifests itself in a lack of cooperation, deliberate misunderstanding of instructions, low quality production, high damage and reject rates, and other kinds of subtle sabotage. This pervasive passive resistance has been one of the important reasons for the failure of the original Five-Year Plan and for the spotty performance under the “New Course” since 1953. 26. While it is unlikely that the regime can soon eliminate the basic and general hostility of the people, it has nevertheless at its disposal a formidable security apparatus: to wit, the Security Police of 20,000 and a Frontier Guard of 18,000. The Security Police is a highly mobile, well-organized, politically reliable, and intensively trained force. Although the Frontier Guard is probaby not as dependable as the Security Police, its reliability is improving as a result of incessant political indoctrination and selective recruiting. In addition, the regime regularly uses the Communist Party, its informer network, its corps of “political educators,” and numerous MVD members dispersed throughout the country to suppress subversion and to maintain authority. The Civil Police force of more than 50,000, though not as reliable as the security forces, can perform limited assignments. 27. In case of widespread public disturbances, the regime has at its disposal an Army of considerable size and a small Air Force. If the situation got beyond the control of Hungarian forces, the Soviet forces stationed in the country, including two Soviet mechanized divisions and elements of the 59th Tactical Air Army, would almost certainly act with or without an invitation. Additional Soviet troops could be quickly brought into the country if needed. 28. With these forces available, there is little likelihood that Communist control over Hungary will be jeopardized during the period of this estimate, but the difficulties confronting the regime will continue to be accentuated by the hostility of the people. Dissension in the Party will continue to impair its effectiveness. In the absence of any lasting solutions to Hungary’s basic problems, there will almost certainly be reorganizations, new promises, and shifts in leadership. IV. Military Strengths and Capabilities 29. The Hungarian Army consists of 150,000 men organized into 13 line divisions (10 rifle, 1 cavalry, 1 mechanized, and 1 armored) with sufficient combat support units. Under a system of compulsory universal service, some 50,000 men are inducted into the Army each year and pass into the reserve after two or, in some cases, three years. The number of well-trained reserves is approximately 350,000 men. Upon mobilization, the size of the Army could be quickly expanded, reaching a strength of 650,000 men by M + 180 days, if adequate matériel support is provided by the Soviets. The Hungarian Army is capable of participating in a Bloc campaign against its neighbors although sustained operations would require extensive Soviet logistic support. Army units also could be employed for occupation duties and to guard rear areas and lines of communication, or they could be integrated with Soviet field forces. The combat effectiveness of the Hungarian Army is as high as that of any other European Satellite, except Bulgaria; its primary limitations being the questionable reliability of some of the troops. The reliability of the Army as a whole, however, is considered to be sufficiently high for it to fight effectively in the Bloc cause until it became apparent that the tide of war was turning irrevocably against the Soviets. 30. The Hungarian Air Force has a complement of 13,000 men and an estimated operational strength of 370 aircraft, including approximately 200 jet fighters, 110 ground attack planes, 40 light bombers, and 20 transports. During the past year, emphasis on primary and advanced flying and on the recruitment of young pilots has already raised morale and effectiveness, and the Air Force is considered to be loyal to the regime. The Air Force will probably be further improved by gradual advances in organization, by a continuation of the jet re-equipment program, and by more extensive operational training. V. Hungary’s Role in the Bloc 31. Like the other Satellites, Hungary is under the firm control of Moscow. Basic policies are almost certainly dictated by the Kremlin, perhaps in considerable detail. The campaign for industrialization and the subsequent introduction of the “New Course” were common to all the Satellites, although more pronounced in Hungary. The recently renewed emphasis on heavy industry probably reflects, at least in part, a conviction in Moscow that relaxation of pressures for industrial growth had gone too far throughout the European Bloc. 32. There is no evidence that Moscow treats Hungary as a special case among the Satellites, nor do we believe that the USSR would permit the adoption of policies in Hungary which would conflict with programs laid down for the Satellites generally. However, peculiarities exist in the Hungarian political and psychological make-up which constitute sources of intra-Satellite dissension. One is popular hostility toward neighbouring beneficiaries of the country’s postwar territorial and population losses: and, another is that the Hungarians, having no territorial issue to settle with Germany, appear largely unmoved by Communist propaganda against West German rearmament. 33. During the next several years, Hungary’s obvious economic difficulties and the recalcitrance of its population will present considerable problems to the Soviet rulers as well as to the Hungarian regime. Improvement in Hungary’s managerial skill and in the people’s attitude toward the regime will develop very slowly, if at all. Hungary will continue to be a weak member of the Bloc, and might even, for a time, cost more on balance in Bloc resources than it will contribute. 34. Despite Hungary’s limited contribution to the Bloc’s power potential, the Kremlin probably considers Hungary of value because it comprises an important strategic area, and makes a contribution to Bloc military strength. Economically, while Hungary may constitute a raw material drain, it does supply certain specialized industrial and selected agricultural products. Over the long term, Hungary may be able to increase its contribution to the general viability of the Orbit economy and to the Orbit integrated military front. Probably more important than any of these factors, from the Kremlin’s point of view, is the prestige involved in maintaining the Communist monolith intact. We believe, therefore, that the Kremlin will take all measures necessary to keep Hungary within the Bloc. 12. Letter From the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Anderson)Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean up. Top Secret. Anderson became the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs on April 2. New York, April 13, 1955. Dear Dillon: First let me tell you how delighted I was to learn that you had been appointed to succeed Bobby Cutler in the National Security Council. You were always my “candidate” for this position, and it pleases me very much to think that you have it. You are undoubtedly finding out now what a very difficult job it is. But I hope that the contribution to public service, which I know you will make, will more than compensate in your own mind for the effort which you must expend. I also write in connection with Bobby’s memorandum to Mr. Hoover of March 31 concerning the Volunteer Freedom Corps.Not found. As he told you, I have had a very close interest in this, and, as a Senator, sponsored legislation to set it up.Reference is to the Alien Enlistment Act of 1950, PL. 597 (64 Stat. 316), approved June 30, 1950. In fact, I am the author of the phrase “Volunteer Freedom Corps.” As Bobby says, the whole matter was put on ice because of the fear that pressing it might endanger ratification of the Paris accords. Now that ratification has been achieved,See footnote 5, Document 9. he suggests that a new and very hard look be taken at the idea. I agree, and submit three thoughts in connection therewith: 1. If World War III should ever come and we should not have the personnel which would enable us to assimilate, militarily speaking, the millions of anti-communist Slavs which would then be available—if, in other words, we were, in the event of World War III, to have repeated Hitler’s error of not having been equipped with officers and non-commissioned officers to assimilate the anti-communist Slavs—we would certainly have convicted ourselves either of gross unwillingness or incapacity to learn from experience. Our own armed forces would, of course, pay for this failure to take prompt advantage of such a splendid source of military manpower. 2. When this matter comes up in the National Security Council,The matter was discussed by the Council on September 8; see Document 30. we should look particularly to see whether we can make a start on a Volunteer Freedom Corps on our own to be related to our own forces (although, of course, not a part thereof), without any clearance from Great Britain or France. If we ask them for their consent, we may not get it. On the other hand, if we do it without asking them, it can no longer be truthfully alleged that this will prevent ratification of the Paris accords. 3. I understand that there is considerable apathy concerning this project. In view of the President’s interest, the least we can do is to restudy itIn a letter to Lodge of April 16, Anderson responded that he would “try to get better educated on this subject” and suggested that he and Lodge talk about it. Lodge responded with a letter of April 25 to Anderson suggesting NSC study of a plan for U.S. formation, without publicity, of 6 battalions of the Volunteer Freedom Corps. The battalions would be organized without consultation with other nations and trained under the direction of each of the 6 U.S. divisions in Germany and then formed into a corps. In a letter to Lodge of May 3, apparently in response to Lodge’s letter of April 25, Anderson informed Lodge that the OCB was proceeding “with a thorough new look at the Volunteer Freedom Corps from all aspects of the problem.” (Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up)—not simply because he is President, but because his expert standing in this field is unique in the U.S. Government. I am sending copies of this letter to C. D. Jackson, General Crittenberger and Brigadier General Dale O. Smith of O.C.B. With best wishes, Sincerely yours, Cabot L. 13. Despatch From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/5–1155. Secret. Budapest, May 11, 1955. No. 338 SUBJECT Ouster of Prime Minister Nagy, Current Trends, Estimate of the New Leadership and Future ProspectsOn April 14, Nagy was stripped of his posts in government and in the Hungarian Workers’ Party by a Rákosi-promoted vote of the Central Committee. This completed Nagy’s political demise which had been anticipated since his denunciation on March 4 in the Central Committee as an “anti-Marxist right deviationist.” The premiership was transferred to Andras Hegedüs. (Soviet Affairs, May 1955, p. 20; ibid., INR Files) Now that the air has cleared a little, it is possible to analyze with somewhat greater accuracy the underlying reasons for and the sequence of events culminating in the ouster of Prime Minister Nagy, and to chart with somewhat greater precision the course which the new leadership in Hungary appears to be laying out for itself. A re-analysis of total output pertaining to internal developments in Hungary since the beginning of March strongly suggests to us that, contrary to what efforts have apparently been directed at making us believe, the crisis here goes much further and deeper than a conflict over economic policy, and that the fundamental causal factors are, if anything, more politically than economically based. While much emphasis has been placed on such factors as heavy versus light and consumer goods industries, socialized agriculture versus individual farming and free markets, etc., we have been impressed by the tone and implicit content of output relating to the Party and to the role it should properly fill in a communist society adhering to the precepts of Leninism-Stalinism and coming under the complete domination of the Kremlin. Accusations Against Nagy and Their Validity Going back to the Central Committee resolution of March 4, we find that Prime Minister Nagy and his right deviationist followers were accused of four primary crimes: (1) denying the importance of heavy industry; (2) underestimating the significance of constantly increasing productivity and reducing prime costs; (3) failing to carry on class warfare in the villages (eradication of kulaks), to stress resolutely enough that the leading partner in the worker-peasant alliance is the working class, and to encourage the development of collective farming; and (4) underestimating the achievements of the Party and under-emphasizing the Party’s leading role. Assessing the justice of these particular accusations in turn, we find that although Mr. Nagy was charged with denying the importance of heavy industry and of attempting to push it into the background, the shift back to heavy industry has been conclusively evident thus far only in propaganda. Figures released in the Central Committee resolution itself do not give substance to the lip service being paid to heavy industry, and, if we examine the 1955 budget presented to Parliament on April 19, we find that investment funds scheduled for heavy industry for 1955 are 25 per cent below the amount originally scheduled for 1954, and probably less than what was actually spent last year. Moreover, total heavy industry expenditures for 1955 are scheduled at 3.15 billion forints, which is considerably less than the 4.2 billion allotted this sector in 1954, and far below the amounts spent in previous years. Finally, it is perhaps noteworthy that whenever the question of increasing heavy industry production has been mentioned in recent output, the phrases “within its proper proportions” or “keeping in mind the particular conditions of our country” have invariably been used. The second charge, that Nagy and his followers ignored the problem of raising productivity, decreasing prime costs, etc., is blatantly false. These have been continuing major points of emphasis over the past nine months and were, in fact, primary points in the October Central Committee resolution and in Mr. Nagy’s confession of faith as published in Szabad Nep on October 20. In the latter, Mr. Nagy stated: “If the quality of the product is inadequate, and if it is too expensive, we must call ourselves to account. We must draw the final conclusion to produce more, better and cheaper goods.” Nagy went even further in his November 19 speech, saying: “Our industry, our leaders and workers alike must make further huge efforts in the constant raising of productivity. This must be attained by eliminating slackness in work discipline . . . All ellipses in this document are in the source text. every factory must work to regulations under which productivity should be raised, prime costs reduced, materials spared, and waste eliminated.” Although there is probably more substance in the accusations regarding Mr. Nagy’s policies in the agricultural sector, they cannot be fully supported by the facts, and where supported, political, rather than economic, factors are more often than not drawn upon for support. Insofar as the charge that he failed to carry on class warfare in the villages is concerned, this is the sort of accusation which would be impossible to prove or disprove, if only for the reason that “kulak” has become a generic term for all opponents of the regime. It should be borne in mind, however, that the land reform in Hungary was carried out under Mr. Nagy while he was Minister of Agriculture, and there has been nothing to indicate that he has changed his views about this luckless section of the population who once owned more than 25 yokes of land. Mr. Nagy has, moreover, alluded many times to the question of the peasant-worker alliance, always paying tribute to the workers’ class by stating, as he did in his speech prior to the council elections, that they “were the leading force, the organizing and uniting power of the people’s gigantic efforts.” Finally, if Mr. Nagy failed to encourage the development of collective farming, it was due primarily to the unanimous decision of the Central Leadership, supported by Mr. Rakosi, to permit peasants to leave collective farms, which was one of the major reforms announced at the inception of the “June Course”, and not one evolving later as a result of any deviationism. The socialization of agriculture has continued to be pointed to as a major long-range objective even during the New Course period. The fault here might be said to rest in the fact that it was not pushed with sufficient zeal to overcome the strong antipathy of the Hungarian peasant. In short, coercion was abandoned, which again was a result of politically, rather than economically, based factors. It is believed, therefore, that it can be said that the main charges against Mr. Nagy which have an economic base are largely without foundation and that they would not have been sufficiently strong in themselves to have supported, even on communist terms, the serious charge of “right deviationism” leveled against him. It would have been understandable had Mr. Nagy been accused of inefficiency, for there can be no doubt that everything said in the resolution about the present state of the Hungarian economy can be easily justified, including the charge that the New Course has been a complete failure economically. Had the charges gone no further than this, it is conceivable that Mr. Nagy might have been persuaded to withdraw gracefully in the manner of Mr. Malenkov, thereby tempering the shock on Western public opinion, and, more importantly, on Hungarian public morale. Against this background, we are more and more inclined to believe that the dominant factors in the local situation are politically grounded and that they bear directly on basic communist dogma itself. As mentioned above, we have been greatly impressed by the tone and content of output bearing on the fourth and final charge against Mr. Nagy, namely, that he underestimated the achievements of the Party and under-emphasized the Party’s leading role. We see in this charge relating to communist dogma three separate facets: (1) the role of the Party in a communist society, (2) the rights and responsibilities of the individual within the framework of the Party’s role, and (3) the extent of an individual’s and a nation’s independence relative to the system (the latter including the growth of liberal and nationalist tendencies with undertones of Titoism). Regarding point (1), we believe there has been a conflict within the Hungarian Workers’ Party between those forces led by Nagy, who considered that the Party should merely give general policy directives to the Government and allow the Government to work out the details, and those led by Rakosi, who maintained that the Party should be permitted to direct the day-to-day administration of the country in every sphere, from the Ministerial level down to the organization of production in factories. Attached hereto as Enclosure No. 1 is a series of excerpts from speeches and articles which relate to this issue of the role of the Party.Enclosed with this despatch, but not printed, were eight translations of articles from newspapers, editorials, and speeches by party officials critical of Nagy and his policies from March 4 to March 21. They cover the gamut of relations between the Party and mass organizations such as the local councils, the trade unions, the Patriotic People’s Front, the press, etc., and, it is believed, point up and provide a considerable amount of evidence that this basic tenet of communist dogma has figured very heavily in the recent crisis. Regarding point (2), the ideological conflict here appears to have been well summarized by Mr. Nagy himself when in his October speech he stated: “Socialism can be built only if the working people are granted more rights and freedoms, as well as increasing material welfare.” This element bears heavily on Party discipline and accounts, we believe, for Deputy Foreign Minister Sik’s recent remark that Nagy “went to excess—he exaggerated”. The growth of liberal tendencies, conspicuous in the increased freedom with which individuals and the press expressed criticism of Party policies and personalities, and in the greatly lessened police pressure, obviously ran counter to established dogma. This “opportunism” appears to have been looked upon as an insidious growth which could not be permitted to spread in Hungary because of its harmful effects throughout the bloc. The third facet, the extent of an individual’s and nation’s independence relative to the system, constitutes, in our view, the most significant issue. At point here is whether it is permissible for a satellite country to develop along the road to socialism taking into account its own capacities and capabilities, and, more importantly, profit by mistakes previously made, or whether it must, perforce, tread the same path and go through the same contortions as the Glorious Leader. There is, it is believed, ample evidence in the attached extracts to indicate that Nagy took a firm stand in favor of the former proposition and that this issue constitutes the core of the “right deviationism” charge brought against him. Two more recent editorials in Szabad Nep have taken the veil off this key issue and exposed it more clearly than did either the resolutions or earlier output. On April 8, Szabad Nep in an article, the purpose of which was said to be to draw readers’ attention to the roots and dangers of “right deviation” stated: “ . . . The rightist deviationists endeavor to underestimate the importance of the Soviet Union and of the People’s Democracies in the development of this country. Instead of realizing the importance of the fact that we are members of the peace camp, they used high falutin’ words in connection with nationalism. In other words, rightist views do not refer only to some minor details, but affect the whole policy of our Party. In their articles and speeches and in practical life, the supporters of rightist deviationism have revised the Leninist program of socialist construction and have substituted it by another one. If we analyze the rightist views, we clearly see that they were aimed, willy-nilly, at making the Party deviate from its road, the road followed by the Soviet Union—and at making Hungary follow another, a specifically Hungarian road that was supposed to lead to socialism. There is only one road leading to the building of socialism and that is the road followed by the Soviet Union . . . ” Again, on May 4, Szabad Nep published an article commenting on the “Textbook of Political Economy” published last fall in Russia and recently translated into Hungarian, which was most revealing on this point. It stated: “The special chapter [on the People’s Democracies]Brackets in the source text. has furthermore been written on account of the fact that in the countries of the People’s Democracies the period of the transitory phase has not yet ended, and therefore the legal precepts of this period can only be studied in its purest form by the example set in the Soviet Union . . . in the most essential points the rightist deviationists have rejected the methods of the building of socialism which have proved a success in the Soviet Union and have suggested a different road to follow instead . . . ” Herein would appear to lie what might be termed “the seeds of Titoism”. One sentence of Rakosi’s speech delivered before Budapest Party activists on March 13 would appear finally to confirm that the orders to reverse the New Course came from without Hungary and strongly to suggest why they came and why Rakosi, the doctrinaire, was given the support necessary to overcome the preponderant forces rallied around Mr. Nagy, both in the Party and in the countryside, and to oust him from power—“Until the summer of 1953”, Rakosi said, “nobody thought of discovering a gap in the structure of the peace front of 900 million people. Since then, however, glances of growing hope have been cast in the direction of Hungary.” In other words, Hungary had exposed herself as a weak spot politically in Moscow’s otherwise firm and uniform control of the bloc Governments and drastic action was required to mend this breach and to reverse the trends which brought it about. It is our conviction that the Rakosi faction encountered much greater difficulty in gaining acceptance of the March resolution than anticipated either by it or by Moscow, and that when the strength of the Nagy following became clearly apparent, there was not only considerable vacillation both here and in Moscow, but a decision was actually taken to modify tactics if Nagy could be persuaded to cooperate. This, we believe, accounts for the long interval between the first public condemnation of Nagy (March 9) and his final ouster (April 18). This time was taken advantage of by Rakosi to hold meetings all over the country in an effort to justify his action and gain acceptance of it by the Party’s rank and file and, concomitantly, to attempt to persuade Nagy to recant. That this latter effort was made is supported by reports from reliable sources that two separate delegations, the last of which included a high-ranking Russian, visited Nagy for this purpose, and by later press admissions that even after the March 9 denunciation Nagy “continued to display an anti-Party attitude”. Nagy’s stubborn refusal to follow Malenkov’s example accounts, we believe, for the comparatively severe action finally taken against him. It is perhaps noteworthy in this connection, however, that despite the severity of the language and charges contained in the April 18 indictment against Nagy, there is as yet no indication that he has been or will, in the near future, be brought to trial, which may, in itself, be indicative of the latent strength of the Nagy faction. Current Trends An evaluation of the new leadership can probably best be made against a stock-taking of policies it has pursued and actions that it has taken since assuming responsibility for Government in early March. The Legation has just completed a review covering the industrial, agricultural and private sectors of the economy in its Despatch #337 of May 11.Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 864.00/5–1155) The conclusion reached is that in these sectors actions which have been taken add up to a new policy, but it is clear, at the same time, that this new policy is not what regime propaganda attempts to make it appear, particularly in the industrial sector. Here it is not a return to heavy industry, which it is said to be; nor does it appear to be a logical plan for improving industrial efficiency prior to establishing new long-range output goals for the second Five-Year Plan. It seems rather to be an effort to stave off, for at least a short period of time, the ever-increasing chaos and growing economic and financial problems through the use of labor competitions, firing of “non-productive” workers, reduction of illegal wage payments, etc. while undertaking measures to close the breach on the political front. In agriculture, the stated policy coincides more closely with action taken. The objective is to push socialization of agriculture, and the two primary methods being used are pressure of all kinds on the peasant to force him back into collectives and actions aimed at curtailing the tendency of both cooperative members and private peasants to engage in capitalistic or speculative activities. New measures have also been instituted to force back the private enterprise sector, the growth of which during the past year and a half has been a striking example of the liberalism prevailing under the Nagy regime. (All of these measures are discussed in greater detail in the Legation’s despatch under reference.) A close analysis of the actions which have been taken in the above three fields, however, has convinced us that the regime is currently pursuing a course here which, for the moment at least, is dictated primarily by political, rather than economic aims, and which might even be said to have been chosen despite the prospects of rather meager economic results. In short, the current trend in these three fields appears to have as its aim the restoration of a desired political atmosphere, whatever its effects on the economy of Hungary. This conclusion adds considerable force to the theory propounded above that the dominant factors in the local situation are politically grounded. In the purely political sphere, the following are the more significant measures coming to our attention: (1) A greatly stepped up secret police activity. The number of reports brought to the Legation of midnight house searches and arrests indicates that this practice, which was considered taboo under the Nagy regime, has now been resumed with considerable energy. (2) The reintroduction of the practice of obliging house concierges to report all visitors and goings on to the AVH authorities, a practice which was likewise dropped under the New Course era. (3) The bringing to trial of two separate and rather large groups of persons on charges of conspiracy, with publicity given to the trial and to the severe sentences handed down. (4) The formation of a new supplementary Party organization in the countryside and the holding of new elections for leaders of all Party organizations throughout the country. Thus, in the political as in the other sectors, the current trend is towards harshness, with the use of more coercive, restrictive and fear-instilling tactics an outstanding feature. Estimate of the New Leadership Against this background the temptation is to conclude that the current leaders of Hungary have unanimously chosen a one-way, four-lane highway leading back to pure Stalinism. However, we do not believe that this is the case. We are strongly of the opinion that it is not the intention of even the most diehard doctrinaires to attempt to turn the clock back two years or that there is even now unanimity in the leadership regarding the right course for Hungary in these critical times. Measures taken thus far have, we believe, been dictated by Rakosi, with the support of Moscow, with the aim of shearing off quickly and decisively some of the more potentially dangerous political outcroppings of the Nagy era—to restore a more desirable political climate from the standpoint of the doctrinaires, a climate in which Hungarians will be less susceptible to influences coming from outside the bloc and less willing to expose themselves in lending support to Nagy personally or to policies which he stood for and which have now been branded as being too Hungarian and tacitly acknowledged as running counter to established communist dogma. The sequence of events and several incidents which came to light during the protracted interval between Nagy’s public denunciation and his dismissal revealed quite clearly the strength of the Nagy faction in Hungary not only in the countryside (where it is believed preponderant) but in the top echelons of the Party itself. We are inclined to believe that it was the appreciation of this fact on the part of the doctrinaires and the employment of it by the moderates which led to the selection of Andras Hegedus as the new Prime Minister. We look upon Hegedus as a compromise candidate, a man, who because of his peasant background and his position as Minister of Agriculture under Nagy, was more acceptable both to the Nagy faction within the Party and to the peasantry than someone more closely associated in the public mind with the doctrinaire element or with an overtly anti-peasant policy. He was, at the same time, probably considered acceptable to the doctrinaires because of the debt he doubtless owes Rakosi for his rather spectacular rise and as it is considered that he could be bent to Rakosi’s will when vital issues are at stake. The fact that Hegedus seems to have been a compromise candidate does not of itself mean that future policy of the regime will similarly be a compromise policy. Policy will undoubtedly be governed during the coming months by the objective of restoring political stability and removing the budding liberalism of the Nagy era on the one hand and the virility of the opposition to whatever course is taken on the other. The immediate political objectives must be considered of real urgency by Rakosi and his followers if, as seems to be the case, they are willing to forego economic improvement for the time being. It might, therefore, be concluded that the doctrinaire element might be prepared to take rather extreme measures to attain its immediate ends in the political field. On the other hand, the reaction throughout the countryside to new tactics cannot be ignored either, and it seems quite probable that reaction and opposition will grow stronger as regime policy toughens. It seems to us that what is now developing might be characterized as a “dash back to more secure ground”, which will continue until solid ground has been reached or at least until what might be called the political quagmire of Nagyism has been escaped. Once this objective has been attained—if indeed it can be—it may be that the doctrinaires under the figurehead of Hegedus will attempt to steer a middle-of-the-road course between the “excessive” liberalism of Nagy on the one hand and the pre-1953 harshness of the doctrinaires on the other. They would probably also at this time attempt to give more serious attention to the running sore of Hungary’s economic problems. Needless to say, all of this will, in any event, be contingent upon the absence of great changes within the USSR’s domestic situation and upon the absence of significant modifications in the tension between East and West, either of which could have effects within Hungary which might well outweigh the internal factors discussed above. The Department is requested to send processed copies to Embassy, Moscow, other Missions in the satellites, and to USIA, Washington. For the Minister:Donald P. DownsFirst Secretary of Legation 14. Editorial Note On May 14, the Soviet Union and the Eastern European Communist nations formed a security arrangement with the signing of a multilateral treaty of “friendship, cooperation, and mutual assistance” at Warsaw. The pact was subsequently ratified by all signatories on May 30. The general perception in the United States Government of the Warsaw Pact was that it was an interim arrangement of tactical significance in East-West relations. Allen Dulles briefed the National Security Council on June 9 on the establishment of the Warsaw Pact. (Memorandum of discussion at the 251st NSC meeting; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records) Documentation on Warsaw Pact developments subsequent to its formation is in Department of State, Central File 760.5. Text of the pact is printed in Documents (R.I.I.A.) for 1955, pages 193–197. 15. Editorial Note From May 26 to June 2, a top-level Soviet delegation, headed by First Secretary Khrushchev and including First Deputy Chairman Mikoyan and Chairman Bulganin, visited Yugoslavia in an attempt to narrow Soviet differences with the Tito government. On his arrival at the airport on May 26, Khrushchev apologized for past outlawry of Yugoslavia from the Cominform and blamed former Minister of Internal Affairs Beriya for the split. Khrushchev called for closer ties between the Yugoslav and Soviet Union’s Communist Parties and admitted later in the visit that there were “different forms of socialism.” 16. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 661.66/6–755. Secret. Repeated to London and Paris. Moscow, June 7, 1955—10 p.m. 2192. Visit of Soviet delegation to Sofia, Bucharest,En route home from Yugoslavia, Khrushchev and the Soviet delegation stopped at Sofia on June 3 and Bucharest on June 4. An initial report of the Bucharest meeting is in telegram 303 from Bucharest, June 6. (Ibid., 661.66/6–655) Because of the lack of diplomatic relations between the United States and Bulgaria, no comparable report for the Sofia meeting exists. communiqués and press comment on these occasions, as well as summoning of Hungarian and Czech Communist leaders to Bucharest, would appear to indicate that Soviet Government intends to establish some gradation among satellites of permissible and non-permissible relation with Yugoslavia in light of Belgrade talks.See the editorial note, supra. While pattern is not yet clear, it would seem that those satellites bordering upon Yugoslavia may be permitted to establish somewhat closer relations with Tito than those at greater distance and possibly of more importance to Soviets. Absence of any representatives of Poland and Albania at Bucharest is of considerable interest.In telegram 5416 from Paris, June 10, the Embassy reported that the French Foreign Ministry was inclined to minimize the importance of the absence of Albania and Poland from the Bucharest meeting on the grounds that the former was generally ignored in satellite gatherings by the Soviet Union and the leaders of the latter were adequately filled in on policy during the Warsaw Pact meetings earlier in May. (Department of State, Central Files, 760.00/6–1055) In case of Poland, not only is geographic location factor, but in all probability Soviets are determined to take no chances whatsoever that Belgrade talks might result in too close a rapprochement between Poland and Yugoslavia. Soviets have always attached maximum importance to control of Poland in view of its geographic location between Soviet Union and Germany, together with full knowledge of character of Polish people and traditional anti-Russian feelings. So far in Soviet press comment on Belgrade talks there has been no specific mention whatsoever of any direct effect upon Polish-Yugoslav relations. Absence of similar reference to Yugoslav-Albania relations and fact that Albanians were not summoned Bucharest is noticeable possibly for opposite reasons. Of all satellites, Albania is more directly affected by Soviet-Yugoslav rapprochement and it is not by any means impossible that during Belgrade talks there was some measure of Soviet recognition of Yugoslavia’s special position with regard to Albania, such as I believe existed prior to 1948. Both in communiqués issued after Sofia visit and picked up in Pravda yesterday and again in Izvestia today, reference is made to prospects improvement Bulgarian (and Soviet) relations with Greece and Turkey as result rapprochement with Yugoslavia. It is not clear at this stage exactly what Soviets have in mind in regard to these countries but this aspect has been singled out for special press attention and may forecast some developments effecting Turkey–Yugoslavia–Greek pact. On general subjects mentioned in Department telegram 1035,In telegram 1035, June 6, the Department of State asked for further “thoughts or information” on the implications of the Belgrade meeting on possible Soviet courses of action at the Four-Power Foreign Ministers meeting at Geneva, July 18–23. The Department was particularly interested in topics the Soviets might stress, nuances with respect to the satellite problem and the Far East, and personality factors within the Soviet leadership. (Ibid., 661.68/6–455) I so far see no indication from Belgrade meeting beyond those already noted as to priority to be given certain international questions which would shed more light on Soviet positions at four-power conference. Before my departure I will do a round-up telegram of current indications concerning possible Soviet topics and positions at four-power conference. With regard to satellite problem, I continue to believe that Soviets are in process, of which Belgrade talks are a part, of seeking more stable and permanent basis of relations with satellites in light existing circumstances. The purpose is obviously not willingly to lose control over European satellites, but on contrary to make certain readjustments based on more realistic assessment of current situation since Stalin’s death in order to retain maximum degree of such influence and control. As indicated in beginning of this message, I am inclined to believe that Soviets in this process will make distinction between various satellites depending upon their relative importance to Soviet security, degree of reliability from Soviet point of view and other factors. It is too soon to attempt any definite conclusion as to what final outcome this process may be and most that can be done at this juncture is to keep this subject under close observation. On Far East, we have noted and reported that Chinese press approval to Belgrade talks has been cited and picked up editorially by Soviet press, and of course, official Yugoslav association with Soviet position on admission China to United Nations and Formosa issue is gain for Soviet bloc, as already observed in Soviet eyes rapprochement with Yugoslavia may reduce possibility of developments damaging to Soviet prestige or interest in Yugoslav-Chinese relationship. We have not [garble] from here on possible effect Soviet-Yugoslavian relations on Western Communist parties since evidence on that score is more readily ascertainable elsewhere. However, healing of heretical breach with Tito, even at possibly greater price than Soviets intended to pay, will certainly not be damaging to advantage of Communist cause as whole although possible to degree Moscow control. There have been so far no developments here which would indicate any personnel factor within Soviet leadership as result Belgrade visit, and it is doubtful any such signs will be quickly apparent. Entire leadership was present at airport on return of delegation and were present last night at Bolshoi gala performance and everyone seemed in normal positions. In general, however, we are inclined to believe that conduct of Soviet delegation at Belgrade, and particular fact that declaration was signed by Bulganin and not Khrushchev, is further sign that up to present at least Khrushchev has not acquired position of personal dominance to point where his will alone determines Soviet policy, and that in effect collective leadership, with all its inherent elements of instability and division applies. From his remarks to Riddleberger, which were similar to those made to American correspondent, I am informed, here during Czech reception in May, it would appear that Khrushchev, as things now stand, will not attend four-power conference. While delegation probably not yet determined, most likely composition would be Bulganin, Molotov and possibly Mikoyan from among top leaders. Bohlen 17. Despatch From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 749.00/6–1455. Confidential. Drafted by Albert W. Sherer, First Secretary and Consul, and Attaché Milan W. Jerabek. Prague, June 14, 1955. No. 478 SUBJECT Effect of present Soviet tactics on Czech people and government The Austrian Treaty,The Austrian State Treaty was signed at Vienna on May 15 and ratified by the Soviet Union on June 11. Khrushchev’s visit to BelgradeSee Document 15. and the Soviet proposal to establish diplomatic relations with the German Federal RepublicOn June 7 the Soviet Union invited West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer to come to Moscow to discuss the establishment of diplomatic, trade, and cultural relations. are recent events which must have had some effect on the present government of Czechoslovakia and upon those Czech people who have the time and energy to give much thought to international affairs. The Embassy will endeavor to obtain all information available, prior to the Four Power meeting in July, which will assist the Department in determining how profound the effects of these events are and how we can take advantage of the present fluidity of Soviet diplomacy to promote the cause of freedom in Czechoslovakia. Our preliminary analysis of the effect of recent developments on the Czechoslovak Government is disappointing. The present regime is beset with economic difficulties, but there is little reason to hope that any member of the Party or Government hierarchy will make any independent economic or political move without clearance by Moscow. Present leadership is stable, docile and unambitious. There does not appear to be any split in the central leadership, as has been reported to be the case in Hungary, and it may be expected that all words and actions in Prague will parrot the Moscow line. The central leadership is completely dependent upon Moscow for its survival and there seems to be no one with enough popular support, ambition or courage to organize or inspire independent thought or action. With regard to the people, their hopes for a slackening of rigidity of the chains binding them to Moscow have no doubt been increased by the Soviet gestures toward the Yugoslavs and the West Germans. Discontent has unquestionably been sharpened by Soviet overtures to two of the governments which for years they have been instructed to hate. We have found, however, no overt manifestations of disaffection aside from expressions of discontent in private conversations. Our limited contacts with the people reveal interest in current developments with the hope that the Soviet retreat will somehow result in favorable changes in Czechoslovakia. However, there is no disposition to assume risks and popular attitude appears passive. Given this situation we consider it very unlikely that pressures from within will bring about any dramatic changes in this country at the present time. If the present Soviet tactics have any repercussions here they will be slow in coming and gradual in effect. If Soviet-Yugoslav relations eventually force a change in Soviet policy in the Satellites, Czechoslovakia will follow the lead of others but it will not take the initiative. This pessimistic viewpoint is not shared by Ivo Vejvoda, the Yugoslav Ambassador in Prague. Since he knows the Czechs better perhaps than any other diplomat stationed here and has many contacts with both the government and the people, his views cannot be discounted. On the other hand, he held an important position in the Foreign Ministry in Belgrade in the 1948–1950 period and no doubt played a part in formulating policies which have so recently been proven themselves. He has been exhilarated by recent events and because of his enthusiasm may over-emphasize their impact here. The day after Khrushchev’s airport speechSee Document 15. Vejvoda informed us of the profound effect it had had on both the government and the people. When discussing the subject he repeats the adjectives “enormous” and “tremendous”. In government offices he claims to have heard bureaucrats repeating Khrushchev’s phrases “dear comrade Tito” and “sincerely regret” in jocular tones. He also tells a story of a factory meeting which occurred after Khrushchev’s arrival speech and states that the source of the story is one of the highest trade union functionaries. As he tells it, a factory party secretary was being severely criticized at a meeting for many short-comings. In desperation the secretary defended himself by saying, “Don’t blame me, I was misled by Beria and Abakumov.” Everyone laughed and the meeting adjourned without taking disciplinary action against the secretary. Vejvoda also claims that middle and lower level party leaders are in a quandary as they are being asked embarrassing questions by the rank and file and are receiving no policy guidance from the top. Cepicka, Novotny and Dolansky attended a recent diplomatic reception and were engaged in serious conversation with Vejvoda for approximately half an hour. He has not related the substance of this conversation to any of my staff and I have not yet had an opportunity to discuss the matter with him. However, he has alluded to the interest with which the Czech leaders read the joint declaration on future relations, especially those sentences concerning respect for sovereignty, compliance with the principle of non-interference in internal affairs and recognition of different forms of socialist development. It is doubted that Cepicka, Novotny, Dolansky or any other present leader wants independence or freedom from Soviet control; and, although Vejvoda has never alleged that they do, he implies that they have been influenced by the respect shown his country by the Soviet Union. One would assume that if the present Czech regime had an ounce of gumption it would have strong reservations concerning recent Soviet overtures to the German Federal Republic. If Czech leaders were in fact shocked, surprised, or disappointed at the Soviet overtures, their feelings were not revealed in the controlled press. All papers on June 9 carried leading articles on the subject of Czech-German relations and all expressed satisfaction with the Soviet gesture of June 7. U. Alexis Johnson 18. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 661.68/6–2055. Confidential. Repeated to Paris, London, Bonn, Moscow, and Belgrade. Warsaw, June 20, 1955—1 p.m. 512. Transmission following Embassy views re recent international developments affecting Poland has been delayed by Department’s late ban all non-urgent cable traffic. Basic views most urgent subjects sent Embtel 506 repeated information Moscow 37, London 37, Belgrade 7.In telegram 506, June 14, the Embassy in Warsaw characterized Polish-Yugloslav-Soviet relations. The Embassy believed Poland could not pursue an independent foreign policy with regard to Yugoslavia because of Soviet infiltration in the Polish regime. (Ibid., 661.68/6–1455) Soviet-Yugoslav talks: Embassy believes Soviet concessions and statements made BelgradeSee Document 15. have no practical implications Poland this time. Because of demonstrated tenacity in past of Polish imperviousness to foreign domination, as well as Polish hate of all things Russian and Soviet, USSR considered likely to make significant concessions, if any, in Poland as result demonstrated fact that certain aspects system in force here have shown themselves unworkable. Polish regime and Soviet masters both very much aware heavy undercurrent of dissidence in otherwise well-controlled stream life Poland and probably calculate any relaxation in controls, or decision let stream find natural course would result in still greater discontent with remaining controls, and renewed efforts to wear them away. Embassy has no opportunity sample adequately reaction Polish public to Soviet-Yugoslav talks. However, made from few contacts, great mass of public appears apathetic towards (if aware of) this development (apparently in contrast to reported reactions from some other satellites). Private sampling opinions intellectuals, medium-level, nonparty members legislature reveals “wait and see” attitude but also great pessimism with respect possibilities less Soviet control. In this connection, and report relating thereto in Paris Embtel 5389, June 8, repeated Warsaw 27, Moscow 291,In telegram 5389, June 8, the Embassy in Paris reported: “French Ambassador Warsaw has reported that he asked Polish Foreign Minister’s opinion of most important parts of Belgrade communiqué and that latter had replied immediately and unequivocably that paragraph 4 stating different forms of Socialist development are solely concerned with individual countries was of utmost importance to Poland.” (Ibid., 661.68/6–855) French Ambassador’s version here is that Foreign Minister in reply to Ambassador’s question simply said that most important aspect of Belgrade declaration was the “ideological rapprochement” and thereafter nothing more was said on subject, the Foreign Minister appearing unwilling to say more. (In order preserve good relations with French Ambassador here, Embassy desires all recipients this telegram refrain from discussing this discrepancy with any foreign representatives.) Embassy does not of course, discount psychological impact on intellectual Poles of spectacle made by Khrushchev in crawling to Tito and believes, from long range viewpoint, that incident serves well to hearten Polish will to resist passively. Parenthetically, Embassy believes Secretary Dulles statement re importance satellite independenceApparent reference to Dulles’ televised report to the President, May 17, on the signing of the Austrian State Treaty and its implications; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, May 30, 1955, pp. 871–876. similarly heartening to Poles even though regime distorted remarks to read imposition by US of pre-war “capitalistic” Polish Government and leaders. Aside from constantly recurring rumors of Bierut’s impending downfall and of possibility Gomulka “may” be returned to some government position, there are no indications here of a change in Polish leadership. Germany: Although USSR bid relations West Germany was admission weak Soviet faith in possibilities reunification East-West Germany, interesting confirmation provided recently to reliable Western colleague by East German Ambassador Heymann, who stated that since reunification impossible for long time, two Germanys “should” have relations, and that he consequently “welcomed” invitation Adenauer to Moscow. Statement particularly interesting from standpoint that satellites, including East Germany, will presumably follow Moscow’s lead promptly in attempting establish relations West Germany when and if Soviet-West German relations become fact. Embassy has heard this connection that some Poles fear Adenauer trip to Moscow may result in Soviet offer return some “recovered” territories to Germany. Department has probably already foreseen problem which would arise if USSR, having established relations West Germany, would insist inviting both West Germany and East Germany (which Western countries have refused recognize) to conference on reunification. Warsaw Treaty: Although Warsaw eight-power treaty ratified by all signatories, no news here of any steps toward practical implementation. This would seem indicate assumption correct that none is necessary (all practical details assumed to have been already in force when pact signed) and that therefore treaty is mere legalistic confirmation for possible negotiating purposes. General: Some private Poles have expressed disappointment that West, particularly US, has lost diplomatic offensive to USSR during period starting with Soviet visit Belgrade. Sources inclined view Soviet moves as carefully calculated, calmly executed maneuvers and to miss apparent fact that Soviets have been forced to these actions by trend of events regarding regaining sovereignty and rearming West Germany. Embassy agrees with idea already advanced some commentators that same trend events might eventually cause USSR to offer “neutrality belt” of satellite states in return for similar “neutrality belt” contiguous Western countries. Reliability such offer obviously open to question. Judging by way it is being attacked in Polish press, US “policy of strength” is great success. Jacobs 19. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/7–655. Secret. Warsaw, July 6, 1955—2 p.m. 6. While realize Department has its own current estimate of situation in Poland, in view of approaching “summit” meeting,Reference is to the Four-Power Heads of State meeting at Geneva, July 18–23. following résumé of thoughts may be of interest. 1. Communist regime still firmly in control with no detectable signs any relaxation. Likewise no detectable signs any change in methods and measures of regime flowing from Belgrade Accord (especially recognition of right to choose socialistic methods different from Moscow–Cominform variety). Our view is that if Polish officials were queried this subject they would reply simply that question doesn’t arise as Poland has chosen and follows of own “free will” Moscow (Cominform) variety of Communist socialism. We do not however discount undermining influence of Belgrade Accord upon minds of some Polish leaders and intellectuals which may some day bear fruit in efforts to shape trends along non-Cominform lines. 2. Notwithstanding current talks on relaxation of tension and real “peace, goodwill and understanding among nations” (theme-song of Polish radio broadcasts), there are few signs of real efforts to act more friendly toward USA—development one might well have expected at least during pre-summit meeting period. While we note some slight improvement in few official and personal contacts had with Foreign Office officials and somewhat larger attendance at our fourth July reception, in contrast, however, USA during this pre-summit period is target for greater than usual abuse and misrepresentation in local press; five spy trials have been paraded within past two months alleging US Intelligence instigation; in radio broadcasts US defense plans and military aid are continually played up in warmongering light; misrepresenting Austrian Peace Treaty solely as Soviet accomplishment; no mention is made of US assistance abroad in peaceful utilization of atomic energy (conversely USSR “assistance” is overplayed); and Secretary Dulles is lampooned in cartoons as brooding on how to “destroy” our atomic and hydrogen bombs by dropping them on defenseless cities and civilians (on other hand, little adverse is said against Great Britain and France). Great popular fervor was shown for French during Chopin festival and Britain has just come in for good share of “goodwill and understanding” during visit of HMS Glasgow. This is probably part of campaign to play these powers against USA. 3. Another striking development of current period is play given to statements by the President and Secretary concerning our unwillingness to accept as final satellite regimes. In this play-up, advantage is taken of fear of Poles (not merely Communist party followers) of a resurgent, rearmed Germany. Line taken is that USA desires replacement of present regime in Poland by one which would permit reopening of Oder-Neisse Western boundary and East Prussia questions and return of some part at least of these areas to Germany. No intimation is given in these radio and press play-ups that USSR, if it goes along with rapprochement with West German Republic, and ultimately with German reunification, will likewise be confronted with German demands over frontier Silesia and East Prussia. Likewise play-ups are silent on known Polish desires for return of Soviet held Wilno and Lwow areas. On balance we believe all Polish circles (Communist and non-Communist) would like to see Polish frontiers “fixed” as at present with only few minor changes so that full development those areas as Polish territory could be proceeded with—at same time average Pole obviously uncertain as regards “permanency” this frontier. 4. Anent fear of resurgent reunited Germany, French and UK fears are well-known. We have noted here recently similar strong feelings of diplomatic representatives of Norway, Sweden, and Finland, especially if future German Army is to be trained by some former German generals mentioned to head that army. Finnish diplomatic officer, one of few who have driven from Berlin to Warsaw, was shocked by “arrogance” of Eastern military unit in forcing all traffic “in the ditch” while its cavalcade roared by. There is some feeling among Scandinavian representatives that Silesian industrial area (Europe’s second Ruhr) would for world peace and security be better under Polish control than resurgent Germany’s. Point here is that these pro-Western diplomats sympathize with Polish fear and may help abolish it in their more frequent talks with Polish officials. 5. Present regime is striving, more than ever it seems, to gain goodwill of Polish people. Its favoritism toward youth and workers is well-known—holidays, tours, bonuses, et cetera—ridiculous in Western eyes but may be not so ridiculous to younger generations. Strong efforts to play-up to cherished Polish accomplishments in art, music, literature, national monuments and the like (Chopin festival and rebuilding of Warsaw shrines). Even in police and prison terrorism, there seems to be some alleviation. Recent report of Jewish prisoner released to emigrate to Palestine reveals that prison life has improved greatly in past year and more prisoners pardoned. Our Embassy as well as British, French and Israeli are noticeably aware that regime has relaxed in permitting Poles to leave the country, especially those with relatives abroad. Other examples are some signs of improved State-Church relations; more liberal laws on private property holdings; and frequent “self criticism articles” (and cartoons) appearing in press on regime’s shortcomings. This may be planned drive to improve regime’s standing with Polish people against day when regime will bid for support in some new “free” elections. 6. Visits of NehruIndian Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru made official visits to seven West and East European nations and Egypt from June 6 to July 14. He was in Poland June 23–25, and had previously visited the Soviet Union June 7–23. may have started some new thought trends here. Veteran diplomats have commented on size of crowd who lined streets to greet Nehru—larger they say than crowds hitherto greeting such celebrities as Bulganin–Khrushchev and company and Chou En-lai. Deduction is that some Poles see in Nehru possible neutral spokesman in power struggle between USA and USSR. If this be true, regime might lean toward neutral status for Poland (and other satellites) in return for neutral Germany with Nehru as “salesman”. He could help sell theirs and Moscow’s brand of coexistence. Apparently this is the role Nehru has been fishing for in this area. At least Nehru seems to have captured good share of Polish “imagination” as well as much favorable press comment. 7. While there is inadequate supply of meat, there is no real food problem in Poland as of now. People everywhere appear well-fed. They may complain of “prices” but all seem to eat. Likewise there is complaint about prices of clothing but nearly everybody appears to be fairly well clothed. Recent visitors to Moscow and Warsaw exclaimed how much better “appearances” are in Warsaw. People in such circumstances, especially the younger generations who know little else are not likely to brood and breed revolution. Economically capital, tools and machinery are needed to develop more fully Polish heavy industry but no one who has seen the thousands of smoking chimneys in Poland can deny progress. 8. Military situation in brief is that Polish military forces solely dependent upon USSR for logistics and direction. However, present level of supply, training and organization of Polish military forces makes them potential offensive force which cannot be ignored when integrated into an Eastern NATO organization. It is felt that Polish forces are capable of conducting delaying action on their frontiers and of defending lines of communications across Poland, as well as suppressing local uprisings while Soviet forces conduct main effort elsewhere in Europe. There is no sign that USSR intends to relinquish military (anymore than political) control in Poland. 9. In summary our view is that Belgrade Accord will produce no immediate change in Soviet-Polish relations. Polish regime hopes some relaxation will flow from summit meeting which would permit it to continue in undisputed power while it continues to consolidate its position with rising generations. It does not want a reunited or a resurgent Germany, even though divided into East and West, but would probably prefer latter. It would resist return of Silesian “Ruhr” to Germany. It may be expected to support Nehru’s salesmanship of neutralist-coexistence line. It would like greater volume of trade with West to develop economy. 10. What Polish people think of summit meeting and Soviet bid otherwise for relaxation of tension is difficult to estimate. Obviously there must be goodly number of people who long for a change and secretly hope for downfall of regime. It is probably safe to say that most Poles believe that regime’s downfall can be accomplished only as result of a general East-West war. Department pouch copies Moscow, Belgrade, London, Paris. Jacobs Impact of the Geneva Heads of Government Meeting, July 18–23, 1955, and the Geneva Foreign Ministers Meeting, October 27–November 16, 1955; Consideration by the U.S. Government of a Rapprochement with RomaniaFor complete documentation on the Heads of Government Meeting and the Foreign Ministers Meeting, see vol. V, pp. 119 ff. and pp. 537 ff. 20. Editorial Note During the preparations for the Geneva Summit, the Paris tripartite working group, made up of representatives of France, the United Kingdom, and the United States, raised as a possible topic at Geneva the question of the Soviet Union’s domination of Eastern Europe. In planning meetings in Paris on July 9, the French suggested that while the satellite issue was important, it should not stand in the way of agreement on other matters. The British doubted whether the Soviet Union would agree to consider the satellite question realistically at Geneva and favored dealing with proposals for broader exchange of persons and ideas as the best means for change in the Soviet bloc. The United States reiterated the importance of maintaining pressure on the Soviet Union on the satellite issue. (Telegram 128 from Paris, July 9; volume V, page 312) The President approved on July 11 NSC 5524/1, “Basic U.S. Policy in Relation to the Four-Power Negotiations,” which was discussed by the National Security Council at its 254th meeting on July 7. Contained as an objective in NSC 5524/1 was paragraph 12a dealing with Eastern Europe which reads as follows: “The retraction of Soviet power from Central and Eastern Europe, and ultimate freedom of the satellites from Soviet domination; as initial steps, (1) the withdrawal of Soviet forces from East Germany, Poland, Hungary, and Rumania, and (2) the increased accessibility of the satellites to information and influence from the Free world.” NSC 5524/1 treats more specifically the status of Soviet satellites in paragraphs 26–28, which read as follows: “26. Existing policy (NSC 174) sets as an ultimate objective the elimination of Soviet control over the satellites. This objective is to be pursued by ‘appropriate means short of military force’, including ‘if possible, negotiation with the USSR’. “27. The U.S. must maintain the position that Soviet control of the satellites is one of the principal causes of world tension and is incompatible both with lasting conditions of peace and with the basic principles of freedom and self-determination. The U.S. should publicly assert this position, possibly with specific demands for withdrawal of Soviet forces, for free elections in the satellites, and for increased accessibility of the satellites to information and influence from the free world, invoking the provisions of relevant international agreements as applicable. Any demands for withdrawal of Soviet forces from the satellites could best be approached through (a) German unification, which should be accompanied by withdrawal of Soviet forces from East Germany and Poland; and (b) the coming into force of the Austrian state treaty, which should be accompanied by withdrawal of Soviet forces from Hungary and Rumania as well as from Eastern Austria. “28. In any negotiations the U.S. should seek every opportunity to weaken or break the Soviet grip on part or all of the satellite area. While making clear its view that a stable peace in Europe requires the restoration of national independence to the satellites, the U.S. should preserve flexibility of means in the pursuit of this objective. The U.S. must avoid in all circumstances any action that even appears to indicate any abandonment of this objective.” For the complete text of NSC 5524/1 and the memorandum of discussion at the July 7 NSC meeting, see volume V, pages 287 and 268, respectively. For text of NSC 174, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, volume VIII, page 110. 21. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Anderson) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Anderson)Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up. Top Secret. Washington, July 12, 1955. Dear Dillon: I have reviewed with Admiral Radford the comments of USCINCEURThe views of the U.S. Commander in Chief Europe were set forth in telegram EC 9–2833, DA IN 144659 to the Department of the Army, June 4. USCINCEUR considered that implementation of the Volunteer Freedom Corps at the time was “unwise” because the project 1) would drain non-German personnel of the Labor Service Organization, 2) would requre burdensome logistical support, installations, and training, and 3) from a political and psychological viewpoint, could be exploited by the Soviet bloc as evidence of internal subversion. (Department of State, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 61 D 167, Volunteer Freedom Corps) on the proposed establishment of a Volunteer Freedom Corps. As a matter of record, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered the comments of USCINCEUR and have taken them into account in making their recommendations on the implementation of the program outlined in NSC 5523.NSC 5523, “Activation of a Volunteer Freedom Corps,” June 20, is identical to the text of the progress report on NSC 143/2, Document 26. NSC 5523 was circulated for NSC consideration, but was superseded by NSC acceptance of the recommendation in the progress report that NSC 143/2 be amended (rather than completely revised in the form of a new paper in the NSC 5523 series). This is set forth in their memorandum of 24 June 1955 to the Secretary of Defense.In this memorandum, the JCS reviewed NSC 5523 and stated that they “perceived no objective to having appropriate government agencies proceed with the courses of action recommended in part III of the report by the OCB of June 14”. (Department of State, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 61 D 167, Volunteer Freedom Corps) In view of the above, I perceive no objection to the consideration by the National Security Council at an early date of NSC 5523, which relates to the establishment of the Volunteer Freedom Corps. I would see no advantage in further OCB consideration of this matter. In my opinion there are two policy questions which would make Council consideration of the entire study desirable. These are: a. The question of whether we should ask the British opinion on this matter, or simply inform the British concerning our decision. b. Whether in fact this considerably more limited proposal can be viewed as adequate implementation of NSC 143.For text of NSC 143, “Activation of a Volunteer Freedom Corps,” February 14, 1953, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, p. 180. The above reasons would seem to warrant presentation of the limited Volunteer Freedom Corps proposal submitted by OCB for early NSC consideration. The expressed wish of the President for the implementation of such a project would appear to add further reason for speedy consideration.Dillon Anderson responded to this letter in a letter to Robert Anderson of July 14, stating that while the Volunteer Freedom Corps activation proposal should be submitted to the NSC, it should be done in the form of a revised progress report. (Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up) Sincerely yours, Bob 22. Editorial Note During the Geneva Summit Conference, President Eisenhower hosted a dinner for the Soviet Delegation on July 18, during which the issue of the Eastern European satellites was discussed. Both Secretary Dulles and President Eisenhower stressed to Bulganin how important the status of the countries of Eastern Europe were to themselves and to all Americans. Bulganin indicated that “it was a subject which it would do no good to pursue at this conference: it would require time and an improvement in the atmosphere.” (Memorandum for the record by Llewellyn E. Thompson and Livingston Merchant, July 19, USDEL/MC/9; for text, see volume V, page 372. 23. Despatch From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/7–2555. Secret; Limit Distribution. Warsaw, July 25, 1955. No. 27 SUBJECT Dinner Conversation With Ambassador Winiewicz During recent dinner conversation with former Ambassador Winiewicz, now head American and Commonwealth sections of the Foreign Office (British Ambassador present), the following points were discussed, which I believe bear reporting: While discussing the “Iron Curtain” on exchange between East and West of views, ideas and developments in each area, which lends itself to continuance of misunderstanding, misrepresentation and, above all, lack of confidence, I mentioned that Polish radio jamming and ban on visits of foreign correspondents was a great stumbling block in this field. I mentioned that the New York Times Moscow representative, Clifton Daniel, was astonished at certain things he saw and found in Warsaw and had written an article in a somewhat favorable vein on his visit. Winiewicz admitted there was truth in my observation but said the subject was rather “touchy”, as non-Foreign Office officials, whenever the matter is discussed, allege that correspondents, especially American, come with pre-conceived ideas against the regime and always report on the worst, seamy aspects of what they see and that, as regards radio, everything broadcast is critical with never a word about accomplishments. This attitude makes it very difficult for the Foreign Office to raise the question without Foreign Office officials being unjustly accused of pro-Western leanings. I expect nothing will come of this conversation, but as more and more American correspondents are applying for visas, my remarks may be a helpful reminder to Winiewicz when such applications are being considered. During the conversation Winiewicz remarked that the “trouble” with Westerners, especially Americans, is that they rarely, almost never, appreciate the fact that the regime is not composed entirely of “agents of Moscow” who do only Moscow’s bidding. He said that there are official elements, one hundred percent Polish, who feel that, regardless of the complexion of the regime, they, as patriotic Poles, must do what they can in existing difficult circumstances for the good of the Polish people. He went on to say that the Polish people are not completely pawns of Moscow and that a similar situation exists in other Soviet bloc countries, mentioning Communist China particularly. He said there was an awakening in Moscow to the fact that Moscow must give more consideration to the nationalist aspirations of the various “so-called“ satellite peoples. I infer that Winiewicz’s point is that the West should do more to encourage strictly nationalist elements in the satellite countries, especially in Poland; and not damn everybody connected with the regime. The final observation of interest by Winiewicz was that, after so many years’ residence abroad, in England and the United States, he and his wife were very happy to be back in Poland, even though they had to live in a small three-room apartment. He himself was amazed at some things that had been accomplished during his absence. Sir Andrew Noble’s chief contribution to the conversation was that the great difficulty between the East and West at the moment is a lack of trust and confidence on both sides. He said that we have no confidence in Moscow and he was sure that Moscow had no confidence in the West. The problem was to establish a more mutual basis of trust and good faith. J.E. Jacobs 24. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, July 29, 1955Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199. Confidential. Drafted by Johnson who had returned to Washington from Prague primarily to receive instructions for his forthcoming negotiations with the Chinese Communists at Geneva. For documentation on these discussions, which began on August 1, 1955, see volume III. Washington, July 29, 1955 PARTICIPANTS The President The Secretary Mr. Robertson, Assistant Secretary, FE Ambassador Johnson Foregoing persons met with the President this morning at 9:30 AM. At the request of the Secretary, Mr. Johnson briefly outlined to the President the situation regarding Czechoslovakia with particular regard to the extravagant hopes of the people for some miracle to arise out of the recent Geneva Conference which would bring about their liberation from Communist rule, and the effects on the population of his (Johnson’s) removal from Czechoslovakia at this time for negotiations with the Chinese Communists. The President then read a copy of the draft instructions to Ambassador Johnson for the talks with the Chinese CommunistsFor text of the approved version of the letter from Secretary Dulles to Johnson, July 29, see vol. II, p. 685. and he expressed his approval. It was agreed that while no press announcement would be made by the White House concerning the interview with the President, a statement would be drafted for use only by VOA for Czechoslovakia to the effect that Ambassador Johnson had reported to him on the situation there and that the President had expressed his continued interest in the hopes and aspirations of the people of Czechoslovakia. Subsequent to the meeting, Mr. Johnson drafted an announcement for use by the VOA which he showed to Mr. Hagerty who expressed approval. 25. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/8–255. Secret. Budapest, August 2, 1955—2 p.m. 51. Reference: Legtel 50.Dated August 2, not printed. (Ibid.) Re paragraphs B and C of reftel, Legation leans toward view that unsteady balance does exist within Hungarian regime, reflecting both internal problems and Moscow’s effort to play two themes simultaneously pending future developments; and that Rakosi’s position, while not necessarily tottering, must be less solid than before as result surface rapprochement at Geneva and Yugoslav attitudes (cf Tito speech at Karlovac).In his speech at Karlovac on July 27, Tito characterized the present Soviet leadership as “new men who view world developments realistically, who do not want to see various wrongs and errors repeated, but who want to move along other paths”. Tito continued that the Soviet leaders realized that Stalin’s policies were wrong and counterproductive, accepted Yugoslavia as a true socialist country, and had begun the normalization process with Belgrade. Tito hoped that other Eastern European nations would follow the Soviet Union’s example in their relations with Yugoslavia and castigated the leaders of those nations, particularly Hungary, for failure to do so. (Soviet Affairs, August 1955, p. 9; ibid., INR Files) Against this background, Legation’s relations with local authorities characterized by surface amiability, still no official reaction to approach on trade and problem areas, and no response to US protest re employee arrests delivered July 1. Noted that four weeks have passed since two-week definition of reasonable time for satisfactory answer to said note was given by Legation representative per instructions in Deptel 348.In telegram 348, June 29, the Department of State instructed the Legation to submit a note, the text of which was included, to the Hungarian Government protesting the arrest of a Hungarian national employee of the Legation in Budapest and charging that it was a part of a larger campaign of harassment against the Legation’s local employees. (Ibid., Central Files, 121.643/6–2555) In this situation we see that some problem may be posed by attempt to reconcile two desiderata: A) To avoid creating impression that US bluff been called, which not unlikely to become progressively stronger if no follow-up made to note of July 1. B) To avoid impression of taking desperate steps likely to exacerbate East-West relations, in face of US attitudes expressed at highest levels in Geneva. It occurs to us, however, even more strongly than before (Legtel 19),In telegram 19, July 14, the Legation commented on the campaign of harassment against the Legation’s local staff. The Legation discussed countermeasures, none of which it believed would be totally effective. (Ibid., 121.643/7–1455) that estimated situation in Hungarian Government hierarchy offers reasonable solution. Would appear that balanced, factual publicity re series of arrests of Legation’s local employees, and police surveillance of Hungarians who have contacts with westerners, could be effective without being harmful if put into context somewhat as follows: Points could be emphasized, more in sorrow than in anger, that simultaneously with expressions by Bulganin and Khrushchev at Geneva of desire for improved relations and broader contacts between representatives of East and West, actions of type mentioned are being taken by certain influential elements in Hungary (obvious crack at Rakosi) which appear clearly designed to worsen relations and limit contacts. That can only be presumed policies underlying such actions will soon undergo change, as otherwise doubts might be cast on sincerity of statements made by Soviet leaders—something US would be most reluctant to have happen. Such line would appear to implement action forecast in US note; still not represent overt exacerbation of East-West, US-Hungary or even US-Hungary Government relations per se; and perhaps be helpful in further undermining position of most conspicuous symbol of pro-Stalinist, anti-Western policies in Hungary. Meanwhile Legation could continue to extent possible with efforts to examine problem areas in “spirit of improving relations”, presumably less hampered in these efforts than would be if official publicity and propaganda arsenal turned broadside on Hungarian Government as such. Barnes 26. Report by the Operations Coordinating Board to the National Security CouncilSource: Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Volunteer Freedom Corps—Documents. Top Secret. A covering memorandum from Livingston Satter-thwaite to Lay, August 4, indicates that this report was concurred in by the OCB on August 3 and transmitted to the NSC for its consideration. The NSC discussed the report on September 8; see Document 30. Washington, August 3, 1955. PROGRESS REPORT ON NSC 143/2 ACTIVATION OF A VOLUNTEER FREEDOM CORPSFor text of NSC 143/2, May 20, 1953, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, p. 218. (Policy Approved by the President, May 20, 1953) A. Summary of Major Actions and Decisions 1. Coordination of VFC was assigned in May 1953 by the NSC to the Secretaries of State and Defense. After consultation with the U.S. Ambassadors in Paris and London, and the U.S. High Commissioner in Bonn, it was decided to delay any official approach because of the forthcoming West German elections and the expected early resolution of EDC, both of which it was felt would have been endangered by a premature disclosure of plans for VFC. 2. On September 24, 1954 NSC assigned the coordinating responsibility of VFC to the Operations Coordinating Board. Early in 1954 General Willis D. Crittenberger visited the U.S. Missions in Europe and reported on May 11, 1954For text of the memorandum, see ibid., p. 230. that it was still the consensus of U.S. diplomatic and military representatives that VFC should be held in abeyance until the problem of EDC was resolved. In order to achieve some of the objectives of NSC 143/2 the OCB recommended and the NSC approved on October 16, 1954 expansion of the Labor Service Organization to include more non-German Soviet orbit escapees.Reference is to NSC Action No. 1244. (Department of State, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council) This has been done. 3. NSC 143/2 was kept under continuing review by the OCB in the light of developments in Europe and, following ratification of the London–Paris Agreements, the OCB requested that a plan of implementation be prepared. On June 14, 1955 the OCB concluded that the original conditions which had held the project in abeyance had changed sufficiently to justify implementation of a Volunteer Freedom Corps, although on a somewhat modified basis.See the OCB Report attached below. B. Policy Considerations 4. The plan of implementation developed by the OCB would establish a smaller organization than that generally understood to be envisaged in NSC 143/2, although both the current project and the NSC paper would establish a modest and austere program of cadre units for expansion in emergency. While NSC 143/2 provides that diplomatic approaches should be made to allied governments and to the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany to enlist their advance concurrence, the OCB plan, in view of the termination of the occupation status of West Germany, calls for diplomatic action to secure the concurrence of the German Government only, and that the U.K. and French Governments simply be informed in advance. Further, since the policy paper provides that emphasis should be placed on exploiting the psychological aspects of the project, the question may arise as to whether a program which would not be given any special publicity until an appropriate future time can be viewed as an adequate implementation of NSC 143/2. C. Recommendations and Future Actions 5. In view of the foregoing considerations, the OCB recommends that the National Security Council amend paragraph 4 of NSC 143/2 to dispense with the necessity of diplomatic approaches to obtain the concurrence of the U.K. and French Governments, and that the current OCB plan be considered an adequate implementation in other respects in spite of the small size of the organization and the change of emphasis away from psychological exploitation in the current situation. In view of the implications that the Four Power Conference and subsequent negotiations developing therefrom might have for implementation of VFC, the OCB further recommends that the Council concur as a matter of policy that timing for initiating action be subject to the determination of the Secretary of State in consultation with the Secretary of Defense. 6. Following action by the NSC and the Secretary of State, the Department of Defense will make arrangements for funding of this project by a Presidential determination and allotment of monies, initially under the Kersten Amendment authority (Section 401 (a), MSA of 1954, as amended) to the Department of Defense and for appropriate instructions to be issued to implement the program. Until such time as the OCB agrees that it would be useful and proper to publicize VFC the substance of the instructions should remain classified.The Kersten amendment, named for Congressman Charles J. Kersten of Wisconsin, was attached to the 1951 Mutual Security Act and allocated $100 million in assistance to escapees or residents of the Soviet Union or the Eastern European satellites. The funds were to be used to organize them into military forces supporting NATO or for other purposes deemed by the President as assisting the defense of the NATO area or the United States. The amendment was written into subsequent Mutual Security Acts; for section 401 of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, see P.L. 665 (68 Stat. 843), approved August 26, 1954. [Attachment] Report by the Operations Coordinating BoardTop Secret. Washington, June 14, 1955. REPORT TO THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL ON THE ACTIVATION OF A VOLUNTEER FREEDOM CORPS Part One—Summary I. Background Considerations Details regarding the origins, development, advantages and disadvantages, and the present possibilities of a Volunteer Freedom Corps (hereafter referred to as VFC) have been developed in Part Two of this report. II. Conclusions A. A VFC, composed initially of a few military units under the control of the U.S. Forces in Germany, the size and numbers of the units to be determined by the availability of recruits of non-German Soviet Orbit escapees, should now be established to provide a basis for possible development of national military cadres in the event of an emergency. 1. The initial step in the implementation of NSC 143/2 has been taken by the expansion of the Labor Service Organization (LSO) in Germany to include a unit of former nationals of the USSR (NSC 5435)The memorandum by Crittenberger to the OCB, May 11, 1954, and the report of the OCB ad hoc working group, September 8, 1954, made up NSC 5435, “Expansion of Labor Service Organization in Germany,” approved as NSC 5435/1 by the President on October 16, 1954. See Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, p. 230. and additional East European escapees. 2. From the recruiting response to the expansion of the LSO, it is apparent that no large reservoir of qualified personnel is immediately available for the formation of a VFC in Europe. At the outset, recruits for a VFC may come primarily from the LSO aided by personnel from the Alien Enlistee (Lodge Bill)Reference is to the Alien Enlistment Act of 1950, P.L. 597 (64 Stat. 316), June 30, 1950. Program. 3. All agencies concerned with the VFC must be prepared to minimize the impact of political pressures from the various émigré groups who may attempt to use VFC to further their own aims. Such pressures can be anticipated in direct approaches to members of Congress, to the participating agencies and to the press. 4. The principal immediate benefit of this pilot operation, VFC, lies in its ability to provide a cadre of trained personnel to form, control, and exploit to U.S. advantage any large numbers of defected Soviet Orbit personnel during war time. No special publicity will be given to the VFC until organization and training have progressed to such a degree that the potential manpower and psychological values of the organization can be estimated and reviewed by the OCB. B. In addition to the program outlined in A. above, the OCB is proceeding with studies leading toward the implementation of paragraph 7 in NSC 143/2 which provides for the expansion of the VFC concept to other areas. 1. Reconsideration of the formation, probably in the Far East, of an air unit along lines previously developed within the Department of Defense. 2. Examination of the feasibility and desirability of ground, sea, or air units in the Middle East and in Southeast Asia. 3. Consideration of the feasibility of expanding a skeleton VFC general headquarters from among personnel already being utilized by the Department of Defense. III. Courses of Action Prerequisite to formation of VFC in Europe A. Diplomatic action should be initiated to secure the concurrence of the West German Government to the formation of a VFC within its borders. B. A Presidental Executive Order similar to that which has already been prepared should be issued. Until such time as the OCB agrees that it would be useful and proper to publicize VFC, the substance of that order should remain classified. C. Arrangements should be made for funding of this project by a Presidental determination and allotment of monies, initially from the Kersten Amendment authority (Section 401, MSA ’55)For the amended section 401 of the Mutual Security Act of 1955, see P.L. 138 (69 Stat. 286), July 8, 1955. to the Department of the Army. IV. Recommendations It is recommended: 1. That the Board concur in the implementation of the actions indicated in paragraph III above. 2. That the OCB advise the NSC of these actions and request NSC approval as a matter of urgency. 3. That the interested departments proceed immediately upon NSC approval with the courses of action outlined in Paragraph III and that the Department of Defense concurrently initiate action, coordinating with the Department of State, to establish the cadre VFC. Part Two—Detailed Report I. Background 1. Origins The Volunteer Freedom Corps (hereafter referred to as VFC) was proposed in a letter from the President to the National Security Council on February 14, 1953 (NSC 143).For text, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, p. 180. The President, mentioning the potential additional combat manpower and the mobilization of the will to oppose communism, recommended that the U.S. Army recruit and train national battalions of anti-communist volunteers for freedom from Iron Curtain countries. He suggested the establishment of an ad hoc committee to work out all other terms and provisions of the proposal. The President mentioned the British precedent during World War II: 15 national battalions in the Pioneer Corps. 2. Initial Reactions NSC considered the President’s letter on February 18 and 25, 1953.The memoranda of discussion at the 132d and 134th NSC meetings, February 18 and 25, 1953, are not printed. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records) On the latter date, the NSC approved the proposal in principle but referred it to an ad hoc committee, chaired by General Willis D. Crittenberger, Retired, a consultant to the NSC, to study all aspects of the proposal for its feasibility (NSC Action No. 724).Taken at the 134th NSC meeting. (Department of State, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council) The Crittenberger Committee studied the basic proposal in all of its ramifications for two months. All available viewpoints, contingencies, conditions and details were presented to and discussed by that Committee. On April 20, 1953,See the editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, p. 192. the Crittenberger Committee reported that the VFC concept was sound and that the establishment of VFC on a modest and austere basis, namely several battalions of non-German escapees from the European Soviet orbit, was now feasible. 3. The Crittenberger Committee Report (attached to NSC 143/2) The Committee Report interwove the detailed plan and the analysis of the feasibility of the VFC proposal. It admitted the unavailability of exact information on eligible foreign nationals, then or in the future, but estimated 33,000 eligible “escapees” over the next four years. Analyzing the available escapees and the differences between a VFC during a cold war and in actual war, it selected West Germany as the recruitment area. The Committee Report gave extensive treatment to the psychological considerations in the VFC proposal. Emphasizing the anti-Soviet “rallying” point value, the Report recognized that the psychological advantages, disadvantages, envisaged gains and drawbacks, were dependent on and in proportion to the manner and spirit with which the proposal was implemented. 4. NSC 143/2 (May 20, 1953) The Crittenberger Report was forwarded to the NSC Planning Board on April 21, 1953, and the policy paper recommending for NSC consideration the establishment of a VFC (NSC 143/1),Dated May 5, 1953, not printed. (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 143 Series) was prepared in early May 1953. The NSC on May 20, 1953 adopted the policy paper with an amendment. The President approved the statement of policy. This paper, NSC 143/2, concluded that “a Volunteer Freedom Corps should be established.” It provided that several battalions of European anti-Soviet escapees, excluding Germans, but including escapees from the USSR, should be trained by the U.S. Army as cadre units for further development in case of an emergency. Details of organization such as permissive nationality distinctions, recruitment, pay, command by U.S. officers and attachment to U.S. or UN divisions as well as future entry into the U.S. were listed. Diplomatic approaches were to be made to the Allied and German governments to secure their concurrence. Para. 8 of NSC 143/2 provided that: “In the event of delay in the initiation of the Volunteer Freedom Corps project, and upon instruction of the National Security Council, there should be put into effect an interim proposal designed to expand the existing Labor Service Organization in Germany until such time as it is considered desirable or possible to undertake the Volunteer Freedom Corps program.” 5. Subsequent Developments Initial coordination of the implementation of VFC was assigned to the Secretaries of State and Defense. State then queried the U.S. Ambassadors at Paris and London and the U.S. High Commissioner in Bonn as to the attitude of the foreign governments toward establishment of a VFC. The tenor of these replies advocated delaying any official approach lest the West German elections be affected adversely and later lest the approaching ratification of EDC be endangered. On September 24, 1953, NSC assigned the coordinating responsibilities for VFC to the Operations Coordinating Board. In informal OCB discussions, early in 1954, it was agreed that General Crittenberger should visit the above U.S. missions, explain the background of the VFC proposal and probe the views of American diplomatic and military officials in Europe. General Crittenberger reported on May 11, 1954 that it was still the consensus of U.S. diplomatic and military representatives that VFC should be held in abeyance until the problem of EDC was resolved and that thereafter the plan might be reexamined in light of the then existing factors. General Crittenberger also reported on the developing Labor Service Organizations. He reported that it might be better to recruit escapees directly for the VFC if it were formed rather than to disrupt the LSOs by transferring personnel from them to the VFC. 6. Most Recent Developments As of March 31, 1955, the LSO strength was 25,974 which is 1,556 under authorized strength. Slow recruitment and losses are laid to the civilian nature of LSO coupled with the competition for manpower from an expanding German industry, and the fact that no publicity has been authorized in connection with the expansion. It is estimated that an initial body of recruits could be drawn from the LSOs who would volunteer and be qualified for VFC, and that the much needed LSOs could be brought up to strength by appropriate means. Since the LSOs have a fine record of efficiency and morale, this source could provide an initial VFC cadre. Since LSO performs service support and guard duty, the term “Labor Service” is perhaps not fully descriptive. Nevertheless, because of LSO’s abbreviated military training and civilian status, they can not be considered as combat troops. Moreover, they are badly needed in their present capacity. On September 8, 1954, the OCB recommended to NSC an expansion of LSOs to not more than 1,000 former nationals of Soviet orbit countries. This OCB action resulted in NSC 5435/1, “Expansion of the Labor Service Organization in Germany”, which was approved by the President on October 16, 1954. Recruiting for this expansion has been slow. As of May 10, 1955, only 168 former Soviet nationals and 152 escapees from European satellites have been instated. All LSO men must have German work permits. An escapee may never get a work permit if he can not adequately identify himself to German authorities. In the meantime, he may languish, for months or years, in a Lager such as Camp Valka. This condition hardly induces escape from Iron Curtain countries. On the other hand, escapees qualified for VFC could probably be enlisted without work permits, thus obviating a major drawback to escape. II. Advantages and Disadvantages of the VFC 1. Advantages Noted in the Crittenberger Study a. The establishment of a VFC would provide a positive and dramatic symbol around which the will to resist Soviet-Communism could be mobilized, particularly in the event of war, and it would: (1) Establish cadre units of anti-Soviet volunteers capable of rapid expansion in case of intensified emergency or general war. (It should be noted that valuable time would be lost if preparation for military cadres of the captive nations were made only after the start of actual hostilities. Assignment and training of qualified U.S. personnel would consume much time at the outset.) (2) Provide honorable employment for suitably motivated escapees, thus maintaining their morale and will to resist. (3) Contribute toward sustaining the national self-respect and will to resist of the enslaved peoples behind the Iron Curtain by demonstrating that anti-communist activists representing these peoples are sufficiently respected in the free world to be accorded the proudest right of a free citizen—the right to bear arms in support of his homeland. (4) Enable anti-communist volunteers who are otherwise without national rights to contribute to the defense of the free world, to prepare themselves to play a combat role in any military action in which the U.S. participates in defense of freedom, and even when the occasion is suitable, actually to participate in such U.S. military action. (5) Set an example of dedication to the cause of freedom of morale-building value to free men everywhere. b. VFC would also create an additional incentive to defectors behind the Iron Curtain, thus giving promise of threatening and weakening the Soviet’s psychological and military position by one or more of the following: (1) Increasing the flow of defectors. (2) Increasing the strain on the Soviet security system. (3) Raising or intensifying in the Soviet minds doubts as to the reliability of satellite—or even Soviet—armed forces in case of war. (4) Provoking the Soviet rulers into self-defeating counterpolicies such as increased restrictions on armed forces. 2. Possible Additional Advantages a. A VFC might attract larger numbers of escapees than have the LSOs. (Recruitment for the expansion of LSOs has been slow. This may be due to the fact that the LSOs have not been publicized, they are not first-class military organizations, and members must have German work permits.) b. The U.S. Ambassador to the UN has recently reaffirmed his position that establishment of a VFC would be in the national interest of the United States. 3. Disadvantages Noted in the Crittenberger Study a. Even if the implementation of the VFC is carefully planned and publicized, propaganda comparisons with mercenary foreign legions may be expected and, to a degree that these can be made to appear valid, such charges may weaken any psychological appeal to nationalistically motivated groups behind the Iron Curtain. b. In addition, the creation of conspicuous Soviet-nationality contingents will tend to provide the Soviets with the opportunity to arouse suspicion at home and abroad that the United States is committed to a policy of dismemberment of the USSR empire. c. Special efforts by the USSR to exploit the VFC as proof of United States aggressive intentions, as well as the sole United States responsibility for continuation of world tensions, may be anticipated; and United States psychological strategy will be required to develop measures therefore to reduce Soviet capabilities to benefit from such moves. 4. Possible Additional Disadvantages a. With the rearming of Western Germany, the military advantages of VFC in the current situation are questionable, although the subsequent potential weakening of satellite forces may create a relative military strength. b. The flow of new Soviet orbit escapees who would provide recruits for a VFC is decreasing according to current National Intelligence Estimates (NIE 12–54, “European Satellites through Mid-1956”, August 24, 1954).Not printed. c. Certain émigré leaders would probably interfere in the VFC for their own political purposes which might not be identical with U.S. objectives. d. Establishing a VFC on a conspicuous scale may militate against the attainment of important U.S. objectives at the forthcoming 4-Power Conference. III. Present Considerations 1. Legislative Authorizations Section 401(a), the so-called Kersten Amendment, of the Mutual Security Act of 1951 provided the original general legislative authorization and the basis of funds for the support of VFC. In the Mutual Security Act of 1954, this original section was continued but re-numbered as Section 401. The Executive Branch has proposed that the Mutual Security Act of 1955 continue the general legislative authority and in addition provide funds for programs under the Kersten Amendment and for contingencies arising abroad. 2. Political Considerations The German Federal Republic is now a sovereign state and a member of NATO. While present agreements provide for the maintenance of U.S. forces in West Germany, it would be necessary to obtain the cooperation of the German Federal Government for the establishment of a VFC in West Germany. Since the occupation status of West Germany has ended and it is not intended to exploit the formation of the VFC for propaganda purposes it is felt that it would be adequate simply to inform France and the U.K. 3. Psychological Factors In view of the uncertainty that exists as to the manpower and psychological potential of a VFC and the international repercussions and hostile propaganda that might result in the current situation, no special effort should be made to publicize it at the outset. Psychological and political exploitation should be held in abeyance and, for the present, establishment of VFC should be essentially a military operation. After the VFC has been organized and trained, consideration should be given to planned psychological exploitation. 4. The Practical Solution A VFC as a normal and legitimate military preparation for defense against the contingency of Soviet aggression might be acceptable to the German Federal Government. Units of militarily-fit escapees (some of whom are now available in the LSOs, whose services to those units could be replaced by appropriate means) would be organized without a special publicity effort for first-class military training under the control of the U.S. Army in Germany as the basis for national cadres in time of emergency. Emphasis would be on the military desirability of developing such cadres in the current situation so that they could be immediately and rapidly expanded when the need arises. IV. Description of Current OCB Proposal 1. A VFC, composed initially of a few military units of non-German Soviet Orbit escapees under the control of the U.S. forces in Germany, should now be established to provide a basis for possible development of national military cadres in the event of an emergency. a. The initial step in the implementation of NSC 143/2 has been taken by the expansion of the Labor Service Organization (LSO) in Germany to include a unit of former nationals of the USSR (NSC 5435) and additional East European escapees. b. From the recruiting response to the expansion of the LSO, it is apparent that no large reservoir of qualified personnel is immediately available for the formation of a Volunteer Freedom Corps in Europe. At the outset, recruits for a VFC may come primarily from the LSO, possibly under the leadership of selected personnel from the Alien Enlistee Program. c. The principal immediate benefit of a VFC is that it will provide a cadre of trained personnel to form and control to U.S. advantage any large numbers of defected Soviet Orbit personnel in the event of war. d. All agencies concerned with the VFC must be prepared to minimize the impact of pressures from the various émigré groups. Such pressures can be anticipated in direct approaches to members of Congress, to the participating agencies and to the press. 2. Questions of detail, such as status, size, relationship to the U.S. forces, etc., of the VFC will be developed generally in accordance with the details in NSC 143/2. However, the Department of Defense will be given freedom to modify those details as implementing problems necessitate. 3. Diplomatic action must be initiated to secure the concurrence of the West German Government to the formation of a VFC within its borders. Since the occupation status of West Germany has ended and it is not intended initially to exploit the formation of the VFC for propaganda purposes, it is felt that it would be adequate simply to inform Allied Governments that these units will be developed as cadres for an emergency. This approach is not inconsistent with the NSC 143/2 wording: “Diplomatic approaches should be made to Allied Governments necessarily concerned and to the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany, to enlist their advance concurrence, insofar as possible, in the Volunteer Freedom Corps project”. 4. Due to the uncertainty that exists as to the manpower and psychological potential, as well as the international repercussions and hostile propaganda that might result in the current situation, the VFC should be essentially a military operation. No special publicity should be given to the VFC until organization and training have progressed to such a degree that the potential manpower and psychological values of the organization can be estimated and reviewed by the OCB. 5. The actual establishment of the VFC pilot project in Europe is the responsibility of the Department of Defense. That Department will develop the implementing authority and plans for establishing such a VFC pilot project and it will execute the project in the field upon the resolution of the diplomatic arrangements noted above in IV.3. 6. Arrangements should be made for funding of this project by a Presidential determination and allotment of monies, initially from the Kersten Amendment authority (Section 401 of M.S.A. of ’55) to the Department of the Army. 7. Although no estimate can be made of the number of volunteers initially available for this pilot project, a planning figure of 1,000 men in the first year is considered ample for budgetary and other purposes. 27. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant (Rockefeller) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Dulles)Source: Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, East-West Exchanges. Secret. Washington, August 5, 1955. SUBJECT Psychological Implications of Geneva for U.S. Information Programs Reference is made to our conversation regarding the NSC directive (NSC Action 1426b)Approved by the President on August 1. (Ibid., S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council) to prepare a study on the psychological implications arising out of the Geneva Conference as they affect U.S. information programs relating to the European Satellites and the International Communist Movement. Rather than pursue a “watch-and-see” policy in our information programs, I believe we should have a firm plan which we can follow, with specific items which we can emphasize in our programs. With that in mind, I enclose a staff memorandum which outlines a number of such items. The people of the Satellite countries are experiencing growing uneasiness in the aftermath of the Four Power Conference over the idea that the West may be preparing to “sell them down the river” as part of a general relaxation of tensions with the USSR. We must alleviate this fear and assure the Satellites that: 1. The U.S. goal remains eventual freedom of the Satellites from Soviet domination. 2. We have no illusions about the Soviet leaders or the Soviet system. 3. We will continue to push the Soviets toward relaxing their control over the Satellites. 4. We know the difference between real freedom and phony freedom, and we won’t let the various tricks and evasions, which the Soviets undoubtedly will come up with, divert us in the pursuit of our objective. 5. We will continue to push for the lowering of the barriers which now impede the interchange of ideas between peoples and the opportunities of people to travel anywhere in the world for peaceful purposes. We also will strive to create conditions which will encourage exchange of peaceful goods. These are means of reducing the Soviet grip on the Satellites. I plan to study your and Ted’s memorandumReference is to a draft of a memorandum by Allen Dulles and Theodore C. Streibert, printed in final form as a report from the OCB to the NSC, Document 29. over the weekend and look forward to the opportunity of talking further with you next week. Nelson A. RockefellerPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. [Enclosure] Staff Memorandum Washington, August 4, 1955. SUBJECT The Psychological Implications Arising Out of the Geneva Conference as They Affect U.S. Information Programs Relating to the European Satellites and the International Communist Movements Preliminary—Relaxing Tensions External tensions between the Free World and the Soviet orbit can safely relax only when the internal tensions within the Soviet orbit are relaxed. Outward relaxation, giving the Communists a free hand to consolidate their power over one billion people, would be an utter betrayal of not only the captive nations but of our own children. Soviet internal tensions are caused by the forcible imposition of Communist tenets on people within the Soviet orbit. These tenets include consolidation of power to accomplish design of world-wide extension of Communism from the Soviet base. Such tenets are not mere abstractions as proven by the expansion of the Soviet orbit in the last decade and the continuous integrated subversive activity of Communist Party in the still Free World. This tangible success prompted Molotov to say with satisfaction, eight months ago, “There is no force in the world strong enough to stop the march of Communism. “The Soviet Union and the Chinese People’s Republic and the People’s Democracies have such manpower and enjoy such support abroad that there is no force in the world that can arrest our progress along the path we choose.” (From speech of V. Molotov—A.P. Dispatch—Moscow’s Hall of Columns, Dec. 10, 1954) The formula for molding their people into obedient instruments of world aggression is a continuous purgation from its society of all anti-Communist elements and intensive indoctrination of the remainder chiefly the young. Enormity of natural resistance of the people within Soviet orbit to forcible communization can be gauged by the means the Reds find it necessary to use to accomplish their purpose, such as: 1. Elaborate barbed wire barriers around borders. 2. Vast police army to permeate, forcibly indoctrinate, and discipline both the military and civilian society. 3. Unprecedented “corrective” labor camps—an integral part of Soviet economy—the largest, most comprehensive enslavement of innocent people in history. 4. General saturation of the people with Communist propaganda and virtual exclusion of outside information, with accent on the mandatory political indoctrination integrated throughout the Soviet educational system. The Free World has a right to insist that the Red regime cease communizing its people with the already demonstrated objective of molding them into instruments of aggression. Such insistence is nowise an interference in the internal affairs of the people of the Soviet orbit. These people have not the management of their internal affairs. If they had there would be no threat to the Free World arising from the Soviet orbit. Action vs Communization of Captive Nations The President’s statements at Geneva contain clearly drawn lines for a powerful political offensive against the threat to Free World security that arises from Communist enslavement of their own people in the U.S.S.R. and in the satellites. Soviet Geneva statements and attitudes with regard to their own people can be used by way of challenge to perform and, where they contradict the President, they can be exposed as false. Included in such a political offensive are policy lines for our information programs and a basis for positive deeds which support the restoration of freedom in the Soviet orbit and reduction of the danger of conflict between the peoples of the two worlds. Policy Lines for Information Programs Iron Curtain as Symbol of Captive Nations Enslavement 1. Geneva Text a. “It is time that all curtains, whether of guns or laws or regulations, should begin to come down.” (President Eisenhower, Geneva, July 18)Reference is to Eisenhower’s opening statement at the Geneva Conference; for text, see Public Papers of the President of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1955, pp. 707–712. b. “We are in complete agreement . . . All ellipses in this document are in the source text. since lifting of the said barriers would meet both the national interests of the Soviet and American peoples and the interests of universal peace.” (Bulganin, Geneva, July 18)Reference is to Bulganin’s opening statement at the Geneva Conference printed in The Geneva Conference of Heads of Government, July 18–23, 1955 (October 1955), pp. 35–43. c. Text of President Eisenhower’s statement on lifting curtain, Geneva, July 22,For text, see Secto 72, July 23, vol. V, p. 474, or Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1955, pp. 716–718. in order that there may be a free flow between us of ideas, of things and of people.” 2. Exploitation of Text a. Challenge Soviets to Dismantle Iron Curtain Enslavement of East Europe clearly shown to all Europe by physical entity of Communist-erected and maintained Iron Curtain. No one can deny existence of Iron Curtain . . . . It is a 1200-mile monstrosity stretching from Baltic to Adriatic . . . . a barrier of barbed wire, land mines, watch towers, border guards with machine guns, etc. . . . . divides people of Europe . . . . anachronistic and barbaric in an age of modern communications and transportation . . . . prevents honest trade, social intercourse and understanding between peoples of divided nations . . . . indefensible on any other ground than to give Communists time and opportunity to mold their people in preparation for aggressive war against the Free World. USIA, RFE, and Am Com Lib could do a good job dramatizing the physical horror of Iron Curtain apparatus. Their efforts might be augmented by help of good American advertising firm in turning out grass roots pamphlets, brochures, with sketches, etc. for Free World consumption—all with purpose of generating a popular demand to implement the President’s plea “that all curtains . . . should . . . come down.” b. Hit Secret Police M.V.D. in U.S.S.R. and Secret Police in satellite states like U.B. in Poland as interior barrier to free association between two peoples, etc. c. Hit Slave Labor Camps as barrier to freedom. Challenge government of U.S.S.R. and satellite governments to give visas to representatives of the A.F. of L. that did such a good job in initiating UN investigations of slave labor in Soviet orbit to search out and investigate System of Camps at places like Vorkuta, etc., inquiring from prisoners therein the nature of their “crimes”. d. Hit Lack of Freedom in Soviet Trade Unions Seek opportunity for A.F. of L. and C.I.O. representatives to talk to rank and file trade union meetings in Soviet orbit about: (1) Right to strike for better working conditions. (2) Right to change jobs. Give communist trade union representatives the right to appear before American locals and tell of what “freedom” they have in Soviet orbit. e. Hit Lack of Academic Freedom in Soviet Orbit Challenge Soviet and satellite universities to permit Free World teachers and professors to appear as guest lecturers on Communism and, by way of demonstration give, over radio, for the benefit of Soviet orbit students the answers to, (1) Marxian economics. (2) Marxian philosophy. Obtain cooperation of several American universities to invite Soviet professors on Marxian-Leninism to lecture here (perhaps should include even professors in places like Lenin Institute who educate Communist agents). Such a bold invitation could do little harm here as Marxian economics and philosophy are taught in a few places here under wraps. Coming from the U.S.S.R. the bottle would be labelled. f. Hit Soviet Suppression of Religious Freedom (1) Expose fraud of Soviet 1936 Constitution which permits freedom of anti-religious propaganda but does not give same right of “propaganda” or promulgation of religion. “Section 124.—All citizens are guaranteed freedom of cult and freedom of anti-religious propaganda.” (2) Recent Khrushchev decree merely a refined and sophisticated promulgation of “scientific atheism.” g. Hit Lack of Freedom of Movement of Citizens of U.S.S.R. or Satellites (1) Within Soviet orbit (2) Impossibility of average citizen on his own volition to leave Soviet orbit. h. Hit Government Suppression of Consumers Goods (1) Shipping consumers goods to foreign countries for propaganda while there are shortages at home. (2) Refusing peasant ownership of his own produce on farms. i. Hit Communist Exploitation of Soviet Orbit Economy for World Revolutionary Aims rather than National Interests Entire Soviet economy made to support world revolutionary activities at expense of national interests. Even Government of U.S.S.R. is mere “lever” of Communist Party. Elections to government posts by citizens are meaningless, all power in hands of internationalist party which does not work for welfare of State, as such, but for international revolutionary aims of Party. Therefore, Soviet leaders should be challenged to work for the national interests of the nations of the Soviet orbit. In the present “collective leadership” there are signs that some of the newer members—in contrast to the “old Bolsheviks like Khrushchev, Bulganin and Mikoyan—may be more inclined towards national interests. j. Hit Exploitation of Red Army for World Revolution rather than National Interest (1) See Exhibit A attached. “Three Characteristics of Red Army” by J.V. Stalin, the fundamental doctrines as to function of the Red Army, which has never changed. (2) This same doctrine expressed by Lenin in letter dated October 4, 1918 to Central Executive Committee in which he called for raising strength of Red Army to three million to lend aid to German proletariat. (3) Same doctrine expressed by Stalin in Moscow in October 1952 that forces of Peoples Democracies were to be used as “shock brigades” to liberate countries enslaved by capitalism. (4) Malenkov, Khrushchev, Zhukov have not in the slightest disavowed the purpose of Red armed force. Exhibit A—Pamphlet obtainable in Library of Congress “Three Characteristics of the Red Army” (Russian), J.V. Stalin, Voyenezdat (Military Publishing House), Moscow, 1948. Translated from the Russian Speech made by Stalin on the 10th Anniversary of the Red Army “The Party is proud that it succeeded in creating the first Red Army in the world. What are the characteristics differentiating our Red Army from any other army ever existing in the world? The first and basic quality of our Red Army is that it is an army of liberated workers and peasants, an army of the dictatorship of the proletariat. The second characteristic of our Red Army is reflected in the fact that our army is an army of brotherhood among nationalistics of our country, an army of liberation of oppressed peoples, an army protecting the freedom and independence of our country. The third characteristic of the Red Army consists in its spirit of internationalism, in internationalist feeling permeating the whole Red Army. The strength of our Red Army, Comrades, is in that it was since the first days of its existence educated in the spirit of internationalism and precisely because our army is being educated in the spirit of internationalism, in the spirit of the unity of interests of workers of all countries: it is for that reason the army of world revolution, an army of workers of all countries.” 28. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant (Hanes) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199. Secret. Sent also to MacArthur, Bowie, and McCardle. Washington, August 12, 1955. The following excerpt from the memorandum of the Secretary’s conversation with the President on August 11, 1955, is forwarded to you for your information. “I expressed the view that the new atmosphere meant not a perpetuation of the status quo but rather the greater opportunity for change. The ‘security’ arguments of the Soviet Union had been downgraded and they did not have the same justification of ‘security’ for holding on to East Germany and the satellites. The important thing, I said, was to make it perfectly clear that we did not identify increased hope of peace with increased solidification of the status quo but rather the contrary, and that we now expected there to be changes in the European situation, as evidenced by the unification of Germany and greater freedom for the satellites. I referred to my book ‘War, Peace and Change’ as indicating my great belief that we could not have peace for long unless there was peaceful change. “The President expressed himself as in complete agreement with this philosophy and said he felt it would fit well into a speech he was planning to make in honor of George [John] Marshall about August 25.Reference is to Eisenhower’s address before the annual convention of the American Bar Association, Philadelphia, August 24; see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1955, pp. 802–809, or Department of State Bulletin, September 5, 1955, pp. 375–378. In this speech, Eisenhower evoked the qualities of John Marshall in the “crusade for peace and security” and stated that with this spirit the Delegation went to the Geneva Conference. At Geneva, Eisenhower continued, the United States did not let its eagerness to avoid war overshadow its concern to combat the perpetuation of injustices and wrongs, particularly in the case of the Eastern European satellites, where, to use Eisenhower’s words, “The domination of captive countries cannot longer be justified by any claim that it is needed for purposes of security.” He said he would take a look at the speech from this standpoint and then send it over to me to work on.” John W. Hanes, Jr.Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. 29. Report by the Operations Coordinating Board to the National Security CouncilSource: Department of State, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1, Planning Board Member Files, Miscellaneous, 1954–1955. Top Secret. According to a cover sheet by Gleason, September 2, this report was prepared by Allen Dulles and Streibert and submitted to the OCB on August 31. The OCB considered, approved, and transmitted it to the NSC for the information of the Council members. In a memorandum to Secretary Dulles, August 20, MacArthur explained that this paper was revised in light of the Secretary’s “post-Geneva policy statement,” an apparent reference to a paper entitled “United States Post-Geneva Policy,” August 15, printed in vol. V, p. 551. MacArthur also noted that CIA and USIA were “champing at the bit to get this guidance out.” MacArthur asked Dulles to read the paper and stated that he and Murphy had read it and believed that the “tone and tenor are all right.” Dulles concurred in the memorandum. (Department of State, Central Files, 511.00/8–2055) According to a note from MacArthur to Merchant, August 22, attached to the MacArthur’s August 20 memorandum to Dulles, the Secretary’s approval was subject to Merchant’s concurrence. Merchant noted his concurrence on the August 22 note. Washington, August 31, 1955. PSYCHOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS OF GENEVA FOR U.S. INFORMATION PROGRAMS I. Assignment The Director of Central Intelligence and the Director, U.S. Information Agency have been instructed by the National Security Council to “prepare, on an urgent basis for consideration by the Operations Coordinating Board, a study on the psychological implications arising out of the Geneva Conference as they affect U.S. information programs relating to the European Satellites and the International Communist Movement.” II. The Post-Geneva Situation At this early date it is difficult to assess in detail, or on a documented basis, all implications of the Geneva Conference for the audience of the U.S. information programs. Certain results of the Summit meetings, however, are clearly of direct significance to American information activities. The more important of these are: a. An atmosphere of conciliation was created at Geneva resulting from the generally friendly tone struck by all participants, and the repeated stress on the urgency of international cooperation if a durable peace is to be achieved. In the eyes of the world, the United States emerged from the Summit Conference more clearly as a country dedicated to the earnest pursuit of peaceful solutions to international problems, sincerely willing to cooperate to this end even with the present rulers of the Soviet Union. This has been well received by most of our allies and friends in the free world, except for Nationalist China and Korea, but has had discouraging implications for our friends in the satellites. For many of our audiences, the basic implication is that, unless and until the “acid test” of forthcoming negotiations should prove otherwise, the United States does not intend to question Soviet intentions in seeking peaceful solutions to East-West problems. b. At Geneva the Heads of Government of the Four Powers instructed their Foreign Ministers to undertake further discussions on a number of questions, beginning in October. Meanwhile, various disarmament proposals made at Geneva are to be given consideration by the UN Disarmament Subcommittee, which will reconvene August 29.The language here is apparently that of a draft prepared prior to August 31. These forthcoming discussions will presumably be initiated in the tone of conciliation struck at the Summit meetings. The fact that these discussions are scheduled in itself places a responsibility upon the U.S. Government information programs to avoid actions which in the eyes of the world might detract from the strong moral position achieved by the United States at Geneva. This must be kept in mind while carrying out the further responsibility of bringing pressure upon the Soviets, in advance of the October meeting so as either to induce them to make substantive concessions or make clear to the world their unwillingness to do so. c. Despite their friendly tone at Geneva, Soviet leaders have as yet given no public evidence of their willingness to yield on any substantive issue brought up at Geneva. This fact is most obvious to our satellite audiences. The grip of the Soviet Union on its satellite empire remains firm; Soviet leaders have, in effect, publicly indicated that they do not at this time intend to relinquish effective control of the captive territories or peoples. Internal popular opposition to industrial and agricultural controls, combined with the new Soviet tolerance of the Titoist “heresy,” may well present the Soviet regime with increased difficulties. But the military forces of the Soviet-Communist bloc and the conspiratorial apparatus of international communism still represent an undiminished threat of great magnitude to the free world. Even though tensions which might lead to war in the near future have been relaxed, we can expect that communist tactics of subversion, economic penetration, insidious propaganda and political agitation will continue unabated. It is important therefore that superficial and possibly even a few substantial concessions which might be made at the subsequent conferences, be not looked upon as proof that the Soviet intentions have undergone any fundamental change. d. Expert opinion is agreed that the morale of the captive peoples has probably deteriorated as an aftermath of Geneva. Satellite populations placed exaggerated hopes in the Geneva meetings, and wishfully looked for some evidence of Soviet yielding to the West. They undoubtedly have received an over-simplified impression of the readiness of the United States to cooperate with the present Soviet leaders, which will tend to increase feelings of hopelessness with regard to their eventual liberation from communism. This impression will give support to communist propaganda efforts to convince the Eastern European peoples that they cannot hope for effective intervention by the West. In the absence of any new evidence to the contrary, satellite peoples are apt to regard the apparent American acceptance of Soviet good faith either as political naivete, or as a first step toward abandonment of their interests. They are likely to feel that the manner in which the satellite question was dealt with at Geneva (including the failure of the British and French to support the President’s initiative) was weak and unconvincing in contrast to the strong and united Western position on German reunification. Latent suspicions regarding the sincerity of professed Western intentions to bring about the liberation of Eastern Europe have therefore probably been strengthened by developments at the Summit meetings. Perhaps the most significant aspect of Geneva for the captive peoples is the clear and unmistakable evidence that the Western powers, even the United States, will not resort to war, or threat of war, to liberate Eastern Europe. The resultant loss of hope, however unrealistic, for early liberation, by force if necessary, which is still widely held among the captive populations will undoubtedly lead to weakening of the spirit of resistance. On the other hand, Western proposals at Geneva for wider exchange of ideas, publications and persons offer a possible new approach to the satellite peoples. This approach would have to be combined with strong reassertions that political freedom and national independence must be restored to Eastern European countries. Precise and imaginative proposals for breaking down the isolation of the Eastern European people could be used to induce a gradual relaxation of communist controls, and to reduce the severity of the pressures now exercised upon individuals. Any official exchange program would risk suggesting that the U.S is reconciled to the status quo and is willing to confer respectability upon puppet leaders. Consequently such a program would have to be carefully presented to satellite audiences so as to avoid such an impression. But it would appear that the West stands to gain from wider circulation of Western ideas, books, magazines and newspapers, and from any reduction of radio jamming by the communists. A wider exchange of persons, however, has some risks. Satellite exchangees undoubtedly would be handpicked by the communist regimes, and for the most part, consist of hard core activists. Nonetheless, it might be possible to circumvent intentions of the communist regimes by such proposals as the exchange of visits by relatives or other groups which would be technically difficult to pack with agents. e. At Geneva it was asserted that the U.S. regards international communism as a major source of tension and that the Soviet Union is in a position to reduce this tension. Since Geneva there has been no indication that the conspiratorial activities of international communism have been reduced in any significant way, or that the leaders of the Soviet Union have ceased to exercise effective control over the international communist movement. As long as this situation continues, we cannot relax our efforts to combat international communism with all effective means at our disposal, and to make clear Soviet responsibility for communist efforts at subversion, dissension and disorder throughout the world. Here a genuine dilemma arises, at least for official U.S. information media. If we are to be realistic about the source and control of the world-wide communist conspiracy, we cannot avoid tracing responsibility to the Soviet Union, and in certain contexts, to individual leaders of the Soviet Union—with whom we shall be negotiating over the next few months. To what extent can the aims/motives and operations of international communism be attacked and questioned, without reflecting on the good faith and intentions of individual Soviet leaders? The question of Soviet good faith and the aim of international communism to dominate the world cannot be realistically separated. To resort to euphemisms and circumlocutions in treating the problem of ultimate responsibility can only result in a note of hypocrisy, which our audiences will be quick to recognize. Perhaps this dilemma can be partly obviated by directing our efforts at inducing the Soviet leaders first to disavow publicly any connection with international communist subversion and then to condemn such activities. Because Soviet leaders must, if confronted with the question, disavow any official connection with the whole field of international communist conspiracy and subversion, the dilemma referred to above may be more apparent than real, since, if the Soviet leaders disavow such activities, they cannot take umbrage at public attacks against those activities. It is, of course, too much to expect that we could induce the Soviet leaders to condemn, as distinct from disavowing, publicly communist subversion, but there would be value in obtaining their disavowal, even though patently false, of any connection with international communist subversion. Their mere disavowal of connection with the international conspiracy would, since world public opinion knows they are directly responsible for such conspiracy, condition public opinion to demand more from the Soviet leaders than words on the substantive issues at the October meeting. Furthermore, their refusal or failure to condemn communist subversive activities would tend to become a glaring fact which could be widely exploited. III. Proposed Lines of Approach The various considerations treated above emphasize the need for making the position of the United States clear to the satellite peoples as we approach the forthcoming meetings. Briefly, we do not consider that the relaxation of tension and a more peaceful atmosphere permit us either to scrap programs for individual and collective self defense, or to tolerate covert aggression and to sanctify the injustices of the status quo. Rather the spirit of Geneva means an opportunity for peaceful change which will dispel fear and remedy injustices. Therefore, if the atmosphere of Geneva is perverted by the Soviet leaders either into a cover for covert aggression, or into an excuse for perpetuating present injustices either at home or in the captive countries, then that atmosphere cannot continue. On the other hand, at this moment in history, we cannot afford to appear, in the eyes of the world, as condemning all offers of the Soviet Union even before testing for sincerity. We should emphasize the positive aspects of U.S. policies. We should not emphasize direct charges and allegations against the Soviet Union, but rather we should make such points by indirection.The last sentence of this paragraph was not included in the text of the report as submitted on August 31. At the OCB meeting of September 7, Streibert reported that “the President had gone over the paper rather carefully (Psychological Implications of Geneva for U.S. Information Programs) and had suggested certain ideas which Mr. Streibert felt would be taken care of adequately by adding at the end of the first paragraph under Section III on Page 4 after ‘cannot continue’ the following one sentence paragraph: ‘We should emphasize the positive aspects of US policies, and avoid direct charges and allegations against the Soviet Union, making such points by indirection.’” At the next OCB of September 14, this addition was approved. (Notes of OCB meetings of September 7 and 14; Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430, Preliminary Notes) We should closely follow developments in the satellites and elsewhere, drawing attention to any failures by the Soviet or satellite regimes to live up to the peaceful protestations made by Soviet leaders at Geneva, and to their subsequent exhortations to put the “spirit of Geneva” into practice. Our output should reflect the fact that the U.S. reciprocates the present Soviet attitude and demeanor of conciliation. But we should make clear that a continuation of the present atmosphere depends upon Soviet and satellite actions which clearly show their willingness to bring about a peaceful change. This means the elimination of the present injustices under which the captive peoples suffer, and the curbing of the conspiratorial activities of International Communism. a. Continue to Restate our Basic Position on the Satellites. We should on suitable occasions restate our basic position on the satellites, namely that Soviet domination of the peoples of Eastern Europe is one of the major sources of East-West tension, and that the continuation of this control obstructs the achievement of genuine peace. We hold that the captive peoples must be given political freedom and national independence. A high level statement, preferably by the President, should be used on some appropriate occasion in the near future to reaffirm this position clearly and strongly, and to point up the fact that at Geneva the United States did not acquiesce in the status quo in Eastern Europe.Note: Since the cutoff date of this document, the President made such a speech before the American Bar Association in Philadelphia on August 24. [Footnote in the source text. Regarding this speech, see footnote 2, supra.] We cannot reconcile ourselves to continued Soviet domination of the satellite states and will continue to support the right of the peoples of Eastern Europe to truly independent national existence, and to a standard of living representing a greater share in the product of their own labor. b. Comment Objectively on Internal Developments in Satellites. We should not hesitate to comment objectively, and where appropriate, unfavorably, on internal developments in satellite countries, such as the agricultural crisis of the communist bloc, even when such comment reflects directly on the actions of the Soviet Government, or of top Soviet leaders. We may utilize anniversaries of past Soviet actions, such as the Hitler-Stalin pact or the Soviet takeover of the various satellite states, to point up past communist duplicity and ultimate Soviet responsibility for the imposition of an alien rule upon unwilling Eastern European peoples. This should be done without engaging in polemics, name-calling or personal attack on Soviet leaders. We should also invite attention to actions and statements by both Soviet and satellite regimes since the Geneva meeting which conflict with Soviet declarations that the spirit of Geneva must be put into practice. Should satellite regimes take a more conciliatory approach in East-West relations, or should they relax oppressive controls over their people, such moves should be welcomed as essential first steps, and further steps in this direction encouraged. We should point out, however, that such actions do not come anywhere near satisfying the legitimate spiritual and material demands of the satellite peoples, and that much more can and should be done. c. Show That German Reunification in NATO Is No Threat to Eastern Europe. We should make special effort in our output to bring out clearly the fact that German reunification and rearmament within NATO will in no way represent a threat to Eastern Europe, particularly to Poland and Czechoslovakia. In countering Soviet assertions to the contrary, we should emphasize the defensive nature of the Western alliances, stressing the point that retention of the satellite areas is not required for purposes of Soviet national security. As the risk of war has diminished, so have become downgraded the security reasons for the Soviets holding on to East Germany and maintaining a tight rule over the satellites. d. Avoid Undue Optimism, But Build up Pressures for Change. In approaching the forthcoming meetings of the Foreign Ministers, we should avoid expressing undue optimism. We should, however, encourage the building up of pressures on the part of the satellite peoples for peaceful change in their economic and political status. We should stress the fact that the American government and people expect some developments along these lines from Soviet leaders, and are watching closely for signs of evolution in the satellites toward greater national independence. Such developments will be watched as a barometer of Soviet real intentions. This note of expectancy on the part of the U.S. should be coupled with stress on the necessity for the Soviet leaders to follow their fair words with genuine deeds if the atmosphere of relaxation which they seem to desire is to continue. e. Build up Pressure for Increased Contacts for People with the Free World. Parallel to this we can gradually build up pressure for a program of breaking down the isolation of the captive peoples from the West, by penetrating Eastern Europe with books, magazines, and newspapers, by exchange of personal visits, and by elimination of communist jamming of Western radio programs. This should be done without suggesting our acceptance of the status quo. We must make clear that we believe the only permanent solution for the satellite countries is the restoration of individual liberty and national independence to the captive peoples. We should point out, however, that by breaking down their isolation, and restoring normal contacts with the outside world, we hope to bring about the easing of the controls under which they now suffer. f. Continue Offensive Against International Communism. We should not relax our efforts to expose the strategic aims of international communism, its tactics of subversion and duplicity, its vast network of agents, front organizations and propaganda activities. We should continue to document our case that international communism is a major source of world tension, which inevitably complicates all efforts to achieve permanent peaceful solutions to East-West problems. We should be careful to keep our attack within the context of the communist movement as such, although we should not be reticent in pointing out that the Soviet Union is the control center of international communism, and that responsibility for ending the communist conspiracy rests primarily on the Soviet Union. IV. Recommendations a. It is recommended that the proposed lines of approach under III above be approved as interim post-Geneva guidance to U.S. information programs with respect to the satellites and international communism. b. It is further recommended that U.S. information programs take immediate and continuing action, in line with the foregoing, to put pressures on the communist leadership in advance of the Foreign Ministers’ meeting. 30. Memorandum of Discussion at the 258th Meeting of the National Security Council, Washington, September 8, 1955Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Drafted by Gleason on September 15. Washington, September 8, 1955 [Here follow a paragraph listing the participants at the meeting and agenda items 1 and 2. The Vice President presided at the meeting.] 3. Activation of a Volunteer Freedom Corps (NSC 143/2; Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated August 5 [4?], 1955See footnote 1, Document 26.) After Mr. Anderson had briefed the Council on this Progress Report, Secretary Hoover asked permission to add one more comment. He said the fact that West Germany had become a sovereign state meant that the United States must secure the agreement of the German Government before implementing plans for a Volunteer Freedom Corps. The reasons for the delay in seeking the consent of the West German Government were three-fold: the Geneva meeting at the summit; the forthcoming meeting of the Foreign Ministers at Geneva; and Chancellor Adenauer’s approaching negotiations with Moscow. Obviously this was not the moment to approach Chancellor Adenauer.At Henry Cabot Lodge’s urging, Dulles wrote Ambassador James B. Conant in Bonn explaining the status of the Volunteer Freedom Corps and asking for an expression of Conant’s views “without consulations with the Chancellor, on the likelihood of obtaining a favorable reaction from him when the time comes.” (Letters from Lodge to Dulles, August 4, and Dulles to Conant, August 16; Department of State, Central Files, 740.5/8–455 and 740.5/8–1655) Writing on behalf of Conant, Chargé Dowling gave his tentative reaction that while Adenauer might regard the proposal “with considerable personal sympathy he would feel impelled for domestic political reasons to decide against it.” Dowling continued that the opposition Socialists would exploit it and their propaganda would find “some response” among Adenauer’s own party in the Bundestag. (Letter from Dowling to Dulles, August 19; ibid., 740.5/8–1955) Secretary Hoover added that Ambassador Lodge had written to him of his continued interest and anxiety that the VFC project be implemented,Reference is to a letter from Lodge to Hoover, September 6, encouraging support at the NSC for the Volunteer Freedom Corps. (Ibid., S/S–NSC Files: Lot 61 D 167, Volunteer Freedom Corps) but that the Ambassador himself agreed that the implementation could not take place in the context of the present situation in Europe. Mr. Anderson commented that Secretary Hoover’s observations were consistent with the proposed actions in the Progress Report, and the Vice President added that they were likewise consistent with the President’s views as to the implementation of the VFC. The National Security Council:Paragraphs a–b and the Note that follow constitute NSC Action No. 1434, approved by the President on September 13. (Ibid., S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council) a. Noted and discussed the Progress Report on the subject transmitted by the reference memorandum. b. Concurred in the recommendations of the Operations Coordinating Board contained in paragraph 5 of the Progress Report on NSC 143/2. Note: The recommendations referred to in b above subsequently approved by the President. Accordingly, an appropriate amendment to NSC 143/2 circulated for information,This amendment, a version of paragraph 5, was circulated in a memorandum from Lay to the NSC, September 16 (ibid., S/P–NSC Files: Lot 61 D 167, Volunteer Freedom Corps) and is the version printed in the OCB Progress Report on NSC 143/2, Document 26. and the approved recommendation referred to the OCB as the coordinating agency, subject to determination as to timing by the Secretary of State in consultation with the Secretary of Defense. [Here follow agenda items 4–8.] S. Everett Gleason 31. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Hungarian Minister (Szarka) and the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Barbour), Department of State, Washington, September 26, 1955Source: Department of State, EUR Files: Lot 59 D 233, Hungary. Confidential. Drafted by Robert M. McKisson. Washington, September 26, 1955 SUBJECT Visit by the Hungarian Minister The Hungarian Minister called at his request on Mr. Barbour this afternoon with regard to the following matter: The Minister referred to a message addressed to the Secretary by Hungarian Foreign Minister BoldoczkiDated September 25, not printed. (Ibid., Central Files, 611.64/9–2555) on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the US and Hungary. He stated that he had been instructed by his Government to approach the Department of State on this important anniversary and to make known the earnest hope of his Government that the occasion would mark the opening of a decade of good relations with the US. The Minister said he was aware that there were many outstanding problems in the relations of the two countries but was confident that these issues could be resolved during this period. He referred to initiatives already undertaken in Budapest looking toward this end and then expressed the hope that the US would find it possible, in furtherance of good relations, to support Hungary’s application for membership in the UN. Mr. Barbour said that he appreciated the Minister’s statement of the views of the Hungarian Government in these matters. He said he thought he should say frankly that there were, indeed, many serious problems outstanding between the US and Hungary and that the past 10 years had been troubled ones and hardly productive of good relations. He said that this Government shared the hope that relations might be improved and that existing problems which stood in the way of such improvement might be resolved. Mr. Barbour added that he hoped it would not take the next 10 years to accomplish this. Referring to the Minister’s request for US support of Hungary’s application for membership in the UN, Mr. Barbour pointed out that the US has refrained from any use of the veto against membership applicants and that Hungary, on each occasion, has simply failed to obtain the required number of votes for admission. Mr. Barbour said that the US has not been able to support the admission of Hungary because to have done so in the light of existing conditions would have been contrary to our principles and conscience. He said that we would be glad to have Hungary become a member of the UN when conditions made it possible for us to approve Hungarian membership in keeping with our principles and our conscience. The Minister thanked Mr. Barbour and again expressed the hope that relations would soon improve between the US and Hungary. He made no reference during the conversation to any specific problems in US-Hungarian relations. 32. Memorandum From George T. Lister of the Office of Eastern European Affairs to the Director of the Office (Beam)Source: Department of State, Polish Desk Files: Lot 58 D 386, Policies. Confidential. Beam wrote the following note on the source text: “Mr. Lister, Thanks. I assume we will not fail to remind the Sovs of the satellites again at Geneva. J.B.” Washington, September 28, 1955. SUBJECT The Satellites and Geneva Since the Geneva Conference the Polish Communist propaganda machine has obviously been making an all out effort to exploit the so-called “Geneva spirit” to its own advantage, both in Poland and abroad. Sometimes the propaganda is adroit and indirect, sometimes it is blunt and brazen. Although not always expressed in words as plain as these, the main lines are: 1. Those Poles who awaited a Third World War (that is, a change in Poland) had their hopes dashed by Geneva; these people have never understood the real facts of the international situation; they listened to VOA and RFE, they refused to accept reality, etc. 2. Poland is like a loving mother who is ready to forgive her erring children and anxious to have them with her; all except a ridiculous few who are self-deceived can now, after Geneva, see that the present regime is here to stay; it is easy and advantageous to return to Poland, etc.When the London Government’s “Premier”, Hugo Hanke, returned to Warsaw the Communists were careful to have him include in his first public statement a reference to “the shock caused by the Geneva Conference” to the Polish émigré leaders and to state that “the Geneva Conference became a real disaster for our London circles.” [Footnote in the source text.] Usually it is not difficult to detect a note of triumph and malicious glee in these statements. Thus the Warsaw regime is trying to demoralize anti-Communists at home and abroad, not so much by what was actually done at Geneva but rather by the Communist interpretation of that Conference—“the spirit of Geneva.” I believe that with some minor differences the same line is being used in other satellites. The President and the Secretary have recently reaffirmed our policy on the satellites.Apparent reference to Eisenhower’s and Dulles’ most recent public remarks on the satellite question and the Geneva Conference. Regarding Eisenhower’s statement, see footnote 2, Document 28. Dulles’ statement on the satellites and Geneva was made in an address before the U.N. General Assembly, September 22 (text in Department of State Bulletin, October 3, 1955, pp. 523–529). However, there may be a danger that these statements will be discounted, not only by our friends but by our enemies, if they are not followed up in actual negotiations at the next Geneva meeting. It may then appear that, our original stand on the satellites having been rebuffed by Bulganin, we have abandoned all hope of really achieving anything in their behalf in our desire to come to terms with the USSR. Presumably the Soviets will take the position that the satellites are sovereign countries and that we should negotiate with them directly. But I think that our main purpose will have been achieved if we show clearly, at Geneva, that we feel that there can be no real relaxation vis-à-vis the USSR without a satisfactory settlement of the satellite question. At all events I am afraid that the Communist propaganda machine has been so active, clever and well coordinated since the Geneva Conference that we must now take a stubborn stand on the satellites at the next Geneva meeting or suffer a major psychological defeat in Eastern Europe. 33. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Planning Coordination Group (Rockefeller) to the Chairman of the Operations Coordinating Board (Hoover)Source: Department of State, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 67 D 167, Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe. Top Secret. Washington, September 30, 1955. SUBJECT Review of NSC Policy on Soviet European Satellites (NSC 174 and NSC 5505/1) 1. By NSC Action No. 1349–c, approved by the President, March 12, 1955,Not printed. (Ibid., S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95) the Planning Coordination Group was made responsible for advising and assisting the responsible operating agencies in the coordinated development of plans and programs to carry out NSC 5505/1, “Exploitation of Soviet and European Satellite Vulnerabilities.” 2. By letter of March 23, 1955,Not printed. (Ibid., Central Files, 611.60/3–2355) recognizing that the future implementation of NSC 174 was directly affected by the policies set forth in NSC 5505/1, the Chairman of the OCB suggested that the Planning Coordination Group be assigned responsibility for coordinating the implementation of NSC 174. This assignment was accepted by my letter of March 29.Not found in Department of State files. 3. At its meetings of August 10 and September 21,Reports on the meetings of August 10 and September 21 are not printed. (Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430, Preliminary Notes) the OCB considered an “Outline Plan of Operations on NSC 174” and noted that the policies set forth in NSC 5505/1 (based on the general strategy outlined in NSC 5501/1, “Basic National Security Policy,” especially paragraph 26–c) reflect a somewhat subtler strategy and different emphasis than the policy conclusions underlying NSC 174. Nevertheless, OCB issued the outline plan, in view of the continuing validity of the objectives of NSC 174 and the need for the plan in the field in the light of developments since the meeting of the heads of government in Geneva in July 1955. 4. The Planning Coordination Group believes that the policy conclusions underlying U.S. actions respecting the Soviet European satellites, including actions to exploit vulnerabilities, should be consistent with the policy and strategy outlined in basic national security policy, currently under review by the NSC Planning Board. 5. Accordingly, the Planning Coordination Group requests that the Chairman of the Operations Coordinating Board recommend to the National Security Council that the NSC Planning Board review NSC 174 and NSC 5505/1 in the light of and subsequent to revision of NSC 5501/1.This request was forwarded to Lay by Staats of the OCB and to the NSC by Lay. The memoranda from Staats to Lay, October 19, and Lay to the NSC, October 20, are attached to the source text but not printed. Nelson A. RockefellerPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 34. Memorandum From George T. Lister of the Office of Eastern European Affairs to the Officer in Charge of Polish, Baltic, and Czechoslovak Affairs (Trivers)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/10–2055. Top Secret. Washington, October 20, 1955. SUBJECT Comment on NSC 5505/1, “Exploitation of Soviet and European Satellite Vulnerabilities” The following suggestions and comment are submitted in response to the request for information concerning various actions taken to exploit the vulnerabilities of the Polish Government in accordance with sections 26 through 45 of the Draft Progress Report to the NSC on NSC 5505/1, “Exploitation of Soviet and European Satellite Vulnerabilities.”The undated draft progress report was attached to a memorandum from Rockefeller to Hoover, Robertson, and Allen Dulles, October 7, requesting submissions from the Departments of State and Defense, and the CIA on the nature and progress of programs for which each agency was responsible. Sections 26 to 45 listed types of vulnerabilities in Eastern European satellites. (Ibid., 611.60/10–755) Regarding the approved progress report on NSC 5505/1, December 14, see footnote 2, Document 49. I do not feel that the form of the Draft Progress Report is really suitable for an effective and clear description of the Department’s exploitation of Satellite vulnerabilities. Perhaps an overall statement could be inserted as an annex or at the beginning of the sections on the Satellites. That statement could point out that: (1) Much of the Department’s activity in this regard consists of providing information, suggestions, advice and guidance for other branches and agencies of the Government; and (2) the Department itself has taken direct action through such channels as: direct negotiations with the Polish Government, including some diplomatic notes which have been made public; negotiations and speeches in the UN; official statements by Departmental spokesmen referring to conditions in Poland or to our official attitude towards the Polish regime or towards the Polish people; official messages to anti-Communist Poles, frequently on the occasion of Polish national holidays or anniversaries; official statements at press conferences and in reply to questions raised on those occasions; Departmental letters in response to inquiries of many kinds regarding our policy and views concerning Polish affairs or conditions in Poland; publicity for appropriate detectors and escapees; friendly and close relations with Polish émigrés and our recognition of them, both implicit and explicit, as unofficial representatives of the Polish people; and influences exerted on other governments and peoples with respect to our policy and views vis-à-vis Poland. It might also be pointed out that in practice, of course, there is a great overlap in the vulnerabilities listed in the Draft Progress Report, and most of the abovementioned activities of the Department would simultaneously cover several, if not most, of them. Even more important, all of the vulnerabilities listed have been exploited in many ways and on many occasions through the methods indicated above. These numerous actions simply do not lend themselves to concise and complete enumeration. Therefore, the examples cited below are included not as representing a complete list of total effort but rather as a very few typical instances of exploitation of Polish Communist vulnerabilities. (26) This refers to section 26 of the draft progress report, “Nationalism in the Satellites.” Nationalism and religion are probably the two most important factors working against the USSR in Poland. Many of the various Departmental activities listed above have encouraged Polish nationalism, without attempting to evoke active resistance or rash conduct which would lead to nothing but reprisals. As one example there is attached a message, drafted for the President’s signature, relating to nationalism and patriotism in Poland.Not found attached. There is also attached a note sent to the Polish and Soviet Governments on April 21, 1955.The note, not found attached, requesting information on leaders of the Polish underground arrested by Soviet authorities on March 28, 1945, is printed in Department of State Bulletin, May 2, 1955, pp. 737–738. (27) Section 27 read, “Germany striving for reunification.” We have not accepted the present Polish-German frontier as permanent, although that is the only point of any importance on which the Communists can arouse anti-American feeling in Poland. (28) Section 28 read, “Passive resistance in the Satellites.” See introductory statement and No. 26. (29) Section 29 read, “Desire of the Satellites to be part of a European community.” See introductory statement and No. 26. There is attached a letter sent by the Secretary to Mr. Rozmarek,Not found attached. of the Polish National Alliance, expressing our desire for conditions which would permit the captive peoples of Eastern Europe to participate “in the community of Europe.” (30) Section 30 read, “Reaction to Russian or Pan-Slavic nationalism and imperialism in the Satellites.” See introductory statement and point 26. There is attached a letter drafted for the President to the American Council of Polish Cultural Clubs,Not found attached. referring to the existence of foreign oppression and an alien ideology in Poland. (31) Section 31 read, “Unrest caused by the subjugation of Satellites to a traditionally hated power.” Although there is undoubtedly a great deal of potential unrest in Poland it has not been translated into actual action against the regime on any noteworthy scale in recent years. (32) Section 32 read, “Confusion, dissension, and opportunism in Satellite regimes.” The defection of Jozef Swiatlo, former Polish UB agent, provided the Department and various agencies of this Government with considerable material exposing opportunism and dissension in the Polish Communist Party. Most of this material has been published and broadcast to Poland, and has been dropped by balloon in pamphlet form in that country.So-called “Operation Spotlight.” (33) Section 33 read, “Patriotic sentiments of the Satellite people.” See No. 26. (34) Section 34 read, “Questionable political reliability of the satellite armed forces.” See introductory statement. (35) Section 35 read, “Conflicts between the Soviet Communist Party and the parties of the various Satellites.” See introductory statement and No. 32. (36–38) Sections 36, 37, and 38 read respectively, “Popular dissatisfaction with Communism and Soviet domination which will continue to slow the attainment of Soviet objectives in Eastern Europe;” “Opposition to the regime based on anti-Communism, nationalism, liberal opposition to socialism, and the desire for freedom from controls over person, press, religion, and education;” and “Peasant opposition.” See No. 26 and introductory statement. (39) Section 39 read, “Inconsistencies in ideology and weakness in leadership.” There is attached a letterNot found attached. referring to the discrepancies between Communist propaganda and actual achievements in Poland. (40) Section 40 read, “The persistence of many historical and cultural ties with the West.” See No. 26. (41) Section 41 read, “High cost of living.” There is attached a letterNot found attached. referring to difficult living conditions in Poland and to the Department’s views and action regarding high customs duties imposed on gift parcels sent to Poland. (41–45) Sections 42, 43, 44, and 45 read, respectively, “Resentment against Soviet economic control;” “Conflict between the demands of the Satellite consumer and the requirements of the USSR upon productive capacity;” “Shortages of materials, labor opposition, incompetent planning;” and “Low investment in agriculture.” See introductory statement. There are several vulnerabilities, or sectors of activity, which are omitted from the Draft Progress Report. Religion is briefly noted under No. 37 but is actually one of the two greatest vulnerabilities. Some others entirely omitted are: the Polish Government’s very great need for foreign exchange, especially dollars, and its sources of that exchange in this country; the Polish Government’s vulnerability abroad among émigrés and hyphenated groups, where Warsaw is very active at present; and the Polish regime’s extreme vulnerability and sensitivity regarding anything which weakens or casts doubt on its claims to legitimacy, such as our position that the elections of January 19, 1947 were fraudulent. In conclusion it might not be inappropriate to include at this time a personal opinion regarding the total effect of our efforts against the Warsaw Government. Admittedly that opinion is not necessarily correct or completely informed on all aspects of our operations, but it is based on a large and rather representative circle of personal contacts in this country and abroad and on a huge mass of reading material from every source of information available to me relating to current Polish affairs. Very approximately, and in very general terms, I would say that we are usually just about able to hold our own with the Warsaw regime in propaganda and operations, although at the moment the Communists have an advantage through their clever exploitation of the “spirit of Geneva.” On the other hand, if one judges from the results from the point of view of what we should be achieving with the opportunities available to us, as compared to those available to the Communists, then I feel that our record is quite poor. In other words, although we are in a much stronger position than Warsaw the Communists make up for this disadvantage by making far better use of the few opportunities they do have. This is unavoidable to some extent because of the handicaps with which any democracy must contend in trying to combat and outmaneuver a dictatorship. But there are other causes which can by no means be excused on these grounds. Among these I would include Warsaw’s superiority in energy, experience, money (probably) and, above all, in coordination of all operations. 35. Paper Prepared by the Interdepartmental Escapee CommitteeSource: Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Escapees, Defectors—Documents. Secret. Prepared and concurred in by the Interdepartmental Escapee Committee (an OCB group chaired by a representative of the Department of State with representatives from Defense, CIA, USIA, ICA, Justice, and the OCB staff). The report is a compilation of reports from State, Defense, ICA, and USIA and was not formally submitted to the OCB, but rather circulated informally to member agencies, the NSC Staff, and others for background and reference. The report was submitted to the OCB Board of Assistants by the OCB Secretariat under cover of a memorandum of November 14. Washington, November 2, 1955. DETAILED DEVELOPMENT OF MAJOR ACTIONS CONCERNING ESCAPEES UNDER NSC 86/1Not printed. AND OTHER RELATED POLICIES, . . . From December 17, 1954 through November 2, 1955 (Policy Approved by the President April 19, 1951) 1. Program to Counter Soviet Efforts to Demoralize the Emigration. In December 1954, the Department of State requested a detailed study be undertaken of what appeared to be an intensive campaign intended to demoralize the Soviet and satellite emigration. The campaign has taken the form of spurious offers of amnesty, letters from home beseeching relatives to return, special bulletins urging redefection and attacking Western information organizations and exile associations and the creation of new radio stations beamed to the émigrés. The Communist efforts are not confined to propaganda but include such undercover techniques as assassinations, kidnappings, and pressure by agents provocateurs. The conclusions of the several interested agencies of the Government are that the Soviets and satellites are attempting to sow dissension among Eastern European émigrés, to disrupt anti-Communist activities in which they participate, to induce those who are responsive to propaganda or pressure to return to their native lands, and to lay the groundwork for subversion among those who cannot be lured to return. The campaign has as one of its goals to discredit the free world program to care for and rehabilitate the refugees. Were it to achieve notable success, the task of implementing NSC 86/1 would become extremely difficult. The Interdepartmental Escapee Committee developed a program of countermeasures which was concurred in by the OCB on April 13, 1955.Not printed. (Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430, Escapee Program—1955) The program called for (a) increased material assistance to the emigration, (b) a propaganda counter-offensive, and (c) protection and security of the émigrés. State: It was recommended that the program be launched by a statement from the President reiterating the policy of asylum and of continued assistance to the refugees. On several occasions the Department prepared and submitted to the Special Assistant to the President draft material for possible use in the Presidential statement. Unfortunately, the statement was never made, thereby delaying implementation of other segments of the plan. Presently, and without benefit of the high-level statement, the Department is preparing to ask the governments of countries of asylum and international agencies to augment their current refugee resettlement programs. ICA: The Soviet campaign is being partially countered by intensification of orientation programs and through an intensive 90-day counseling scheme. All USEP missions have been requested to follow this problem closely and to undertake measures required to counteract it. USIA: To counter the Soviet redefection efforts, USIA, in consultation with interested U.S. agencies, has made plans to launch a counter-offensive designed to achieve the following goals: a. Expose the true purposes of the Soviet campaign. b. Explain the problems and accomplishments of the West in dealing with Eastern European refugees. c. To reemphasize continuing Western interest in escapees. d. To challenge the Soviets to prove that iron curtain conditions have been improved. It is still too early to report on the results of the initial efforts. Although the Agency has endeavored to obtain statements and other material essential to a vigorous counter-offensive, there has been a conspicuous scarcity of authoritative, high-level, official statements with which to work. 2. Problems Arising from Austrian Independence. State: Successfully opposed inclusion in the Austrian Treaty of an article (16) proposed by the SovietsFor documentation on the final drafting of the Austrian State Treaty, see vol. V, pp. 1 ff. which would have jeopardized the security of at least 50,000 refugees from the Soviet orbit in Austria. In consultation with the Committee, State informed Embassy Vienna in June 1955In telegram 3631 to Vienna, June 21, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 760.00/5–2755) that USEP should be continued without change except that exploitation of assistance and attribution to the U.S. Government in Austria should be discontinued and emphasis should be placed on resettlement. 3. Admission of Former Soviet Orbit Nationals to the U.S. Under Refugee Relief Act.The Refugee Relief Act of 1953, P.L. 203 (67 Stat. 400), approved August 7, 1953, provided 209,000 nonquota U.S. immigration visas in recognition of surplus population and refugee problems. Of this number, 45,000 could be issued to Soviet Bloc escapees. State: As of October 7, 1955, the Refugee Relief Program had issued 4,788 visas to former Soviet orbit nationals, 2,341 of whom were reported to have actually reached the United States. Reviewed proposals for legislation to liberalize immigration of escapees to the United States, leading to the introduction of the Watkins Bill (Congressional Record of May 31, 1955). ICA: USEP suggested and the Department of State has agreed to accord operational priority to cases presented by the U.S. Escapee Program for processing for entry into the United States under the Refugee Relief Act, and to process U.S. escapee cases before an assurance is secured when the Escapee Program states that an assurance in all likelihood will be forthcoming. Although this action has been instituted only recently, it has already had a favorable effect and the rate of resettlement in the U.S. under the Refugee Relief Act is expected to increase rapidly. Additional and expanded assurance search projects have been undertaken. To date these projects have produced 8,360 assurances. 4. Yugoslav Refugee Problems. State: a. Satellite Refugees in Yugoslavia. There are approximately 1,000 satellite refugees held under concentration camp conditions in Yugoslavia. Although the Yugoslavs are under strong pressures to repatriate the refugees as part of their “normalization” of relations with the satellites, they have agreed to permit the departure of this group to the West. The problem has been to find a haven for the refugees in the West, the U.S. Escapee Program providing a support function. Working jointly with ICA/USEP, the Department of State has taken the following measures: April 1955: Authorized Embassy RomeIn telegram 3407 to Rome, April 22, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 760.00/4–2255) to try to induce the Italian Government to admit the escapees temporarily. The negotiations have continued slowly but not unfavorably. The Italians have tentatively agreed to accept 250 of the escapees. July 1955: U.S. Ambassador Belgrade requested Yugoslav Government to reduce its pressure to move the refugees out of the country.No record of this request has been found in Department of State files. Requested Embassy Vienna in concert with British and French to approach the Austrian Government in support of a policy of asylum if necessary to assure reception of 125 satellite refugees who “escaped” from Yugoslavia into Austria.As instructed in telegram 70 to Vienna, July 8, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 760.00/7–855) August 1955: Approached the Greek Embassy Washington and authorized Embassy AthensNo record of these approaches has been found in Department of State files. to continue negotiations with the Foreign Office for admittance into Greece for all or part of the escapees in Yugoslavia. Authorized Embassy ParisApparent reference to telegram 937 to Paris, September 9, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 760.00/9–155) to seek permission of the French Government to admit the escapees either on a temporary or a permanent basis. b. Limitation of Assistance to Yugoslav Refugees under USEP. Prepared a recommendation that OCB reconsider its earlier decision limiting assistance to Yugoslav refugees to 20 per cent of the total new arrivals accepted into the program. Recommend instead that assistance be limited to 15 per cent of the total budget of USEP in order to facilitate operations for voluntary agencies. The change was approved by the OCB. ICA: In the period under review the Escapee Program, after consultation with other interested agencies and the OCB, has taken measures to implement the Board’s decision that expenditures for Yugoslav refugees may not constitute more than 15 per cent of the Program’s total budget. This decision was taken by the OCB in recognition of the fact that Yugoslav refugees are not greatly important to the objectives set forth in NSC 86/1, and that exploitation of assistance to them is not in the national interest; consequently, assistance to this group is limited in recognition of their relatively low priority. 5. Entrance into the U.S. of Escapees from Soviet Orbit Ships. State: Reviewed and recommended favorable consideration be given the application for entry into the U.S. of certain seamen of the Soviet orbit ships Praca, Gottwald and Tuapse, which were taken into custody by the Chinese Nationalist Government.Chinese Nationalist forces intercepted the Polish tanker Praca on October 4, 1953, the Polish merchant ship President Gottwald on May 13, 1954, and the Soviet tanker Tuapse on June 23, 1954. The Polish and Soviet Governments protested these seizures on the high seas and charged the United States with responsibility for them in notes of October 12, 1953, May 15, June 24, and July 2, 1954. The United States rejected the charges in notes of October 12, 1953, May 20, June 26, and July 4, 1954. The texts of the Polish note of October 12, 1953 and the Soviet notes of June 24 and July 4 and all U.S. replies are in Department of State Bulletin, November 9, 1953, p. 640; May 31, 1954, pp. 824–825; July 12, 1954, p. 51; and July 26, 1954, p. 131. For documentation on the seizures and their repercussions, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. XIV, Part 1, pp. 472 ff. Twenty-two members of the crews of the Polish ships defected and were granted asylum in the United States in October 1954. Nine more Polish crew members and nine members of the Tuapse had subsequent requests for U.S. asylum pending. Documentation on the seizures, protests, and the defections is in Department of State, Central Files 948.53, 748.00, and 761.00. 6. Assistance to Former Soviet Nationals. ICA: The U.S. Escapee Program has intensified its efforts to render further assistance to former nationals of the USSR in recognition of their greater importance to U.S. national objectives. At present a 90-day period of intensive counseling and visits to the homes of each Russian on the USEP caseload is under way. Escapee Program Field Units have been instructed to be lenient in the application of eligibility criteria to this group. 7. Assistance to Escapees in the Far East. ICA: A limited exploitation of Escapee Program activities in the Far East has been undertaken. Field arrangements for this exploitation have been made and appropriate policy guidance issued. Also in the Far East, the movement of 845 KMT disabled veterans from Rennies Mill Camp in Hong Kong to Formosa was commenced on May 16. This action which is evidence of the responsibility of the Chinese Nationalist Government to those who have served it faithfully will remove a serious negative psychological factor. 8. The Alien Enlistee Program (Lodge Bill). Defense: Implementation of regulations and the validity of testing devices for the enlistment of persons under the Lodge Bill are now under review in order that the enlistment of escapees in this program will not be minimized by too stringent and unrealistic standards. During the period 30 June 1950–31 August 1955, 934 enlistments have been accepted. This is regarded within Defense as an unrealistically low figure and the survey mentioned above was accordingly instituted. It should be stressed however that the Alien Enlistee Program must remain a highly selective one, and cannot be considered in any sense a mass disposal mechanism. Latest figures give 934 enlistees as the total to date. Attention is invited to the fact that personnel enlisted under this program are eligible to apply for U.S. citizenship upon the completion of five years honorable service and must therefore be carefully screened on a basis not exclusively related to the objectives of NSC 86/1. However, recognizing, among other things, the overall value of the program to NSC 86/1 objectives, the Department of Defense sponsored a two-year extension of this bill (June) and on 18 July the Department of the Army sent a cable to field agencies requesting a step-up in recruiting activities. There is presently underway a Department of the Army study on ways and means whereby alien enlistees can be more effectively utilized. Interesting sidelights include the following: Army produced a film on the alien enlistee which has been received favorably wherever shown. A check of alien enlistees serving in Korea showed a considerable number in the rank of sergeant. Two alien enlistees are warrant officers, one has already been commissioned and one is presently being considered for a direct commission as captain. 9. Information Programs. USIA: During the reporting period USIA continued to place emphasis on the primary propaganda objectives of the program (a) to reflect U.S. concern, not only for the welfare of the escapees from behind the iron curtain, but also for the enslaved people they represent, and (b) to encourage defection of Soviet and key satellite nationals. In support of the objectives outlined in NSC 86/1, USIA issued to the field several guidances regulating escapee exploitation including basic information policy guidance with respect to (a) escapees in general, and (b) escapees in the Far East; an information policy guidance on current Soviet redefection efforts; and instructions to posts in the resettlement areas of Brazil and Australia as to how to handle interviews of successfully resettled escapees. In addition, special guidances were prepared for the third anniversary of the U.S. Escapee Program, as well as for special escapee arrival ceremonies in the U.S. Information media output, notably the press service and radio broadcasting continued to make good use of news items, feature articles and commentaries and interviews covering escapee arrival, care, training, transportation and resettlement. A decided increase in interviews of resettled escapees in the U.S., Panama, Australia, Turkey, Lebanon and Europe took place during the reporting period reflecting the results of planning described in the previous report to OCB. The Motion Picture Service sent to the field a film—“Poles are Stubborn People,” which reenacts the experiences of two Polish escapees, Korowics and Hajdukiewics. Research assistance throughout the period was provided by USIA’s Office of Research and Intelligence. Arrangements were made to use the diverse language abilities of an ex-VOA producer, now resident in Brazil, to obtain interviews with suitable resettled individuals in that area. Plans were advanced to familiarize USIA personnel in detail with Escapee Program operations and the Information Agency’s responsibility to publicize its achievements. A paper was prepared for both new and returning field personnel on the Escapee Program for use in the Agency’s training program. 36. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Polish Ambassador (Spasowski) and the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy), Department of State, Washington, November 7, 1955, 4:30 p.m.Source: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/11–755. Confidential. Drafted by George T. Lister. Washington, November 7, 1955, 4:30 p.m. SUBJECT Polish Repatriation In accordance with the appointment previously arranged at his request the Polish Ambassador called at 4:30 to discuss the subject of Polish repatriation. The Ambassador began by reading a statement to the effect that the Polish Government has long desired the return of Poles living abroad and in recent months has been making special efforts to achieve their repatriation. He expressed the hope that the United States would take “a positive attitude” towards Polish repatriation and said he would be interested in any comments or views we might wish to express. Mr. Murphy said that he was not sure of the purpose of the Polish Government’s repatriation program and asked whether it was intended to augment Poland’s labor supply. Spasowski replied that the question of labor supply was involved but that, more important than that, his Government wanted Poles to participate in all fields of Polish national life. “Poles belong in Poland,” he added. Mr. Murphy asked “Why?”. The Ambassador said that he thought it was only natural that Poles should live in Poland. Mr. Murphy pointed out that thousands of Americans live in Paris alone, and are found in large numbers in many other places throughout the world, and that this Government does not feel constrained to try to bring them back. The Ambassador made some vague references to the dispersal of many Poles abroad as a result of the last war. The Ambassador then repeated his request for “a positive attitude” on the part of American authorities. Mr. Murphy replied that this Government traditionally has held the view that people should be allowed to live where they wish and that we feel any repatriation to Poland should be voluntary. The Ambassador immediately agreed that his Government was also opposed to involuntary repatriation but added that he hoped the local American authorities would take a “positive attitude” toward voluntary repatriation. Mr. Murphy inquired what the Ambassador meant by a “positive attitude” and exactly which “local authorities” he had in mind. The Ambassador was not specific on the first point but explained that our immigration officials would be an example of local authorities in this case. Mr. Murphy said that it seemed to him that, in effect, Mr. Spasowski was in favor of involuntary repatriation and wanted our immigration authorities to suggest to Poles that they return home. He added that we would do no such thing. The Ambassador denied that that was his aim. Mr. Murphy then asked whether the Ambassador had any specific complaints with respect to American officials. The Ambassador said that he thought that prior to his arrival in this country the immigration authorities might have discouraged some persons from returning to Poland. Mr. Murphy asked him for specific examples of such cases. When the Ambassador was not able to cite any examples Mr. Murphy remarked that it was pointless to make charges if they could not be substantiated unless the only purpose of the Ambassador’s visit was propaganda, in which case it was a waste of time for all concerned. After a considerable pause the Ambassador said that he would at least like to have this Government’s “assurances” that our local officials would not “discourage” repatriation to Poland.Ambassador Spasowski was called in to Murphy’s office on April 30, 1956, and handed a note reaffirming the U.S. Government’s adherence to the principle of voluntary repatriation and its recognition of the right of members of a foreign diplomatic mission to normal access to its citizens, but making it clear that the United States would not tolerate unsolicited personal visits by Polish diplomatic officials to Polish émigrés and persons of Polish nationality in the United States. Such visits, the Department charged, were part of an extensive Soviet Bloc campaign of repatriation. The memorandum of discussion by Trivers (EE), April 30, 1956, is ibid., 748.00/4–3056. A memorandum from Beam to Murphy, April 17, 1956, proposing a note and suggesting a text (on which Murphy made revisions) is ibid., 848.181/4–1756. The note and accompanying announcement, also April 30, 1956, are printed in Department of State Bulletin, May 14, 1956, p. 803. Mr. Murphy replied that he did not understand what the Ambassador meant by “assurances” and that his purpose in making such a request was not clear. He repeated that if the Polish Ambassador had any complaints he should be specific about them. The Ambassador finally said that he understood our position. Mr. Murphy answered that unfortunately he did not understand the Ambassador’s position nor the purpose of his visit. The Ambassador left after a brief discussion concerning the visa application of the Polish pianist, Mrs. Czerny-Stefanska, who wishes to give several concerts in the United States. 37. Editorial Note On November 11, the Czechoslovak Government protested to the Embassy in Prague the continued dispatch of balloons carrying what it described as inciting leaflets into Czechoslovak airspace. The balloons, the Czechoslovak Government maintained, were a danger because of their large size and the explosive devices used to release the leaflets. The Czechoslovak Government stated that on November 6 a balloon exploded near the village of Mengusovce injuring eight persons, mostly children. (Telegram 173 from Prague, November 14; Department of State, Central Files, 511.49/11–1456) The Embassy in Prague suggested that no official reply be made. The Department agreed. (Telegrams 174 from Prague, November 14, and 135 to Prague, November 18; both ibid., 511.49/11–1456) 38. Telegram From the Legation in Romania to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.66/11–2055. Confidential; Priority. Bucharest, November 20, 1955—9 a.m. 149. Pursuant my request for courtesy visit I was received November 19 by Prime Minister with Foreign Minister alone present. Conversation of over hour cordial and friendly throughout. Chivu Stoica expressed his general pleasure in Secretary State and President Eisenhower statements on GenevaReference is to Dulles’ radio and television address to the nation, November 18, reporting on the Geneva Foreign Ministers Meeting, October 27–November 16. Dulles’ address included a verbatim statement by President Eisenhower. For text, see Department of State Bulletin, November 28, 1955, pp. 867–872. which I was able report and of which they ignorant, although carried on early morning BBC English-language broadcasts. Frank discussion held on all US-Rumanian problems: following general comments by Prime Minister: 1. US-Rumanian relations should be reviewed as whole and close relationships developed on definite reciprocal basis. Success this development will have important bearing on solution specific problems such as release American citizens and reopening information center. 2. Rumania needs very badly to purchase machinery, particularly agricultural and that for chemical industry. Industrialization of country proceeding rapidly and effectively—this definite. No raw materials needed, but US can make important contribution in trade. 3. Rumania anxious increase tourism. Scenery, sights, climate and bathing beaches can and should attract American tourists. Negotiations desirable this subject. 4. Rumania is independent country handling own affairs in own way. Fact it believes USSR can assist it in many ways economically and politically is no reason country should always be identified in US mind as appendage USSR. Specifically Prime Minister remarked on reopening information center. That problem being carefully examined. Rumania very anxious have close cultural relations with US and exchange artists, scientists but methods to be employed must be viewed in light status general US-Rumanian relations and problem solved on reciprocal basis. For Prime Minister comments Garst case and American citizens see Legtel 148.Dated November 19, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 032/11–1955) Thayer 39. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 661.68/12–155. Secret; Priority. Sent also to Munich. Budapest, December 1, 1955—7 p.m. 224. Department pass USIA. Coming as climax to series such major developments as Soviet Belgrade visit, Austrian state treaty and build-up of decision to air satellite issue, Geneva Summit meeting (Department Circular telegram 357)In circular telegram 357, sent to Prague, Warsaw, Budapest, and Bucharest, November 28, the Department requested an appraisal of the impact of the Heads of Government meeting, July 18–23, and the Foreign Ministers meeting, October 27–November 16, both held in Geneva, on the views and attitudes of the satellite peoples. (Ibid., 396.1–GE/11–2855) found Hungarian people in highly optimistic mood and convinced that meeting, if it would not in fact bring about an immediate favorable change in their status, would, at least, lay groundwork for moving date of eventual liberation forward. Demoralizing effect of actual results, primarily failure West follow through on satellite issue, was considerable and lasting (Legation telegrams 73 and 65).Dated August 17 and 12, neither printed. (Ibid., 320/8–1755 and 660.68/8–1255, respectively) Subsequent Foreign Ministers Conference was consequently awaited with much less interest, greater skepticism and with public in rather dejected mood. Hungarians by that time appeared to have lost hope that West would press satellites issue and tendency, therefore, was to link their fate more closely with German issue, apparently in belief that any Soviet retreat re Germany would open new possibilities here. Over-all results meeting were therefore disheartening, demonstrating as far as Hungarians concerned that Iron Curtain still solidly in place and that neighboring Yugoslavia and Austrian events, which gave them much natural encouragement, took place in another world. One positive element from satellite point of view appears to have been fact that sharp and unfriendly atmosphere Foreign Ministers meetings contrasted favorably with smiling, hand-clasping atmosphere of rapprochement which characterized Summit meeting and which Hungarians viewed with trepidation. To just what extent results Foreign Ministers Conference contributed to actual state of deep depression difficult to judge as series internal developments (November 9 CC meeting, November 14 Parliamentary Session) also unfolded during latter part Geneva meeting which preempted public attention and tended obscure any clear-cut popular reactions to conference itself. However, it abundantly clear that accumulative effects two Geneva Conferences, recent internal developments with their forebodings of tighter screws and greater sacrifices, and lastly, documented Soviet announcement of H-bomb possession,On November 26, Khrushchev and TASS publicly confirmed that the Soviet Union had tested a hydrogen bomb. have plunged Hungarian public into most dejected state of mind observed here in many months. (Curiously, reports indicate that despite claims, et cetera, large segment Hungarian public has until now refused to concede that Soviets actually had or were capable producing an H-bomb. Apparent final acceptance this fact has created even heavier atmosphere of gloom, primarily because it is apparently being interpreted by man in street to mean that regardless West’s diplomatic efforts, status quo will prevail for more years than even before believed possible). Over-all result all this is that media today face much more skeptical audience in Hungary and one, moreover, whose hopes for liberation from Communist yoke have been badly shattered in recent months. Real danger which faces us now appears to Legation to be that captive peoples will steadily grow more and more resigned to fate of living under Communism and, concomitantly, increasingly of opinion that it would be preferable to put more into their work and into government-sponsored programs in hope that by so doing they can better their own living standards and improve their general lot. In fact [view] this possibility it seems vitally important that we devise a new approach for our media which can supplant that stimulus to resistance based on hope for liberation by one based on current realities. Legation’s views this problem follow separately.Not further identified. In meantime, however, a vacuum currently exists which badly needs filling; some positive action as opposed to words is believed required which will give succor to Hungarian people now and help lift them out of their current mood. While Secretary’s Brioni statementReference is to a statement made by Dulles at a press conference while in Brioni, Yugoslavia, November 6, after discussions with President Tito. Dulles said in part: “The final subject of our talk [Dulles and Tito] was the problem of the States of Eastern Europe. We reached common accord on recognizing the importance of independence for these States, noninterference from the outside in their internal affairs, and the right to develop their own social and economic order in the ways of their own choice.” (Department of State Bulletin, November 21, 1955, p. 833, footnote 2) could have helped fill this existing gap, subsequent Yugoslav treatment and Hungarian handling have effectively cancelled out any positive effects. Legation suggests therefore that coordinated Western approach on question retention Soviet forces Hungary and Rumania would be appropriate. While recognizing that such action unlikely produce tangible results, it is believed that side effects would be positive here. Not only would it demonstrate that West has no intention permitting issue to go by default, which it is believed Hungarian people are beginning fear is West’s intention, but by smoking out Soviets and Hungarians it would demonstrate inherent weakness Communists internal position here and go far in filling the vacuum which currently exists and in which attitudes deleterious to West’s longer-range objectives are finding favorable climate for growth. Ravndal 40. Telegram From the Legation in Romania to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.66/12–155. Confidential. Bucharest, December 1, 1955—3 p.m. 165. At Yugoslavian National Day party I had long conversation with Gheorghiu-Dej.A more complete report of this conversation is in despatch 145 from Bucharest, December 6. (Ibid., 611.66/12–655) Prime Minister Chivu Stoica and Chisinevschi were present with Foreign Minister Preoteasa joining us at end but Dej alone spoke. Conversation, which covered Rumanian-US relations in general, was blunt and frank but cordial and friendly throughout. Theme stressed by Dej was build-up close personal, cultural and economic relations, which was official Rumanian slogan with all Western diplomats during evening. Dej voiced strong objections to parachuting self-confessed US agents into Rumania. He characterized practice as infantile and noted they were always caught and always would be. I said I had no knowledge such operations and observed so-called confessions pretty much discredited today. He also complained of treatment of Rumanian minister and staff in Washington—travel restrictions, security surveillance, etc. I pointed out similar absurd regulations governing diplomats here and suggested we now begin destroy pyramid retaliatory measures which built up in past, in order have foundation for sensible, mature relations. Dej agreed heartily and claimed Rumanians had already started by giving visas to Garst and Schutz. I emphasized this could not be considered plus on Rumanian side ledger, since Rumanians were beneficiaries this visit. Dej stated in presence Soviet Ambassador that Rumania would not always issue visas to Americans just because they had obtained Soviet visas. I replied that US would not always issue visas to Rumanians merely because they had been privately invited by a US citizen. Dej expressed impatience that US would not vote for Rumanian admission UN. I explained that American people had long memories and much time needed to persuade them Rumanians were serious in their present resolve to respect human rights. I stressed US presently was going long way considering public opinion. Dej showed intense interest in US trade. He stated more than once in answer to my pointing out US not interested Rumanian products that this hurdle easy to pass by other arrangements. At my suggestion he directed Foreign Minister to prepare for me details of Rumanian needs from US. I told Dej I was returning for short visit to Washington to discuss over-all Rumanian-US relations as I had found them and suggested that before my departure I would like review these relations in detail with Foreign Minister in order determine exactly where we stood on basis of reciprocity. Dej agreed that this be done. Tentative date fixed 2 December.The report on this meeting, transmitted in telegram 172 from Bucharest, December 3, reads: “Talk with Foreign Minister held December 2. List specific Rumania wants commodity and equipment field promised; this may afford information their lacks. List includes request purchase license manufacture orlon at 5,000 tons per year. Foreign Minister said during last weeks ‘6 or 7’ citizens have received permission go to US; he will furnish identities. (Consulate has received no applications for documentation.) “Foreign Minister extremely sensitive VOA and RFE ‘propaganda’; hinted many current problems soluble on strict tit for tat basis, under guise ‘principles co-existence and cooperation’. Apparently receptive to atoms for peace as US exhibit at prospective Rumanian exhibition on peaceful uses atomic energy, probably within year or so. “Proposed exchange permanent trade representations between countries.” (Ibid., 611.66/12–355) A more complete account of this discussion is in despatch 146 from Bucharest, December 6. (Ibid., 611.66/12–655) On leaving Dej again referred with approval my suggestion destroy old retaliatory measures and promised Rumanian cooperation. Soviet Ambassador throughout did everything possible break up conversation, which lasted about two hours, but was ignored by Rumanians. Western diplomats report unusual lack of respect shown by Rumanians for Soviet Ambassador but warn this should not be taken as indication Rumanian independence but merely due weakness particular individual. They comment Yugoslav party first time top Rumanian officials willing have relaxed conversations with West.In response, the Department cautioned Thayer to avoid any possibility of misinterpretation by the Rumanians of his remarks to mean “commitments or understandings on points at issue” between the United States and Romania. (Telegram 122 to Bucharest, December 6; ibid., 661.66/12–355) Thayer 41. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 864.00/12–1355. Secret. Sent also to Munich. Budapest, December 13, 1955—8 p.m. 237. Department pass USIA. Legation believes that current Soviet grandiose and generous economic aid projects for “underdeveloped areas” offer highly exploitable issue for use satellite area and that media, if not already doing so, should concentrate heavy fire on this. Basic facts are that not only have Hungary and other satellites never been recipients such generous aid offers, but their manpower and resources have consistently been exploited for benefit Russians; are they now to be sucked even drier to help finance this venture in Russian imperialism? If this not so, why then: 1. Should satellite regimes literally take bread from mouths their people for shipment Soviet Union? Witness fact that although Hungary this year produced what leaders admit was “good” crop, there already exists shortage bread in countryside. 2. Should Hungarian people work harder and harder for less and less as recent speeches in Parliament and published 1956 plan reveal they expected to do? According regime’s own admissions, Hungarian economy in pitiful state while Hungarian people well know how difficult it is to make ends meet. Why no similar generous Soviet gift to Hungary? Hungarian people can testify to its need. Such an offensive should not be difficult to mount or buttress with facts and figures. Its immediate value would be its effect in countering propaganda windfall Communists clearly attempting reap from Soviet India–Burma tourKhrushchev and Bulganin toured India, Burma, and Afghanistan November 18–December 18. and other Middle East moves. Legation believes, however that same theme with slight modifications could be developed into longer range project designed meet in part that problem discussed Legtel 224, December 1,Document 39. namely, that of giving Hungarian people good, cogent reason for continuing to resist communism through years ahead rather than giving in to compromise. Danger to West is that Hungarian people might be sold on idea that, if they cooperated, system could be made to work better, and that they would be primary beneficiaries in terms better living standards. If it can be demonstrated to them that fruits of their labors are simply going to finance Soviet economy, imperialistic adventures in East, media would have excellent argument with which to urge maintenance of at least passive economic resistance. Proper application this theme could also be used to give captive peoples stronger feeling of participating themselves in anti-Soviet struggle. Due West’s possible over-emphasis liberation theme over years, captive peoples, in Hungary at least, have gradually put more and more of their eggs in West’s basket with result that they now rely almost exclusively on West to prevent Soviets from consolidating their position and extending their hegemony and on outside intervention to break Russian grip here. Resistance they have offered has been primarily passive in nature and calculated to hold what could be held until West liberated them. With liberation fading as active factor and as usable theme and with above-cited danger existing, means must be found of upping satellite people’s ante in their own future. As we see it: (1) Soviets have laid foundation by their recent moves in Middle East. In attempting expand their hegemony over this area Soviets are relying heavily on economic penetration. To gather adequate where-with-all for this effort, Soviets require all of resources of satellites. While the West can and will continue to exert all possible pressure around the periphery, it cannot penetrate the Russian purse. However, captive peoples can. If they fail to produce, if they sabotage the new five-year plans, if they hold out against their regimes and continue to refuse to cooperate in all things, they can indirectly drain the Russian treasury. They can thus not only prevent Soviets from further consolidating their power in Eastern Europe but also exert negative influence on Soviet plans for extending their hegemony. Part which captive peoples can thus play in this new era we are entering is a vital one; picture then becomes one of cooperation, with captive peoples playing increasingly active and vital role in long-range plan force Russians back. (2) If fruits captive peoples labors remained with them, West could hardly ask them step up resistance and make new sacrifices. Past decade, however, has proved that only Moscow is beneficiary; while captive peoples living standards have constantly deteriorated Moscow’s treasury has expanded, permitting ventures such as those unfolding in the Middle East. In concert with foregoing, US should develop and have ready for instant use, program under which surplus agricultural commodities can be offered as gifts to captive peoples under international agency supervision whenever conditions appear to so warrant. Clear implication that US is prepared and willing to give concrete expression to its exercise of the golden rule, thus alleviating in some measure effects of captive peoples sacrifices, should be incorporated into above-outlined general theme. Ravndal 42. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Merchant) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, EUR Files: Lot 59 D 233, Rumania. Confidential Drafted by Beam and Stevens. Washington, December 27, 1955. SUBJECT Visit of Mr. Robert Thayer Mr. Robert Thayer, our Minister to Rumania, has had an unusual number of contacts with top Rumanian officials, including the Prime Minister [sic] Gheorgiu-Dej, and has been encouraged by them to believe that a détente in US-Rumanian relations is possible. The Rumanians have expressed to the Minister their feeling that increased trade between the two countries is possible and have suggested the exchange of trade delegations. They have presented Mr. Thayer with a list of products they would like to obtain from the U.S., with particular emphasis on industrial and agricultural machinery. The Rumanians apparently would like to obtain a license from du Pont to manufacture nylon and dacron, saying this would make them independent of the Soviet Union for textiles. On the other hand, the Rumanians have attacked the broadcasts of VOA and of Radio Free Europe as a detrimental factor in relations with the U.S. Mr. Thayer reports that there are no signs of Rumanian leaders breaking away from the Russian type of Communism or from Soviet control of their basic policies. In response to inquiries to us from Mr. Thayer regarding US policy toward Rumania, we have stressed the following. Normal relations cannot be looked for until the Rumanian regime changes its pattern of conduct. We doubt that a real increase of trade could be arranged, and probably least of all on a government-to-government basis. Rumania has little to offer the United States, and we question whether the Rumanians are interested in the purchase of sizable amounts of non-strategic goods. It is also questionable whether American industrial firms would be willing to license their processes and extend credit. It is true that the Rumanians are interested in US hybrid corn and might also take some US lard products, with possibilities of payment in Rumanian cement on a barter basis. We have no objections to normal peaceful trade under the new Department of Commerce general licensing policy, but we doubt that the US Government could or should be willing to go further under present circumstances. It is suggested you may wish to make the following points to Mr. Thayer by way of guidance:No substantive record has been found of the discussion between Thayer and Dulles which this memorandum anticipates. According to Dulles’ Appointment Book, Thayer met with the Secretary for a 15-minute “courtesy call” at 10:55 p.m., December 28. (Princeton University Library, Dulles Papers) See also footnote 1, infra. (1) The development of trade between the two countries depends on a normalization of Rumanian–U.S. relations. This would involve the removal of travel restrictions on US diplomatic personnel, permission for free access to claimants to American citizenship and the provision of adequate housing for the US Legation staff. (2) The Rumanian regime cannot legitimately object to the factual reporting of VOA. Until it conforms to accepted standards of international and humanitarian conduct, it must expect foreign broadcasts of the kind issued by Radio Free Europe (with which the US has no official connection) to continue. As an initial step in breaking down ideological barriers, the US would like to reestablish US information activities in Bucharest on a modest scale, with reciprocal facilities for the Rumanian Legation in Washington. (3) Should the Rumanian Government accept the foregoing proposals, the US might be willing to assign a commercial attaché to Bucharest and to receive a Rumanian commercial attaché in Washington, provided our commercial attaché was given adequate accommodation and permission to travel freely in Rumania. 43. Memorandum From the Minister to Romania (Thayer) to the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Merchant)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.6641/12–2855. Secret. Merchant discussed this memorandum with Dulles and gave his view of the question of trade with Romania in a covering memorandum from him to Beam and Stevens, January 4, 1956, which reads: “Regarding the attached memorandum from Bob Thayer, I discussed the subject briefly with the Secretary after he had seen Bob. I explained to the Secretary my reasons for believing that under existing circumstances the exchange of trade representatives with Rumania seemed to me to promise little value and to risk being distinctly misleading to some of our allies. The Secretary indicated his agreement with me and said that whereas this subject had been briefly discussed with Mr. Thayer when he saw him, he had not given Mr. Thayer any encouragement.” Washington, December 28, 1955. SUBJECT Exchange of Trade Representatives with Rumania The Rumanian Government on their own initiative have been pressing me on the subject of exchanging trade representatives to explore trade possibilities between our two countries. The nature of this representation, whether in the form of commerical attachés or trade delegations, has been left for further discussion. Although it is obvious that trade with Rumania cannot be of any real commercial value to the United States, I believe this exchange should be approved for the following reasons: 1) It would open up many possibilities . . . to obtain information concerning Rumania and her economic situation not now available. 2) It would enable the United States to assert a control not now possible on the free-wheeling of U.S. citizens, like Mr. Garst who is now expanding his activities in Rumania to fields other than agriculture. 3) It would enable the United States to exploit the risks inevitable in the establishment of close relations between Rumania and the West. 4) It would open up opportunities for the United States to begin to show to the Rumanians how much more they could gain from reliance upon the United States than upon the Soviets. In the light of the series of conversations I have been having with Rumanian officials, I believe that other advantages could be obtained on the basis of reciprocity were I to return to Rumania with the approval of the Department to explore this trade exchange further. They would consider this as something we are doing for them for which they would be willing to give us something in return—perhaps the reopening of a USIA information center. On balance, and with full awareness of the advantages to be gained by the Rumanians, I believe the United States would wind up on the plus side of the ledger. 44. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, January 9, 1956Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Beam and Stevens. Washington, January 9, 1956 SUBJECT US Policy towards Eastern Europe PARTICIPANTS Dr. Vilis Masens, Chairman, Assembly of Captive European Nations (ACEN)The Assembly of Captive European Nations was formed in September 1954 under the banner of the Free Europe Committee. The Assembly advocated the attainment of independence from Soviet controls by Eastern European nations through nonviolent means. Its proceedings were regularly reported by Radio Free Europe. Dr. G.M. Dimitrov, Vice Chairman Mr. Hasan Dosti, Albania Dr. Juraj Slavik, Czechoslovakia Mr. Leonhard Vanter, Estonia Mr. George Bessenyey, Hungary Mr. Vaclovas Sidzikauskas, Lithuania Mr. Stefan Korbanski, Poland Mr. Constantin Visoianu, Rumania Mr. Brutus Costa, Secretary General, Rumania The Secretary Mr. Beam, EUR Mr. Stevens, EE Dr. Masens opened the discussion by expressing, on behalf of the ACEN, their thanks and gratitude for the opportunity to meet the Secretary. They wished particularly to thank him and the President for the President’s statement of December 30For text of the statement, a White House press release of December 30, see Department of State Bulletin, January 16, 1956, pp. 84–85. with respect to US policy concerning the liberation of the captive countries of Eastern Europe. They were also grateful to the Secretary for the firm stand which he had taken on many occasions with respect to the liberation of the captive nations. The ACEN were the spokesmen for the oppressed peoples of Eastern Europe. They were not working for the restoration of their own personal fortunes. Their task was to work for the liberation of their countries which in some cases had been deprived for as many as fifteen years of elementary human rights. Until the liberation of the captive nations is achieved, international tensions cannot be relaxed. The achievement of liberation is the responsibility of all members of the United Nations. Dr. Masens then stated that, if it were agreeable to the Secretary, his colleagues would present the views of the ACEN on various problems. The Secretary remarked that the time available to him was limited and that if all the members of the group expressed their views it might take too long, Dr. Masens assured him that his colleagues would be brief. Policy of Peaceful Liberation Mr. Visoianu (Rumania) said that prospects for liberation had stood at a low point after the Geneva conferences and the admission of the four satellite governments to the United Nations.On December 14 the U.N. General Assembly admitted 16 new members including Albania, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Rumania. These developments, particularly the latter, had been a powerful blow to the hopes of the captive nations. They had created the impression that the Free World accepted the Soviet position of domination. The ACEN was grateful for the President’s statement on the peaceful liberation of the satellites. It was now clear that this was a major goal of American policy. It was not only a wish but the active aim of policy. Mr. Visoianu said that he wished to propose three courses of action to advance the cause of liberation: (1) to use all international institutions, such as the UN, and international conferences to promote the cause of peaceful liberation; (2) to inform and arouse world public opinion regarding the situation of the captive peoples with a view to exerting pressure on the Soviet Government; and (3) to keep up the morale of the captive peoples, which is an indispensable condition to the achievement of this goal. Such peaceful procedures had been envisaged in one of the resolutions recently adopted by the ACEN. With respect to the first point, Mr. Visoianu said that there were excellent opportunities for the presentation of the problem of the captive peoples at the UN. The Soviets were vulnerable to attack on the subject of colonization and denial of human rights. The initiative in this field should not be left to the Soviets. The question of the liberation of the captive countries should be placed on the agenda of all international conferences. This point had been raised and subsequently dropped at the Summit Conference, thereby creating the impression that it had been introduced merely as a bargaining point. On the second point, Mr. Visoianu stated that peaceful liberation required the support of international public opinion. The question must therefore be placed before the world. The Soviets will attempt to avoid discussion of this question, but the West must insist. The US is not vulnerable to charges of imperialism, since its record on this score is good. The record of the Soviet Union must be publicly exposed. While the maneuverability of the US in this area may be limited, the Soviet aims are a fact and must be made clear. On the third point, Mr. Visoianu stated that the spirit of independence in the captive countries is still intact. It is hard to keep up one’s courage in the present situation, but ways must be found to accomplish this. The captive peoples must be informed about the policy of liberation. Mr. Visoianu stated that the means at the disposal of the ACEN were limited, but that they were anxious to collaborate in any effort to reach the captive peoples. East-West Contacts and Trade Mr. Sidzikauskas (Lithuania) noted that the question of East-West contacts and trade had been on the agenda of the Foreign Ministers Conference at Geneva, and suggested that it might also be discussed with Mr. Eden during his forthcoming visit. The normalization of contacts between the Western world and the Soviet orbit was not useful as long as the present political situation prevailed. East-West contacts must be part of a general strategy looking to the liberation of the captive countries. Such contacts are not a subsitute for liberation. Under present conditions trade relations with the orbit would involve the importation to the West of goods resulting from the exploitation of the satellites and produced by slave labor. Repatriation Campaign Mr. Korbonski stated that the aims of the Soviet repatriation campaign were clear. First, it sought to persuade people behind the Iron Curtain that the émigrés had lost faith in the West, thereby weakening the spirit of resistance. Second, it sought to disintegrate the strongest anti-Communist émigré centers and to weaken the spirit of the émigrés. Mr. Korbonski suggested that a “Marshall Plan” be devised on behalf of the emigration. He referred to the deplorable situation of refugees in camps in Austria and Germany and stated that they must be removed as soon as possible. He hoped for a liberalization of US immigration laws. Steps should be taken to provide jobs for those already in the West, particularly for elderly intellectuals. The Communist repatriation campaign was aimed at the upper levels of the emigration. These people will not be lured home by propaganda but may eventually succumb if their personal material situation is bad. Mr. Korbonski suggested, first, the establishment of ethnic institutes to provide opportunities for émigrés to engage in intellectual and spiritual work and second, the formation of an employment agency to take care of older émigrés. He called for a bold plan of aid which would provide the means necessary to liquidate the present unhealthy conditions. National Communism Mr. Dimitrov (Bulgaria) stated that, at the request of his colleagues, he wished to raise the delicate question of national communism. The ACEN did not deny the necessity of using Tito to fight the Soviet Union. They wished to stress, however, that national communism has no attraction for communists in the captive countries. National communism is without ideological appeal. The communists have built their strength on the basis of allegiances to the Soviet fatherland. Without the Soviet Union the present regimes in the satellites would not exist. National communism cannot succeed in the captive countries. If it had any appeal, thousands of Bulgarians would already have crossed the border into Yugoslavia. New regimes in the satellites will not be communist. The ACEN doubts that communist forces can be used against the Soviet Union. Eastern European communists consider that Tito has already returned to the Soviet fold. Soviet control in the satellites is so efficient that no effective action can be taken except by the democratic resistance forces in cooperation with the Free World. Secretary’s Remarks The Secretary said he was happy to have this meeting with the representatives of the captive nations and he expressed appreciation of the thanks they had conveyed for the President’s recent statement. The Secretary recalled that for a long time before he became Secretary of State he had advocated the peaceful liberation of the captive European peoples. This was an essential goal and there could be no real peace until it was realized. He had not changed his views in the meantime, and he wished to make it clear that peaceful liberation was a definite aim of US foreign policy. The Secretary mentioned that the President had dealt with the problem in his opening speech at Geneva.See footnote 5, Document 27. The President had later pointed out that he had privately discussed the question with the Russians at Geneva. It had not been admitted to the agenda since the agenda had to be established by common agreement. The President, nevertheless, had talked about it in private meetings with the Russians, and the Secretary himself had emphasized it from time to time. The President in his report to the nation on August 25 [24]See footnote 2, Document 26. had portrayed the satellite problem as basic to the establishment of peace. The Secretary mentioned that some people thought the President’s speech may have been a factor in prompting the Russians to move into the Middle East. The Secretary said that our views apparently are not fully shared by all members of the Atlantic community. There is some sentiment to the effect that an acceptable world peace could be based on the status quo. This was certainly not our view and it would merely mean that the Russians would be able to consolidate their position to make further moves against the free world. The Secretary said that the President and he intended to adhere to our policy. The Secretary related his impressions of the second Geneva Conference. The Soviets seemed to be nervous about their position in the satellites. At the first Geneva Conference they had agreed to German reunification by free elections. At the second Conference they had repudiated their agreement and had not even paid lip service to the principle of free elections. Had they done so they might have spared themselves some political and psychological losses. Soviet action had probably been motivated by fear that free elections would be contagious in the satellite area and would undermine their control. This explains why they refused even to contemplate free elections. The Secretary believed that the Soviets were faced with considerable problems throughout the satellite area. Unrest in some of the countries was greater than in others but the entire picture seems to cause them anxiety. It was certainly to our advantage to see that anxiety increase. In the Secretary’s view the situation was not hopeless. What happens behind the Iron Curtain sometimes happens unexpectedly. The basic situation indicates that certain changes may be in the making. He, of course, could not set a timetable or a date for what may likely occur. As regards contacts between East and West, which had been mentioned in the discussion, the Secretary said we would wish to avoid those types of contacts which would have a bad effect in the captive countries. We were submitting East-West contacts to very careful scrutiny. As regards the situation in refugee camps in Germany and Austria, which was another topic mentioned, he was not familiar with it but he said other officers in the Department would be available to discuss it. The Secretary said he was sympathetic to changes in our immigration law which would facilitate freer movement of refugees to the US. Changes in the law were subject to Congressional decision, but the Executive branch favored certain relaxations and we will keep in mind what the representatives of the captive nations have said at this meeting. The Secretary said he could understand the repugnance which had been expressed with respect to certain aspects of “Titoism”. We must bear in mind, however, that there are many angles from which the problem of peaceful liberation may be approached and we should not ignore any one of them. The Soviets try to detach colonial areas from the Western countries in a two-phase operation, and the Secretary mentioned a statement which he believed Stalin had made in 1924 elucidating their aim in this regard. First, the Soviets try to break the ties with the Western countries and then amalgamate the dependent areas in the Soviet system. We ourselves should keep the way open for a kind of a two-phase operation. Encouragement of nationalism would help loosen ties with the Soviet Union. Thereafter, other problems might be more easily solved. This, however, is not an exclusive approach. The Secretary said that what concerns the representatives of the captive nations is of deep concern to the President and himself. His listeners would understand that certain details of the problem cannot be discussed publicly. The Secretary was confident that if we all stand together for the course we believe right, it will prevail. No peaceful step which will advance the liberation of the captive nations will be overlooked. We will continue to act to insure respect for the rights of man, freedom and justice and independence for the small nations. At the conclusion of the meeting the Secretary showed members of the Committee the statements Ambassador Lodge had made in the Security Council and the General Assembly, on instructions, regarding the admission of the satellites to the UN.Department of State Bulletin No. 861, December 26, 1955. [Footnote in the source text.] A draft Department press release was shown to Dr. Masens, Chairman of the Committee, which he found satisfactory.The text of the press release was transmitted in circular telegram 455 to Prague, Warsaw, Budapest, Bucharest, and Moscow, January 9. (Department of State, Central Files, 760.00/1–955) He said that in their interviews with the press, members of the Committee might refer to the statements they had made to the Secretary, but as regards what the Secretary had told the meeting, they would limit themselves to the terms of the communiqué. 45. National Intelligence EstimateSource: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Secret. A note on the cover sheet reads: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. “Concurred in by the Intelligence Advisory Committee on 10 January 1956. Concurring were the Special Assistant, Intelligence, Department of State; the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Director of Naval Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, USAF; and the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff. The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the IAC and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.” According to a note from Macomber to Barnes, undated, attached to a memorandum from Armstrong to Dulles, February 7, summarizing NIE 12–56, the Secretary saw an advance copy of the conclusions of NIE 12–56; consequently the summary memorandum of February 7 and NIE 12–56 were not shown to the Secretary. (Ibid., Central Files, 760.00/2–5756) Washington, January 10, 1956. NIE 12–56 PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE EUROPEAN SATELLITES THROUGH 1960 The Problem To estimate the current situation and probable developments in the European SatellitesAs used in this paper the term “European Satellites” includes East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria and Albania. [Footnote in the source text.] through 1960. Conclusions 1. The military, political, and economic significance of the Satellites to the USSR is so great that Moscow almost certainly regards the maintenance of control over the area as an essential element of its power position. The Satellites provide the Soviet Union with a defense in depth and an advanced position for launching attacks on western and southern Europe. The Satellite regimes themselves are valuable to the USSR as instruments in the conduct of Soviet foreign policy, propaganda, and economic and subversive operations. The Satellites represent an important element of over-all Bloc economic strength. The total gross national product (GNP) of the Satellites is roughly two-fifths that of the USSR and includes significant production of certain key materials and heavy manufactures. (Paras. 12–16, 48–51) 2. The USSR now has, for all practical purposes, complete control over the Satellite regimes and will almost certainly be able to maintain it during the period of this estimate. Within the limitations suggested below with respect to East Germany and Albania, we believe that it will remain firm Soviet policy to retain such control. This control rests fundamentally on the USSR’s military capability of maintaining its domination over the area. Control is exercised primarily through the Satellite Communist parties, assisted and guided by a complex of Soviet diplomatic and military establishments, economic advisors, and police agencies. Moscow has made clear that the status of the Satellites is not a matter for international negotiation. In the case of Germany, the USSR has held open the possibility of reunification on the basis of negotiations between the East and West German regimes. We believe, however, that the USSR will not voluntarily relinquish East Germany except in exchange for a solution of the German problem favorable to Soviet interests. It is also possible that the USSR might be willing to reconsider its position with regard to Albania. For example, there is a slight chance that the physical isolation of Albania from the Soviet Bloc and its minor strategic value to the Bloc would induce Moscow to use Albania as a pawn in Balkan intrigue. (Paras. 14, 17, 22) 3. The maintenance of effective Soviet control over the Satellites does not preclude policy modifications calculated to take greater account of local conditions, to promote smoother economic development, and to diminish the impact of Soviet rule on Satellite national sensibilities. In addition, Moscow might expect that such measures would document the claim of Satellite independence, and would thereby impress opinion in neutral and underdeveloped countries and improve the propaganda position of Free World Communist parties. 4. Despite Moscow’s firm control of the Satellites, there are a number of local factors which hamper the execution of Soviet policy. In some of the Satellites factionalism has become evident in the party leadership and has caused confusion in the program. Some elements privately resent dictation by Moscow and favor a reduction of political terror and an increase in consumer goods. There are many party members with a nationalist tinge who constitute a potential for “deviation.” All the governments are still confronted with problems arising from their unpopularity with the masses and from the difficulties inherent in developing an efficient administration in a totalitarian state under an alien ideology. We believe, however, that none of these difficulties will jeopardize either the control by Moscow-oriented Communists or the implementation of Soviet policy.The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army and the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, while conceding the existence of certain ideological and administrative problems in the Satellites, nevertheless, believe these problems are currently of no great magnitude and are likely to diminish during the period of this estimate. They would therefore omit this conclusion. [Footnote in the source text.] (Paras. 27–28) 5. DissidenceOn this subject, see NIE 10–55, “Anti-Communist Resistance Potential in the Sino-Soviet Bloc,” dated 12 April 1955. “Dissidence” is defined as a state of mind involving discontent or disaffection with the regime. “Resistance” is defined as dissidence translated into action. [Footnote in the source text; NIE 10–55 is not printed.] is widely prevalent in the Satellites. It is unlikely that an additional five years of Communist rule will appreciably reduce this dissidence, or greatly diminish the traditional national aspirations of the East European peoples. On the other hand, dissidence is offset by a tendency of the Satellite population to become resigned to Communist rule and by the gradual increase in the number of Communist-indoctrinated youth. We believe that, except possibly in East Germany, no development short of a drastic impairment of Communist controls or the approach of friendly forces in time of war would be sufficient to stimulate important outbreaks of open resistance. (Paras. 31–35) 6. The Satellite regimes have as fundamental goals the expansion of industry, the collectivization of agriculture, and the Sovietization of the countries generally. In 1953, however, faced with mounting difficulties, they reduced the pressure for rapid achievement of these goals. Industrialization and collectivization of agriculture were slowed and police controls became somewhat less obtrusive. In early 1955, however, pressures for increasing output were revived, the priority of heavy industrial development was re-affirmed, and collectivization efforts were renewed. These modifications do not appear to represent a full return to the pre-1953 program. (Paras. 36–40) 7. We estimate that the Satellite economies, taken together, will increase their GNP through 1960 at the rate of slightly less than four percent per annum, a substantial decline from the extraordinary average annual rate of over seven percent achieved in 1949–1954. Satellite agricultural output in 1960 will probably be about 11 percent greater than in 1954, while nonagricultural production will increase by about 28 percent. Meanwhile, total population is expected to increase about seven percent by 1960. Manufactured consumer goods will account for the major part of the small prospective rise in living standards. (Paras. 43–47) 8. During the period of the estimate Satellite trade with the Free World may continue to rise somewhat faster, in percentage terms, than total Satellite trade. For economic as well as political reasons, the Satellites apparently desire to increase their trade with the Free World. In the absence of substantial medium- or long-term credits from Free World countries, however, an early expansion of Satellite exports will be necessary to balance any increase in imports from the Free World. This confronts the Satellites with the problem of adjusting the character and prices of their exports and their way of doing business, in order to improve their position in Free World markets. It will probably be easier for the Satellites to increase trade with the underdeveloped areas than with the industrial countries of the West. (Paras. 52–54) 9. We believe that the scope of Bloc-wide action markThe terms “Soviet Bloc,” “Bloc-wide,” or “intra-Bloc” refer to the USSR and the European Satellites. Where Communist China is also referred to, the term “Sino-Soviet Bloc” will be used. [Footnote in the source text.] regional planning will substantially increase as compared with the period 1949–1953. During the period of this estimate, this policy will probably not contribute greatly to the growth of the economy or to the resolution of basic economic problems, although some benefits can be expected. Over a longer period, integration may make significant contributions to the economic strength of this area. (Paras. 55–58) [Here follows the “Discussion” section of the Estimate.] 46. Editorial Note At the February 8 meeting of the Operations Coordinating Board, the question of balloon operations against Eastern Europe was discussed: “5. Free Europe Balloons “ . . . mentioned simply as a matter of information that we might soon be forced to take some kind of a stand with respect to the ‘Free Europe Balloon’ operation, particularly in the light of the recent situation with respect to balloons. . . . the Free Europe people to soon be . . . asking what policy we would adopt. Should they, for example, reduce substantially their present operations, or what? . . . would be opposed to giving up the Free Europe Balloon operation, but that he had an open mind about reduction in launchings. . . . “There was no further discussion, but the problem was noted.” (Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Minutes—Preliminary Notes) Earlier in February, the Czechoslovak Government had raised the subject of the Free Europe Committee’s balloon operations with the International Civil Aviation Organization. In addition, on February 11 the Polish Government officially protested to the American Embassy in Warsaw. (Telegrams 894 to Brussels, February 3, and 532 from Warsaw, February 12; ibid., Central Files, 511.49/1–3156 and 511.48/2–1256, respectively) Destalinization, February–June 1956 47. Editorial Note On February 5, at a closed session of the Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, First Secretary Nikita S. Khrushchev strongly criticized and condemned Joseph Stalin and the cult of personality surrounding him. For documentation on the speech and United States reactions to it, see volume XXIV, pages 72 ff. 48. Editorial Note On February 27, as part of a discussion of NSC 5602, “Basic National Security Policy,” at the 277th meeting of the National Security Council, the Council examined the policy of American economic assistance and development aid to less-developed nations. Secretary Dulles stressed the need for administrative flexibility to counter the Soviet Union’s current economic offensive. Rowland R. Hughes, Director of the Bureau of the Budget, indicated that his organization was giving the matter of administrative flexibility “most intense study.” The following discussion then took place: “Secretary Dulles said that he was glad to hear this, but still believed that the problem required special mention in NSC 5602. With this view the President expressed agreement. Thereupon Secretary Dulles said he would like just to outline a kind of example of what he had in mind. Suppose, for instance, the United States went to the Czechoslovakian Government and said in effect that Czechoslovakia needed a lot of cotton. We would be glad to give this cotton to Czechoslovakia, together with butter, meats, fats, and other foods of which we had large surpluses. We would then propose some kind of a deal by which in return for these commodities Czechoslovakia was to provide us with war goods or other things. Any such proposal as this to Czechoslovakia would simply ‘raise hell’ in the Soviet satellite countries. The Soviets, said Secretary Dulles, are grievously exploiting the satellites. Why can’t we exploit this fact, just as the Soviets are exploiting our allies and the neutral nations? Secretary Dulles pointed out that this, of course, was just an off-the-cuff suggestion and that it had not been staffed. But if the United States were to decide to make such moves as this, they would have to be made quickly if they were to be effective. Under the existing lack of flexibility we simply could not move quickly enough. “The President inquired whether he could not put some such suggestion as that made by Secretary Dulles in the next message he was to send down to the Congress. Director Hughes added that it would be next to impossible to get the Congress to agree to any such proposal as that outlined by Secretary Dulles. “The President said that of course the trouble was that the Congress believed that any and all U.S. trade with the Soviet bloc was wrong and bad. On the contrary, the President said, what he wanted to set in motion was centrifugal forces rather than centripetal forces in the Soviet bloc. U.S. trade with the bloc might eventually prove to be such a centrifugal force. “Secretary Dulles closed the discussion by stating that his plan was only an illustration of the kind of flexibility that the President might need in the future in dealing with the new Soviet tactics.” (Memorandum of discussion by Gleason; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records) The complete text of the discussion on NSC 5602 is printed in volume XIX, page 201. At the 281st NSC meeting on April 5, Secretary Dulles raised the question of assistance to Soviet satellites in Eastern Europe as part of a larger discussion of “International Trade, Including Trade between the Free World and the Soviet Bloc.” Dulles remarked: “He referred to his suggestion at that time that the United States might cause a great deal of difficulty to the Soviet Union if it were suddenly to offer to Czechoslovakia a large amount of surplus U.S. agricultural commodities. So far as he knew, continued Secretary Dulles, nothing had ever come of this suggestion, and he presumed that it was buried somewhere in the depths of the government bureaucracy.” (Memorandum of discussion; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records) For complete text of the discussion of this agenda item, see volume IX, page 174. 49. Progress Report Submitted by the Operations Coordinating Board to the National Security CouncilSource: Department of State, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 61 D 167, Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe. Top Secret. According to a covering memorandum from Staats to Lay, March 6, this progress report was concurred in by the OCB on February 29 for transmittal to the NSC. In a memorandum from Beam to Hoover, February 24, summarizing a draft of the progress report, Beam stated that it was “an agreed report” and noted that there were “no important differences of opinion among the agencies expressed either in the Working Group or the Board of Assistants.” (Ibid., OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430, Soviet Satellites 1956) Washington, February 29, 1956. PROGRESS REPORT ON NSC 174, UNITED STATES POLICY TOWARD THE SOVIET SATELLITES IN EASTERN EUROPE Policy Approved by the President December 23, 1953) (Period Covered: May 1, 1954 through February 29, 1956) A. Listing of Major Developments During the Period 1. During the period under review the following actions and categories of action were taken pursuant to NSC 174: a. Presentation to the International Court of Justice of incidents of Soviet bloc attacks on U.S. aircraft. b. Actions to obtain release of U.S. citizens imprisoned in the Soviet bloc. c. Information programs exposing Soviet domination of the satellites. d. Speeches and publications by people who have suffered under communist tyranny. e. Offers of surplus U.S. agricultural commodities in cases of food shortages: Danube flood relief offer of July 29, 1954, which was accepted; and the offer to Albania on February 9, 1955, which was rejected. f. Exploitation of indications of internal conflict within and among ruling groups. g. Expressions of official U.S. interest in the future of Eastern Europe by the President, Secretary of State, and other senior U.S. officials. h. Diplomatic actions in support of information activities of private American organizations, such as the Free Europe Committee. i. Cultural and other contacts have been somewhat increased between the U.S. and the peoples of the Soviet European satellites. j. Information programs have publicized evidences of growing Western strength including the U.S. contribution to the defensive military strength of the free world. B. Summary Statement of Operating Progress in Relation to Major NSC Objectives 2. Long-Range Objective—Independence. Eventual fulfillment of the right of the peoples of the Soviet satellites to enjoy governments of their own choosing, free of Soviet domination, is the long-range objective stated in NSC 174. There is no evidence of progress toward this long-range objective during the period under review. Nevertheless, this fact does not bring into question the validity of the objective. 3. Current Objectives. The current objectives cited first in NSC 174 are to disrupt the Soviet-satellite relationship, to minimize satellite contributions to Soviet power, and to deter aggression. Actions intended to disrupt the Soviet-satellite relationship may have caused some difficulties for Moscow, but no real evidence of a schism has yet made its appearance. Our actions, however, may have played a part in persuading the Soviet Union to moderate the extent to which its control and domination over the satellites are openly demonstrated. In varying ways in the different satellites, the USSR continues to show respect, within certain confines, for the power of local nationalisms. Despite the continuing success of Yugoslavia in maintaining its independent position which led to the Khrushchev-Bulganin visit in Belgrade last spring, no repercussions of the Yugoslav example are as yet apparent in the satellites. Although nationalist opposition continues to be a disruptive force in varying degrees in the separate satellites, it must still be concluded that a non-Soviet regime on the Tito model is unlikely to emerge in any of the satellites under existing circumstances. 4. Satellite Contributions to Soviet Power. There is some sign that U.S. policies and actions directed to minimize the satellite contributions to Soviet power have shown a measure of success. It is believed that the strategic controls on East-West trade have had an effect in limiting the satellite contribution to the Soviet bloc economy and war potential. These controls are regarded as a factor in retarding technological advance in the industry of the satellite areas to the extent that industry for the most part has been obliged to rely on equipment and processes which are becoming antiquated. The new communist domestic propaganda line stressing the need to learn technological know-how from the West bears witness to the unsatisfactory condition of satellite technology. U.S. psychological warfare programs are believed to be contributing to the continued passive resistance of the satellite populations which, through employee slowdown in industry and reduced effort in agriculture, has the effect of holding down the satellite contribution. 5. Soviet Control and Popular Hostility. A further current objective in NSC 174 is to . . . promote conditions favorable to the eventual liberation of the satellite peoples. During the review period there have been signs in varying degrees throughout the satellite area of a change in regime approach, a greater flexibility of regime policy and ostensibly somewhat more open criticism of conditions. Whatever the varying degree in the appearance of liberalization in the satellite countries, there has been, however, no relaxation of real controls anywhere in the area. The totalitarian controls remain firm and effective, and none of the satellite regimes appears threatened. On the other hand, the regimes have not been able to overcome the separation between themselves and their peoples. In no satellite country has the regime anything approaching majority acceptance. As long as this alienation between people and regime is sustained, one of the basic prerequisites to eventual liberation remains at hand. While it is difficult to assess to what extent U.S. policy and actions can affect such a basic popular attitude, even though we were to attribute to them, at best, a minor role, we should not under-estimate the importance of United States efforts. The Voice of America, Radio Free Europe, the Crusade for Freedom and the other means of reaching the satellite peoples seem to have served both to keep alive in these peoples their sense of connection with the West and with Free World ideals, and also to sustain their alienation from the Communist regimes. At any rate, the continuing violent attacks of regime spokesmen and propaganda against these U.S. operations are an indication of their importance. Were they to be discontinued or diminished, the satellite regimes would be relieved of a major concern and become more confident in the eventual success of their efforts to subdue their own peoples and refashion them in the desired communist pattern. 6. Strengthening of Elements Favorable to U.S. Another NSC 174 objective is to conserve and strengthen the assets within the satellites, and among their nationals outside, which may contribute to United States interests in peace or war, and to the ultimate freedom of the satellites. Of major importance in this connection have been the several statements by the President and the Secretary of State affirming the U.S. intention not to undertake any agreement which would have the effect of confirming the status quo in the satellite area and expressing it to be the aim of U.S. policy that the satellite peoples should eventually obtain their independence and the right to determine freely their own form of government. Their effect was greatly enhanced by the violent reaction of the Soviet bloc authorities. While our efforts with respect to the peoples within the satellite area have been limited in means, primarily to such statements of policy and information operations, we are able to give direct support to the activities of their nationals outside the satellite area. During the review period we have conducted diverse programs to strengthen exile political activities and to resettle Eastern Europe refugees still living in camps or in temporary circumstances. A promising organization of the Eastern European political exiles has been developed during the review period, namely, the Assembly of Captive European Nations. 7. Review of Policy. On October 12, 1955, the OCB agreed to recommend to the National Security Council that the NSC Planning Board review NSC 174 and NSC 5505/1The Planning Coordinating Group prepared a progress report dated December 14, 1955, on NSC 5505/1, “Exploitation of Soviet and European Satellite Vulnerabilities,” which it did not approve but merely forwarded without comment to the Chairman of the OCB. As noted in the summary of the progress report on 5505/1, the emphasis of that paper was placed upon inducing evolutionary changes in the Soviet Union. Actions taken to exploit satellite vulnerabilities were reported on separately in this progress report on NSC 174. The progress report on NSC 5505/1, December 14, is ibid., S/P–NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1, Soviet Vulnerabilities. For documentation on revisions of NSC 5505/1, see vol. XXIV, pp. 3 ff. in the light of and subsequent to revision of NSC 5501.For documentation on revisions of NSC 5501, “Basic National Security Policy,” January 6, 1955, see vol. XIX, pp. 24 ff. In connection with the review of NSC 174 and NSC 5505/1, it is recommended that particular attention should be given to determining what further courses of action might be taken to induce the Soviet and satellite leadership to be more receptive to negotiated settlements and what degree of stress should be placed on encouragement of Titoist tendencies or “national Communist movements” as provided in NSC 174. NSC 5601NSC 5601, “U.S. Policy Toward Yugoslavia,” January 9, 1956, is scheduled for publication in volume XXVI. treats with Yugoslavia’s possible impact on satellite developments. NIE 12–56 (Jan. 10, 1956, paras. 27 and 28)For an extract of NIE 12–56, see Document 45. Paragraphs 27 and 28 are not printed. contains an estimate of the importance of nationalist “deviation.” A continuing assessment will be required. It is recommended that particular attention be given to the individual countries in the satellite area in order to ascertain whether a general overall policy for the whole satellite area without discriminating among the several countries as set forth in NSC 174 is adequate or whether separate policies for each country, or a general policy with specific adaptations to the separate countries might not be more desirable. C. Major Problems or Areas of Difficulty 8. The Geneva Conferences and the Satellite Issue. The West at the Geneva Conferences concentrated on the problem of German reunification as the major European problem for which settlement was to be sought. This had the effect of making the people in the Satellites feel that their future was being subordinated. The satellite issue was mentioned in the form of U.S. statements at the conferences and was raised informally with the Soviet leaders, but it was not possible to include it as an agenda item. It cannot be doubted that the inability of the West to press the satellite issue at either Conference has had an adverse effect on the satellite peoples. The admission of several satellites to UN membership recently seemed to affirm the status of the existing regimes and seemed to confirm the above feelings. 9. U.S. Policy for Germany and the Satellites. The intransigence of the Soviet policy at the Geneva Foreign Ministers meetings is assuredly in part related to the Soviet position with respect to the satellites. As long as the Soviets can keep the line of division in Germany and hold the satellites in the shadow behind that line, they will be gaining time for the consolidation of the Communist regimes in the satellite area. The Soviet position in Germany must be recognized as an advanced position with respect to Soviet control of the satellite area. It is a moot question whether the Soviets have any real expectation of communizing Germany or of maintaining their position in Eastern Germany in the long run. At the least, they may hope to achieve an eventual settlement which will afford some protection to their East German supporters and perhaps provide some form or modicum of neutralization. However, they may have an interest in postponing such an agreement so that the satellite countries will be as far advanced towards consolidation of the regimes and their popular acceptance as possible. They may also be expected to seek in connection with any settlement on Germany an international sanction of the status quo in Eastern Europe. The European security pact proposed by the West at Geneva, it may be noted in this regard, has been attacked by exile political leaders as sanctioning the status quo in Eastern Europe, which of course was not the case. Foregoing considerations (Paras. 8 and 9) should be borne in mind in connection with the formulation of U.S. strategy and policy with respect to Germany in order to ensure that possible effects on the attainment of our policy objectives with respect to Eastern European satellites continue to be considered in relation to our German policy. 10. The Time Factor. The outcome of the Geneva Conferences confirms the estimate that a considerable span of time will be required to attain the loosening of Soviet control in the satellite area and the accomplishment of U.S. objectives, either long-range or current. The sheer passage of time involves certain difficulties with respect to the implementation of NSC 174. It is likely to become more and more difficult to keep hope of liberation alive in the satellite peoples. The strength and determination of the political refugees are apt to decline; the older generation of political exiles will die off, and the young refugees are likely to become so absorbed by their new environments that they will cease to take an active interest in the affairs of their home countries. Moreover, the passage of time in itself tends to confirm the status quo. Continued diplomatic recognition, possible limited government agreements (on property questions), admission of all the satellites to United Nations membership, increased trade, cultural exchanges, visits of Congressmen, American tourist travel will all tend to signify normalization of relations and an implied acquiescence in the Communist puppet regimes. It must be regarded as a major problem in the implementation of NSC 174 that any movement toward a relaxation of tensions between East and West is bound to be widely interpreted in the satellites as a weakening of Western determination to achieve their liberation from Soviet control and a disposition to accept their status as permanent. 11. Conflicting Approaches. U.S. capabilities directly to influence developments within the satellites, particularly for the development of organized resistance which could basically alter the status of the satellites, remain limited. Moreover, implementation of the Outline Plan, approved by the OCB on September 21, 1955,Not printed. (Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, USSR and Satellites, 1953–56) will be affected considerably by the shifting climate of the international situation. In the absence of a cold war climate, many of the courses of action would be difficult to pursue. For example, those intended to encourage anti-communist activities and passive resistance are somewhat incompatible with a détente. Likewise, efforts to bring about a basis for a negotiated settlement and to encourage evolutionary changes in satellite regimes, as proposed for existing policy (particularly under NSC 5505/1), are not always compatible with programs intended to keep alive the hopes and aspirations of the captive peoples. A re-examination of NSC 174 and NSC 5505/1 may offer some guidance as to the resolution in practice of such incompatible policies. It may be that the U.S. will have to undertake to follow simultaneously two policies with inconsistent courses of action, representing divergent approaches to the one objective. 12. East-West Contacts. Efforts at the Geneva Conference of Foreign Ministers to obtain agreement with the Soviets on a broad range of increased contacts involving a freer exchange of ideas, information, and news as well as freer travel and cultural exchange met with no success. Nevertheless, the Soviets continue to evince interest in a restricted increase in contacts and cultural exchange. There is some indication that a corresponding relaxation, albeit of lesser dimension, is likewise desired by the satellite regimes. While the United States desires to increase contacts on a selective basis and in a wide variety of fields with the peoples of the Soviet bloc, the objective of the Soviet and satellite regimes appears to be to permit only a restricted number of carefully controlled contacts, especially between official delegations, to exploit Western freedoms in order to obtain scientific and technological information, and to give the appearance of raising the iron curtain without actually doing so. Although there appears little likelihood of any striking success in opening breaches in the iron curtain soon, plans contemplate our continuing to press suitable opportunities in this field, making available to the world press continued examples of satellite fearfulness to permit their peoples contact with the West. 13. Trade with the Bloc. As tensions have appeared to diminish, groups in the West have increased their demands for freer trade with the bloc. Although restrictions have been removed on certain commodities, pressures may continue to reduce much further the range of goods now considered strategic. In recent months several satellites have indicated their interest in resuming more active trade relations with the U.S. In Czechoslovakia we have undertaken to discuss this question in a comprehensive negotiation on outstanding economic issues, e.g., U.S. claims for nationalized property and other Czech financial obligations. In Hungary we offered to discuss the question of trade in the context of a broad examination of mutual problem areas. Negotiation of trade matters with these countries presents difficulties, not only because of our refusal to discuss controls on strategic trade but also because of our lack of flexibility with respect to hindrances to non-strategic trade, such as the denial of tariff concessions to Soviet bloc countries as required by the Trade Agreement Extension of 1951PL. 50 (65 Stat. 72), approved June 15, 1951. and restrictions on trading in agricultural commodities which result from provisions of PL 480.Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 (68 Stat. 454), approved July 10, 1954. 14. Uncertainty of U.K. and French Policies. During the past year, and particularly in connection with the tripartite preparation for the Geneva Summit meeting, it became apparent that the British and French Governments did not share our strong convictions on the satellite question. They were anxious that the satellite issue not be raised or pressed at the Summit meeting, fearing that it might become an obstacle to progress in negotiations on other subjects. While there is no clear evidence that they would be as yet prepared to make any agreement which would have the effect of sanctioning the Communist regimes in the satellites, nevertheless they are not inclined to make positive statements, such as we have, indicating a firm position on the satellites. The U.S. is considering at this time approaching both the British and French Governments in order to seek acceptance on their parts of a position with respect to the satellites that is closer to the U.S. position and which would be reflected in their policy towards the satellites and their public statements. It would be particularly germane to take this up with the British prior to the Bulganin-Khrushchev visit to England. 50. Memorandum of Discussion at the 280th Meeting of the National Security Council, Washington, March 22, 1956Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Drafted by Gleason on March 28. Washington, March 22, 1956 [Here follow a paragraph listing the participants at the meeting and agenda items 1 and 2. In agenda item 2, “Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. Security”, Allen Dulles briefed the NSC on Khrushchev’s speech on Stalin at the Twentieth Party Congress; for text, see volume XXIV, page 72.] 3. United States Policy Toward the Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe and Exploitation of Soviet and European Satellite Vulnerabilities (Progress Report on NSC 174, dated February 29, 1956;Supra. Progress Report on NSC 5505/1, dated December 14, 1955;See footnote 2, supra. Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, subject: “Review of NSC Policy on Soviet European Satellites”, dated October 20, 1955Not printed. (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 174 Series) It transmitted a memorandum from Rockefeller to the OCB, September 30, requesting that the NSC Planning Board review NSC 174 and NSC 5505/1 in light of and subsequent to revisions on NSC 5501.) The Executive Secretary briefed the National Security Council on the contents of the two subject progress reports (copy of briefing note filed in the minutes of the meeting).Not found. Secretary Dulles was obliged to leave the meeting, and his place was taken by Under Secretary Hoover. At the end of his briefing, Mr. Lay suggested that Secretary Hoover might wish to add to his remarks. Secretary Hoover said that U.S. policy toward the Soviet satellites presented a difficult subject to come to grips with from a practical point of view. In trying to achieve the objectives of this U.S. policy, the Operations Coordinating Board had encountered extreme difficulty in devising effective courses of action. We had achieved very little in terms of concrete gains. Circumstances limited us to “playing for the breaks” and doing our best to maintain the morale of the populations of the satellite states. In any event, Secretary Hoover believed that it was desirable for both these policies to be reviewed by the NSC Planning Board, with particular reference to the events of the last few days. The President said that he had no quarrel with the verdict of those who had prepared the progress reports, but added that constant searching might conceivably reveal possible courses of action to achieve our objectives. We mustn’t be less aggressive in pursuing our objectives simply because we had thus far not achieved the progress we would like to see. Mr. Allen Dulles said that he was glad to hear the President speak these words. While, he said, there was no forward progress recorded in these progress reports, the fact that the Soviets have not succeeded in getting further than they have in their satellite states constituted a gain in some sense. Thus the hope of liberation had not yet been blotted out in the satellite populations. The President replied that history proved that no single country like Soviet Russia could really be successful in controlling indefinitely vast areas such as those comprised by the satellites unless, like ourselves, in an earlier era with the Indians, we virtually exterminated the population. The President added that it was essential that we keep the hope of liberation alive in the satellites as a force on our side. So we should keep up the good work and hope that the Soviet Union keeps encountering additional trouble in the satellites. In a certain sense Secretary Dulles had been right in his public statements that the Soviet Union had been obliged to change its tactics owing to the lack of success of their previous tactics. Secretary Hoover offered the opinion that there was one course of action at least in this area that the United States might pursue more actively. He referred to his February visit to Berlin,Under Secretary Hoover visited Berlin on February 5 to be the principal speaker at the ceremonies marking the tenth anniversary of the radio station RIAS (Radio in the American Sector) and to dedicate a local high school named in honor of his father, former President Herbert Hoover. While in West Germany, February 2–4, Hoover met with officials of the Federal Republic of Germany. and said that 90% of the East Germans would vote now for union with a free Germany. Accordingly, the United States should publicize what the Soviets have been guilty of doing in East Germany. It was a very weak spot in their armor. The President expressed the opinion that we should make West Berlin a “showcase of prosperity”, especially in terms of sending food, of which we have such a tremendous over-abundance. Let’s send them pork, beef, wheat, and rice—millions of dollars worth of it. Secretary Hoover informed the President that he had investigated this matter when he had been in Berlin. He had found the West Berliners very well fed and clothed. Moreover, they were proud that their situation had been achieved by their own efforts and exertions. West Berlin was the most completely anti-Communist place in the world. The National Security Council:Paragraphs a–c that follow constitute NSC Action No. 1530, approved by the President on March 23. (Department of State, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council) a. Noted and discussed the reference Progress Reports on the above subjects, and the recommendation in the enclosures to the reference memorandum of October 20, 1955, that the NSC Planning Board review NSC 174 and NSC 5505/1 in the light of and subsequent to revision of NSC 5501 (NSC 5501 superseded as of March 15, 1956, by NSC 5602/1). b. Directed the NSC Planning Board in the light of the discussion to prepare a revision of U.S. Policy Toward the Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe, to supersede NSC 174, with the understanding that East Germany will be dealt with primarily in relation to U.S. Policy Toward Germany following receipt of a forthcoming Progress Report by the Operations Coordinating Board on Germany, including East Germany and Berlin.Reference is to a Progress Report on NSC 174, not printed. (Ibid., S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 174 Series) c. Directed the NSC Planning Board to review NSC 5505/1 in the light of paragraph 6–c of NSC 5602/1For text of NSC 5602/1, “Basic National Security Policy,” March 15, 1956, see vol. XIX, p. 242. and submit such policy recommendations with respect thereto as may be appropriate. [Here follow the remaining agenda items.] S. Everett Gleason 51. Instruction From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/3–2856. Secret. Drafted by Lister and approved in EE, EUR, USIA, and P. Washington, March 28, 1956. A–199 SUBJECT American Relations with Poland Reference is made to Embassy despatch No. 238 of January 10, 1956,In despatch 238, Ambassador Jacobs reported on a continuing exchange of views between him and the British Ambassador in Warsaw as to the nature of Polish communism and the Polish Government. The British Ambassador, Sir Andrew Noble, held that a definite Polish policy was emerging in Warsaw, and the Western powers, particularly the United States and United Kingdom, should take advantage of the post-Geneva Conference relaxation of East-West tensions to support and encourage Warsaw’s independent policy, thus weakening Soviet domination of Poland. Ambassador Jacobs believed that encouraging the present Polish Government would mean bolstering the prestige of a regime which the United States publicly condemned. Jacobs held that the relaxation of Soviet control in Poland was only superficial; Poles still had no real freedom of action in foreign affairs. Such friendly overtures as suggested by Ambassador Noble in the fields of cultural, economic, political, information, and sports affairs, were, from Jacobs’ point of view, inadvisable at the present time. Attached to despatch 238 was a copy of Noble’s despatch to London outlining his policy suggestions. (Ibid., 641.48/1–1056) and to previous Embassy despatches and telegrams setting forth the views and recommendations of the Embassy, as well as those of the British Ambassador, with respect to our present relations with Poland and inviting the Department’s comments and guidance. The Embassy’s views as reported in despatches 76 of September 12, 1955In despatch 76, Ambassador Jacobs commented on the differences of opinion between him and Ambassador Noble along the lines of despatch 238. (Ibid., 611.00/9–1255) and 238 of January 10, 1956, and cogently expressed to Sir Andrew Noble on December 30, 1955,According to despatch 238, Noble and Jacobs had their main exchange of views on Poland on December 30. correspond in general to the Department’s position except as qualified by the following comments. It is the Department’s present belief that until or unless some basic and drastic change occurs, either in the nature of Soviet policies or in the power relationship between the Free World and the Soviet Bloc, Poland will continue to be ruled by men whose decisions are based primarily on their understanding and interpretation of the desires and intentions of the Kremlin. The Department views such manifestations of “relaxation” as the reorganization of the Polish security police, the recent “thaw” in Polish literature, and the Nowe Drogi reference to a Polish road to Socialism as significant and noteworthy changes in Communist tactics in Poland, but not as evidence of the emergence of an independent “Polish policy”, as that term is usually understood. Possibly these recent developments cannot be explained solely as window dressing attributable to: 1) Moscow’s desire for relaxation of international tension following Stalin’s death and in view of growing Western unity against Communist aggression; 2) the reconciliation with Tito and the Belgrade communiqué of last June; and 3) the President’s and the Secretary’s clear statements at Geneva that the satellites would be watched as a barometer of Soviet intentions. Nevertheless the Department has seen no proof of any fundamental relaxation in the real bases of Soviet power in Poland, namely Soviet Party, police and military controls, plus the overwhelming and encircling strength of the USSR. Thus, even making allowances for the many reservations and qualifications with which the British Ambassador has supported his analysis of present Soviet-Polish relations, the Department cannot agree with his basic thesis that a definite Polish policy independent of Moscow is now emerging. As indicated above, there are good reasons for both Moscow and Warsaw to encourage the Free World in various ways to hope and believe that Polish foreign and domestic policies are not controlled by Moscow and that the Polish Communists are pursuing a Polish policy of gradual but basic liberalization. Ambassador Winiewiez, for one, has long represented the Polish Government in exactly this light with great tact and personal charm. Occasionally these tactics bear fruit even with intelligent observers, as apparently occurred in the case of Hugh Delargy’s judgment and interpretation of the activities and motives of Boleslaw Piasecki (reference despatch 173 of November 22, 1955).In despatch 173, the Embassy referred to the view of British Labor M.P. Hugh Delargy, who had visited Poland in November 1955 to examine church–state relations, that Boleslaw Piasecki, a so-called Catholic collaborator with the Polish Government, was a courageous and formidable patriot. (Department of State, Central Files, 032/11–2255) The British Ambassador’s opinions and recommendations, on the other hand, may have arisen not so much from a real misunderstanding of the situation in Poland as from a hope of finding something a little more satisfying than simple unqualified and “unconstructive” opposition to the Soviet and Polish Communist authorities. However, the Department is by no means in agreement with the argument that there is no alternative between accepting present Polish policy as independent or semi-independent and, on the other hand, abandoning all attempts at flexibility and maneuver and simply dismissing the Poles “as permanent vassals of the Kremlin and therefore not worth much attention” (reference paragraph 7 of the enclosure to despatch 238 of January 10, 1956). The Department feels with Sir Andrew that the overwhelming majority of Poles are still anti-Communist and deserving and potentially very useful allies of the Free World (although continued Communist rule may change this situation more rapidly than the Ambassador now foresees). Moreover, not only is Poland the Soviet Union’s most important East European satellite, politically and strategically, but it is also clear that American policy towards the Warsaw regime is closely linked to our relations with the USSR and can affect and influence these relations in many ways. For exactly this reason it is essential that the shadow of the recent “thaw” in Poland not be accepted as the substance of a genuine Soviet withdrawal. The Department has stated repeatedly that it is not reconciled to the continued enslavement of Poland and other Eastern European countries by the USSR and strenuous efforts are being made, and will be continued, to encourage as well as to inform the Polish people despite the artificial barriers imposed by Moscow. Developments in Poland will be followed and studied as closely and objectively as possible and consolidation and extension of Communist power and prestige in that country will be opposed within the limits, and by the methods, prescribed by Soviet-Free World relations. Policy will be flexible but realistically based on the main course of Communist performance and on the essentials of Communist power rather than on its more superficial aspects or on the hope of luring the present Polish Communist leaders away from Moscow by concessions or “friendship”. The Department will be guided by the conviction that a firm and realistic policy vis-à-vis Soviet rule in the satellites will eventually yield more results than attempts at appeasement or cooperation with Polish Communists. Furthermore, the Department believes that the situation in Poland is by no means frozen and that it would be a mistake to adopt frozen attitudes which failed to take cognizance of potential fluidity and any incipient signs and trends of development favorable to the United States. It is a firm postulate of United States foreign policy, confirmed at the highest level of this Government, to seek to promote evolutionary changes in the policies and conduct of the Soviet and satellite regimes which will be in United States interest. In so doing, it will of course be desirable to influence these regimes toward the choice of those alternative lines of action which, while in their national interests, do not conflict with those of the United States. With respect to Poland this means among other things that we should be ready to encourage and foster any bona fide tendencies toward independence and national freedom from Moscow which may reveal themselves in Party and official circles. As indicated above, we do not intend to accept, or make concessions to, a sham independence nor do we intend to make concessions in the hope that the Warsaw regime might some day seek independence from Moscow. But were there any bona fide signs of a favorable development, we should of course shape our actions in cognizance thereof. Also we believe that it would even be appropriate to take suitable actions in hope of stimulating an independent Polish policy, insofar as such actions did not represent concessions on our part nor serve to enhance the prestige of the existing regime. We believe that the personal relations of our diplomatic representatives with Polish officials may have a certain flexibility as a consequence of this consideration. Thus, although the Department does not believe that the USSR is relinquishing any basic controls in Poland, or is planning to do so in the future, it is apparent that developments in Poland and Polish public opinion are factors to be taken into consideration in determining American policy and that the continuation of Soviet rule in Poland need not deprive American policy and Embassy activity of all significance or flexibility. Some comments on various aspects of Polish-American relations touched upon in recent Embassy communications are set forth below. It is hardly necessary to point out that most of these cannot be regarded as hard and fast rules applicable under all circumstances and must in the last analysis depend to a very great degree upon the Embassy’s judgment of any given situation. VOA Broadcasts: The Department is opposed to “softening” the content or tone of VOA broadcasts to Poland in the hope that the Polish Government might reduce or abandon jamming. Presumably the Polish authorities would not sanction so extreme a measure unless VOA programs were drastically altered and such a change would be exceedingly difficult to explain or justify to Polish listeners. At the same time the Polish Government would no longer bear the onus of jamming and there would be a strong implication that similar changes were justified in all VOA as well as RFE and other Free World programs to Eastern Europe. Contrary to Communist allegations, VOA Polish language broadcasts do not indulge in simple vituperation and haranguing and they do give recognition to postwar achievements in Poland, although these are rightly attributed to the efforts and sacrifices of the Polish people rather than to those of the Communist authorities. The present VOA policy is to inform and encourage the Polish people, in vigorous, expressive and explicit language, without deliberate misrepresentation or incitement to open and fruitless resistance. Any fundamental and genuine liberalization of Communist controls in Poland would of course be duly praised and encouraged in VOA broadcasts. But the Department feels it would be extremely unwise to appear sensitive to Communist complaints and maneuvers against VOA, which constitute in a way the best proof of its effectiveness. Present differences in subject matter and tone among VOA, BBC, RFE and other Free World programs appear to have little significance and are probably even desirable in that they afford the listener some selection to suit his preference. However, it would unquestionably be helpful for Moscow’s propaganda purposes if (as appears now in no way likely) BBC Polish broadcasts were sweetened to an extent which would obviate Communist jamming. The Department is presently considering the advisability of increasing VOA Polish-language broadcast time in view of Poland’s relative importance in the Soviet system and in response to the inauguration of Warsaw’s “Radio Kraj” service. Exchange and Dissemination of Information: There is no reason to believe that the tremendous disparity between information available to this Government in Poland and to the Polish Government in America will be overcome or even significantly modified within the near future. Nevertheless the Department would prefer to maintain reciprocity in exchanges of information through formal channels, and the Embassy should therefore continue to refer official requests for Government publications or information of any importance to Washington, even though the Embassy will usually be the channel of ultimate distribution in Poland. Naturally this rule need not, and should not, be applied to all official inquiries. Possibly it would have been both useful and appropriate for the Embassy to provide or promise the Polish Press Agency representative mentioned in Embassy despatch 57 of August 30, 1955Not printed. (Ibid., 948.62/8–3055) suitable general unclassified data on American economic and cultural achievements. Decisions in such cases must depend on the Embassy’s judgment of the particular situation. In general, Iron Curtain countries should not be provided with technical information or other useful data without securing some substantial quid pro quo. On the other hand, it would seem desirable to furnish whatever unclassified material is available in the Embassy including Government publications, reflecting political or economic and social progress in America. If no objection is perceived it is suggested that the Embassy resume sending American publications directly to Polish addresses (reference despatch 76). The Embassy’s despatch 161 of November 8, 1955Not printed. (Ibid., 024.648/11–855) provided an example of what appears to be a good opportunity for useful informational activity. Possibly Polish material of some value could be obtained for the American agricultural publications and dictionary, although reciprocity in such cases would not be necessary.The Department of Agriculture states it forwarded the agricultural publications requested in despatch 161 on March 26. [Footnote in the source text.] As regards private, informal requests for unclassified information, the Department feels that they should not only be fulfilled by the Embassy whenever feasible but that every appropriate opportunity should be utilized for the casual distribution of suitable reading material. The Department was pleased to note the Embassy’s work in this field as reported in despatches 186 of December 5, 1955In despatch 186, the Embassy reported it was providing American popular publications on a handout basis to persons who could make the best use of them and who would pass them on to others. (Department of State, Central Files, 511.482/12–555) and 236 of January 10, 1956In despatch 236, the Embassy requested guidance on the informal request of a Polish Foreign Ministry official for a commercial showing of a Walt Disney film. (Ibid., 511.485/11–1555) and hopes that this type of distribution can gradually be expanded. As the Embassy is aware the Polish Embassy in Washington conducts many informational and propaganda activities, including the preparation and distribution of press releases, the distribution of magazines, pamphlets and books, and the promotion of exhibits depicting Polish cultural achievements. So far as can be ascertained this propaganda work has enjoyed relatively little success in America and rather than attempting to curtail it it is hoped that it may serve as a justification, or if need be a bargaining point, for increasing similar Embassy activity in Poland. To achieve this purpose it is believed that it would be preferable not to make a formal request of the Polish authorities to reopen a USIA office or library in Warsaw, at least at this time, but rather to increase the Embassy’s informal activities in this line under circumstances in which the Poles would find it awkward or embarrassing to protest. Perhaps it would therefore be desirable to cease referring Polish inquirers to the Polish Embassy in Washington because of the closure of Embassy informational activities in 1951. For the Embassy’s information there is now being assembled an exhibit of some 100–150 carefully selected photographs taken in America during the last ten years. Within the near future the Polish authorities will be asked to indicate where and when the exhibit can be shown in Warsaw, Krakow and other cities. In the event permission is refused the Department will consider the advisability of requesting, with suitable publicity, the Polish Embassy to withdraw its exhibits from this country. A representative of the Museum of Modern Art has recently been discussing with Soviet officials the possibility of sending an American art exhibit to Moscow this year (reference Embassy telegram 353 of December 11, 1955).Not printed. (Ibid., 748.00/9–2856) Thus far to the Department’s knowledge no decision has been reached. It is quite possible that if the Polish Government agrees such an exhibit would be sent to Warsaw following Moscow. Despatch 167 of November 15, 1955Not printed. (Ibid., 511.485/11–1555) reported Polish interest in showing The Living Desert, a suggestion which was properly referred to the Walt Disney Corporation in New York. The Department should be advised of any future inquiries of this nature so that it may also, if it wishes, get in touch with the American firm concerned. The Department is now discussing the general subject of American pictures behind the Curtain with the Motion Pictures Association. It is hoped that additional films will be forthcoming from the Department of Agriculture and USIA (reference despatch 283 of February 7, 1956). It may be desirable to prepare Polish sound tracks for two or three of the most appropriate and request the Polish authorities to give them wide popular distribution rather than restricting them to official and technical circles. It had been hoped that more success would be achieved this year than last in connection with an exhibit for the Poznan Fair. However, as the Embassy has already been informed, it has not proved possible to complete arrangements for American participation. Exchange of Persons and Groups: The Department hopes that any future exchanges of persons and groups will have some relevance and advantage from our point of view and not lend themselves to interpretation by Communist propaganda as indicative of relaxation of tension and further recognition of the Polish Government and the status quo. For this reason the Department would prefer to avoid exchanges on the official level and to concentrate on private individuals and small groups in the fields of culture, education, sports, etc. Obviously it will not be desirable to leave the initiative in suggesting and selecting exchanges to the Polish Government, and the possibilities of exploiting defections or Polish refusals to accept invitations should be taken into account. The Porgy and Bess visit to Poland appears to have served a useful purpose and the Halina Czerny-Stefanska tour in America boomeranged against Warsaw to some extent because of the protests and adverse publicity which arose when Communist propaganda linked her performances with the Mickiewicz celebrations. The Department feels that any good effects of air force or military visits of the type suggested by the British Ambassador would be more than offset by Polish Communist propaganda exploitation designed to increase the prestige of the Warsaw regime. Nor does the Department favor extending invitations to top ranking Polish agricultural representatives to duplicate the visit of their Soviet counterparts. The Department has no reliable information on what plans, if any, are being made to bring the Mazowsze ensemble here. Credits and Trade Restrictions: The Department is opposed to granting credits to Poland at the present time and there seems to be little likelihood of a further relaxation of trade restrictions within the near future. Dulles 52. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.69/4–356. Secret. Drafted by Robert C. Hill (EE) and cleared by Stevens (EE) and Beam (EUR). Washington, April 3, 1956. SUBJECT US Position on Re-establishment of Diplomatic Relations with Bulgaria Discussion: You will recall that in 1953 you concurred in the Department’s determination that, on balance, the interests of the US would best be served by a resumption of diplomatic relations with Bulgaria. Further action was suspended at that time, however, when Congressional leaders consulted on the issue expressed opposition.The question of a possible resumption of diplomatic relations with Bulgaria and Congressional opposition to such a move was discussed by the National Security Council at its 177th meeting on December 23, 1953. For an extract from the memorandum of discussion, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, p. 127. In a recent development the Bulgarian Government has indicated through its Legation in Paris that it is now prepared to propose formally that diplomatic relations be resumed. This development, representing a departure from Bulgaria’s previous insistence that the US make the first move, appears to reflect an eagerness on the part of the Bulgarian Government to normalize relations with various countries including the US following Bulgaria’s recent admission into the UN. After careful re-examination of the issue in the light of these considerations it is again recommended that a resumption of relations would be in the interests of the US. This view is expressed in the attached Position Paper (Tab A) which concludes with a series of recommendations for a course of action. The recommendations may be summarized as follows: 1) As the minimum price for agreeing to open negotiations for a resumption of relations the US should require that the Bulgarian Government state, without reference to its previous charges of US responsibility for the suspension of relations in 1950, that it desires to resume relations with the US, and is prepared to observe traditional rules of diplomatic intercourse. This might be done in the form of a note for release to the press, or in a public statement by the Bulgarian Government. 2) If the Bulgarian Government accepts those conditions we should seek through negotiation to obtain agreement on the following points: a) the re-establishment of relations should be effected in two stages, at first through an exchange of chargés d’affaires and subsequently, if conditions warrant, through an exchange of ministers with normal representation; b) the Bulgarian Government will provide written guarantees specifying in detail that our mission will not be subjected to harassment and will be permitted to operate according to the usual rules of diplomatic intercourse; c) the Bulgarian Government will agree to open negotiations, to begin after the exchange of chargés d’affaires, with a view to settlement of certain outstanding problems, notably the status of US citizens in Bulgaria and the settlement of outstanding US claims against Bulgaria. When the attached paper was circulated for comment, ARA (Mr. Holland), FE (Mr. Sebald), and P (Mr. McCardle) expressed dissent. ARA notedThe arguments against reestablishment of relations put forth by ARA are contained in a memorandum from Assistant Secretary Henry F. Holland to Robert Newbegin, Director of the Office of Middle American Affairs and Maurice M. Bernbaum, Director of the Office of South American Affairs, February 24, which was attached to a memorandum from Bernbaum to Holland, also February 24. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.69/2–2456) that in its view a resumption of relations with Bulgaria would constitute a dangerous precedent for Latin American countries not now having diplomatic relations with the Soviet bloc, and FE expressed similar apprehensions with respect to countries in its area. P observed that such a development might weaken resistance groups in Bulgaria and that it might place us in an embarrassing position should the Bulgarian Government at some later date renege on assurances of proper conduct given in order to bring about a resumption of relations. The apprehensions reflected in these views were discussed at a meeting in my office in which representatives from the areas concerned participated.No other record of this meeting has been found in Department of State files. It was noted that the US currently maintains relations with four Soviet satellites in Eastern Europe, and would merely be completing the pattern of its representation in that area by resuming relations with Bulgaria. Any illusion that a return to Sofia would constitute acceptance of the Soviet-dominated Bulgarian regime could be dispelled by our information media, and could be explained in Latin American countries and elsewhere through our diplomatic missions. It might be noted that Argentina has for several years maintained diplomatic relations with Bulgaria and other Soviet satellites in Eastern Europe. As for the possibility of a lack of good faith in negotiations it is to be hoped that the Bulgarians particularly have learned that there is a limit to our patience. It was therefore concluded that although certain risks must be recognized, the advantages to be gained by the US through a resumption of relations with Bulgaria, on the favorable terms which now appear available to us, outweigh the disadvantages. It was agreed that Congressional leaders should be consulted before any formal negotiations looking toward a resumption of relations are undertaken. It was further agreed that the governments of the Balkan Pact countries (Yugoslavia, Greece and Turkey) should be informed of our intended action. These governments, as well as the governments of France, Great Britain and Italy, have already been told informally of the Bulgarian approach in Paris. Reactions were generally favorable to a resumption of US-Bulgarian diplomatic relations. The Yugoslav Acting Foreign Minister, Mr. Prica, told our Ambassador in Belgrade that in his view the approach marked a favorable development in which he was certain his government would be much interested; he added that the approach appeared to be another step in satellite policy to normalize relations with the West, and that he was inclined to think tolerable conditions could now be arranged in Sofia. Recommendation: That you approve the proposed course of action with respect to the re-establishment of diplomatic relations with Bulgaria outlined above,According to a note from Fisher Howe to Murphy’s Special Assistant, W. Tapley Bennett, April 11, attached to the source text, Murphy noted that at the Secretary’s Staff Meeting of April 11, the Secretary gave tacit approval to this memorandum. Murphy took it upon himself to decide that any action leading to reestablishment of relations with Bulgaria should be deferred for at least a few months. (Department of State, Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75) as set forth in detail in the attached Position Paper (Tab A). [Attachment] POSITION PAPERSecret. Drafted by Hill and cleared by Stevens. SUBJECT Re-establishment of US Diplomatic Relations with Bulgaria Problem: Recent indications that the Bulgarian Government, after being admitted to membership in the United Nations, is now prepared to take the initiative in steps leading to a re-establishment of diplomatic relations, makes it desirable and timely for the United States to review its position on the advantages and disadvantages of such a development. Background: Diplomatic relations with Bulgaria were suspended on February 20, 1950 after the Bulgarian Government had refused to withdraw a note which accused the American Minister in Sofia of subversive activity and declared him persona non grata. The rupture had been preceded, however, by a series of indignities and restrictions, including 1) false charges against American mission personnel, 2) intimidation and persecution of local employees, 3) delays in the issuance of visas for American replacement personnel, and 4) increasingly severe travel and housing restrictions. As a consequence of these measures the effectiveness of the American Legation in Sofia had already been severely curtailed when the note demanding the Minister’s recall was received. The note itself, therefore, which purported to be based on testimony produced at the “show trial” in December 1949 of Traicho Kostov, a former Bulgarian Communist leader and alleged “Titoist”, served only to bring to a climax a deterioration in relations which had begun more than two years earlier. It was believed at the time that the suspension of relations might demonstrate to Soviet leaders that there was a limit to our patience and might result, at least temporarily, in some improvement in the treatment accorded our missions in other Soviet bloc countries. During the months following, however, the Communists unfolded a series of “show trials” intended to lower the prestige of the US in the area, and they imposed increasingly severe restrictions on the activity of our missions in satellite capitals. For its part, the Bulgarian Government reacted to the suspension with further attacks on the American mission, disclaimed all responsibility for the suspension, and alleged that the American withdrawal served merely to support the charges advanced during the Kostov, and subsequently the Shipkov trials. Although this belligerence later abated, Bulgarian officials have persisted in the view that the lack of relations which resulted from the suspension was not their fault. This view has been expressed as recently as December 31, 1955, in an address by the Bulgarian Prime Minister and Party leader, Vulko Chervenkov. A shift in the Bulgarian attitude toward the rupture appeared in 1953, after the death of Stalin, when Bulgarian officials let it be known through French diplomatic circles in Sofia that their country would welcome a resumption of relations with the US. These sentiments were subsequently confirmed in two public addresses by Chervenkov. In view of these “feelers” the question was examined in the Department and the determination made that, on balance, US interests would best be served by resuming relations and re-establishing a mission in Sofia. It was subsequently decided, however, after Congressional leaders consulted by the Department had expressed firmly adverse reactions, that any movement in the direction of renewed diplomatic relations at that time was premature. Accordingly, no action was taken, and the matter was left dormant during 1954 and most of 1955. It was only revived after Bulgaria’s entry into the UN, when a Bulgarian diplomatic representative in Paris called on the Deputy Chief of Mission at the American Embassy, indicated informally that he wished to raise the question of resuming relations, and acknowledged that he was doing so on the specific instructions of his government. This representative subsequently declared that his Government intended to transmit a note to the Embassy which would formally propose that diplomatic relations between the US and Bulgaria be resumed. Discussion: As this chronology indicates, the Bulgarian Government’s public attitude toward diplomatic relations has altered considerably during the past five years. The vituperative attacks of 1950 have given way gradually to a milder approach which, in its most recent manifestation in Paris, reveals a willingness now on the part of Bulgaria actually to take the initiative in seeking to resume relations with the US. This change may also be reflected in current Bulgarian efforts to achieve a normalization of relations with Greece and other countries with which such relations were previously strained or non-existent. The considerations which in 1953 had influenced the Department’s position concerning the desirability of resuming relations with Bulgaria, and which with some modifications still prevail, include the following: 1) intelligence acquisition, 2) desirability of having American representatives on the spot should any development of major significance take place in Bulgaria, 3) protection of US citizens and US property in Bulgaria, 4) possible furtherance of nationalistic aspirations, and 5) demonstration of continuing American interest in the welfare of the Bulgarian people. Bulgarian membership in the UN, and the presence in this country of a Bulgarian UN delegation provides, moreover, a new element which can be regarded as an anomaly in the absence of diplomatic relations. No one of these considerations alone is enough to justify a resumption of relations. . . . Lack of US representation in Sofia has the further adverse effect of reducing our capacity to exploit promptly and effectively any development of major significance comparable, for example, to the Yugoslav defection of 1948, and prevents the US from having a source of guidance useful in political formulation and propaganda evaluation. By its absence, moreover, the US is precluded from following with optimum vigilance Bulgaria’s reaction to the recent Yugoslav-Soviet rapprochement, a development of particular importance to this area in view of Bulgaria’s traditional ties with Yugoslavia. It will be recalled that Tito’s expulsion from the Cominform was in part predicated on his continued support for a South Slav Federation which had earlier been advocated by the late Bulgarian Communist leader, Dimitrov, and the Kostov trial which led directly to the suspension of US-Bulgarian diplomatic relations had also featured the alleged heresy of the South Slav Federation, denounced by the Kremlin in 1948. An improvement in Yugoslav-Bulgarian relations might bring about a revival of the idea of the Federation and should therefore have the closest attention of the US. As for other US interests, it is noted that not more than 40 Americans, all believed to be dual nationals, now reside in Bulgaria, and our experience in other satellites shows that the assistance which might be offered them even if there were an American mission in Sofia would be very limited. The US Government nevertheless has an obligation to do all in its power to protect and assist these unfortunate people; the absence of a diplomatic mission, and the consequent lack of consular services (even though these are in part furnished by the US protecting power, Switzerland) handicaps US efforts on behalf of its nationals. With respect, finally, to the question of demonstrating US interest in the welfare of the Bulgarian people and promoting nationalistic aspirations through the re-establishment of diplomatic relations, some differences of opinion are inevitable. It appears, however, that, on balance, and provided it were accomplished on terms favorable to the US, a re-establishment of relations would be useful in the furtherance of US objectives with regard to the sympathies of the Bulgarian people. It could also provide a means for giving encouragement to nationalistic (Titoist) tendencies which might develop among Bulgarian leaders. There is, of course, some danger that other nations—and some elements of the Bulgarian people—might interpret a re-establishment of relations as a mark of US approval of the regime. It should be clear, however, from our words and deeds with respect to other Communist countries of Eastern Europe with which we now maintain diplomatic relations, that the US does not approve the Kremlin-dominated regimes now in power. In the case of Bulgaria, moreover, we are not establishing relations but merely resuming them after receiving assurances that the situation which led to the suspension in 1950 has been corrected. The question may arise that a resumption of relations with Communist Bulgaria would be inconsistent with US policy against the establishment of relations by countries of South America and Africa with the USSR. It does not appear, however, that any such inconsistency exists. The USSR is the prime mover in the Communist field which seeks to extend its influence wherever possible; Bulgaria is but one of the lesser appendages of the Soviet apparatus. In the re-establishment of diplomatic contact with Bulgaria, moreover, the US is simply completing a part in the over-all pattern of its Eastern European relationships. It is of course evident from the eagerness with which the Bulgarian Government apparently seeks to resume relations that it, too, would expect to gain, presumably in prestige and general acceptability in the family of nations. This gain, however, would not appear to be as significant as that which would result for the US. The Bulgarian initiative in seeking a resumption of relations as expressed in Paris suggests that Bulgaria might be willing now to pay a price to achieve its goal. The recent Greek experience also suggests an approach which could be utilized with profit by the US. The Greeks agreed first to resuming relations with limited representation headed by a chargé d’affaires, with the understanding that full representation would depend upon the settlement of certain outstanding issues including Greek compensation claims against Bulgaria. Although these issues have not yet been settled, the Bulgarian Government has recently shown such eagerness to achieve full normalization that it may yet meet Greek demands. Meanwhile, Greece has obtained many of the advantages of diplomatic relations without appreciable loss of prestige or bargaining position. This experience is reflected in the recommendations below. Recommendations: The following recommendations are made: 1) The US should avoid being drawn into making a move by which it would appear that it has taken the initiative, but the Bulgarian démarche in Paris should be encouraged. 2) The Bulgarian representative in Paris should be informed,In telegram 4050 to Paris, April 30. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.69/4–3056) a) that the US agrees that a resumption of diplomatic relations could be of mutual benefit to the two countries, but that, b) in view of the circumstances which led up to the suspension of relations in 1950, the US is understandably reluctant to enter into renewed contact with the Bulgarian Government unless it can first be assured that the Bulgarian Government is now prepared to observe traditional rules of diplomatic intercourse and show a proper respect for the immunities customarily accorded diplomatic representatives. 3) When the foregoing position has been established the American representative should suggest orally that as a first step toward opening formal negotiations the US would desire a formal statement from the Bulgarian Government which would cover the following points: a) specific withdrawal of Bulgarian charges against the American Minister which resulted in the suspension of relations, b) acknowledgement of Bulgarian responsibility for the abuses which led to the suspension, c) a statement of the desire of the Bulgarian Government to resume diplomatic relations with the US, d) assurance that the Bulgarian Government is prepared to observe the traditional rules of diplomatic intercourse, and e) the omission of any reference to previous charges that the US was responsible for the suspension of relations in 1950. These points may be made either in a public statement to be issued by the Bulgarian Government or one of its leaders, or in a note to be addressed to the US Government, it being understood that the note will be made public. Should the Bulgarians seek a modification of these conditions the situation thus created would have to be reconsidered by the US. 4) If the Bulgarian Government meets these demands either in a note or public announcement, the US should reply that it is prepared to enter into negotiations with a view to resuming diplomatic relations. The Bulgarian initiative and the US response should be released to the press. The negotiations, however, should be conducted in secret and agreement on this point should be reached with the Bulgarian representatives prior to the formal opening of negotiations. 5) In negotiations, presumably in Paris, undertaken to explore the possibility of any re-establishment of diplomatic relations with Bulgaria, the US should seek agreement with Bulgaria on the following points: a) the re-establishment of relations should be effected in two stages, at first through an exchange of chargés d’affaires, and subsequently, if conditions warrant, through an exchange of ministers with normal representation; b) the US will expect suitable guarantees in writing that its mission will not be subjected to harassment and will be permitted to operate freely according to the usual rules of diplomatic intercourse, such guarantees to include specific reference to provisions for adequate housing, minimum travel restrictions, prompt issuance of visas for US Legation personnel, and freedom from intimidation and persecution for local employees; c) the Bulgarian Government should give its agreement prior to the exchange of chargés d’affaires that it will undertake further negotiations in Sofia through the US chargé d’affaires to be assigned there, with a view to settlement of problems concerning i) the status of US citizens who may visit Bulgaria or who are presently residing there, and ii) the settlement of outstanding US claims against Bulgaria. 6) Provided the Bulgarian Government accepts these prior conditions, the US will agree to the re-establishment of relations, and will dispatch a small Legation staff to Sofia headed by a chargé d’affaires, which will be authorized to conduct the further negotiations concerning the status of US citizens and US claims mentioned in sub-paragraph c), above. Further representation, including an exchange of ministers, would depend upon the outcome of these negotiations and the conduct of the Bulgarian Government toward the US chargé d’affaires in Sofia and his staff. 53. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/4–51256. Confidential. Repeated to Tehran. Budapest, April 12, 1956—6 p.m. 385. Legation strongly endorses Ambassador Chapin’s proposals to take advantage Rajk trial disavowalsOn March 27, Rákosi announced that the case of Hungarian Communist leader Laszlo Rajk, who was tried, found guilty, and executed in 1949 for allegedly working for the CIA and Yugoslav secret police, had been reviewed and Rajk was being posthumously exonerated and rehabilitated. to force issue re Mindszenty,József Cardinal Mindszenty, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Esztergom and Prince-Primate of Hungary, was arrested in Budapest on December 27, 1948, and charged with attempting to overthrow the Hungarian state, treason, and currency violations. Mindszenty along with six codefendents was tried on February 3–4, 1949, found guilty, and sentenced to life imprisonment. to clear US Government officials involved in those procedures and, through extension, to bring new pressure to bear to gain release all Hungarian employees of Legation still imprisoned (Deptel 243).In this telegram, April 6, the Department repeated to Budapest Chapin’s proposals contained in telegram 1518 from Tehran, April 3, and asked for the Legation’s comments. In his telegram, Chapin wrote: “I suggest that by extension, case could now be made for impugning entire procedure and testimony Mindszenty trial, emphasizing the complete fabrication of alleged USG involvement and calling for release of Cardinal. Stress might be put on obvious inconsistency of allegations that US was involved at one and same time in restoration Hapsburg Dynasty and working with Tito re his Balkan Federation plans. As admitted by Rajk in his trial, there might also be some propaganda value in requesting a retraction of accusations in both trials made against me as American Minister on evidence which at least in Rajk trial would seem admitted by Hungarian Government to be falsified.” (Department of State, Central Files, 746.00/4–356) In Legation’s view situation obtaining here at moment is riper for exploitation than it ever has been. Rakosi is clearly having his difficulties. Whatever his standing in Moscow, he is facing mounting antagonism from his old right wing opponents and growing opposition from some of his late followers here and, with his personal prestige probably at an all-time low, resulting situation is highly volatile. Moreover, Rakosi’s Stalinist background, his unsavory record and his current political acrobatics make him an extremely vulnerable target. A carefully prepared diplomatic offensive with coordinated propaganda exploitation could not only provide his opponents with valuable ammunition but possibly even render his position untenable in eyes of Moscow. Even failing latter objective, it would appear inadmissible for US fail take total advantage opportunities now open for exacerbating internal dissension and promoting already existing dissaffection towards Rakosi. On international level, Legation also believes that Hungary today offers US and west their most vulnerable target for purposes demonstrating to world at large wide contradiction between what Communists are professing and what practicing, and also real under-the-surface leaning of recent tactical shifts. Case histories of what being carried out here with left hand while right is distributing “peaceful coexistence” leaflets are so striking as to present a most convincing picture if properly exploited. Above considerations prompted recommendations contained Legation telegrams 374 and 375.In telegrams 374 and 375, April 3 and 4, the Legation suggested using recent harassment and arrest of Legation personnel by Hungarian secret police as the basis of a protest to the Hungarian Government that these actions were not in keeping with supposedly improving Hungarian-American relations. (Ibid., 120.162164/4–356 and 123–Tiedtke, Fred, respectively) If moves suggested therein were closely followed by presentation notes incorporating ideas suggested by Chapin and whole offensive properly orchestrated, Legation believes that great deal could be accomplished both on internal and international levels. Legation strongly of opinion that, in any event, Rakosi should not be permitted write end to Rajk affair at point he has chosen and we hope, therefore, that Department will see its way clear to move forward promptly in effort wring advantage from opportunities which recent events have opened to US. To be most effective, Chapin suggestions would appear require rather careful research project to provide background for selection most telling quotations, which due absence files here covering this period, can probably be best done by Department. Ravndal 54. Report by the Operations Coordinating Board to the National Security CouncilSource: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 86 Series. Secret. Concurred in by the OCB on April 18 for transmission to the NSC, according to an attached memorandum from Staats to Lay, April 26. Washington, April 18, 1956. PROGRESS REPORT ON U.S. POLICY TOWARD SOVIET BLOC ESCAPEES (NSC 86/1—U.S. Policy on Soviet and Satellite Defectors)This report concerns all U.S. activities under NSC 86/1, except those concerning “defectors” under NSCID 13 and 14 under the purview of the IAC agencies. [Footnote in the source text. National Security Council Intelligence Directive 13, January 19, 1950, “Exploitation of Soviet and Satellite Defectors Outside the United States,” and NSCID 14, March 3, 1950, “Exploitation of Defectors and Other Citizens within the United States,” are ibid., S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95.] (Policy Approved by the President April 19, 1951) (Period Covered: December 17, 1954 through April 18, 1956) A. Listing of Major Developments During the Period 1. Soviet Campaign on Demoralization. During the period covered the Soviet bloc launched a campaign to demoralize anti-communist escapees and to induce them to return to Soviet-controlled territory. On April 13, 1955 the OCB initiated a program to counter the Soviet effort, calling for (a) increased material assistance to escapees, (b) a propaganda counter-offensive, and (c) protection and security of the émigrés 2. Austrian Policy of Asylum. An article proposed by the USSR for inclusion in the Austrian Treaty which would have jeopardized a large number (upward of 35,000) of Soviet orbit refugees in Austria was successfully opposed, thus continuing asylum and care for escapees in Austria. 3. Refugee Relief Program.See footnote 6, Document 35. By April 13, 1956 the Refugee Relief Program had issued 13,131 visas to former Soviet orbit nationals, 7,531 of whom had actually reached the United States. Priority was given to cases presented by the U.S. Escapee Program which had produced 12,673 assurances of employment up to March 1, 1956 under an expanded assurance search project. 4. Yugoslav Refugees. On April 13, 1955 the OCB approved a recommendation to limit assistance to Yugoslav refugees to 15 per cent of the total budget of USEP, replacing an earlier limitation of 20 per cent of the total number of new arrivals accepted by the Escapee Program. 5. Resettlement. By March 1, 1956, 9,327 persons were resettled by the Escapee Program, excluding the Far East, and the caseload increased from 28,647 in December 1954 to 29,705 on March 1, 1956. Further assistance has been rendered to USSR nationals in recognition of their importance to U.S. objectives and a limited program of assistance was conducted in the Far East. 6. Lodge Act.The Alien Enlistment Act, PL. 597 (64 Stat 316), approved June 30, 1950. Since its inception in June 1950, 976 enlistments have been accepted by the Alien Enlistee Program under the Lodge Act, and the program has received some exploitation by information media. 7. OCB Review of Assistance Programs. A report was considered by OCB on April 18, 1956 concerning programs of assistance in behalf of refugees and escapees of interest under NSC 86/1.Attached to the source text, but not printed. The OCB concurred in courses of action to obtain greater efforts by friendly foreign governments and inter-governmental organizations, priority attention to iron curtain escapees under the Refugee Relief Program, and increased use of surplus agricultural commodities and counterpart funds in refugee programs. The courses of action further provide that the U.S. Escapee Program (State) be continued under present policy directives to provide supplemental assistance, that consideration be given by the Department of State to establishment of a central point for refugee matters, and that a high-level public statement of continuing U.S. interest in the refugee problem be made at the first propitious moment. The Report on Assistance Programs is attached to this Progress Report for information of the NSC. 8. Information Programs. U.S. Information programs have placed emphasis on U.S. concern for welfare of escapees and the captive peoples in the Soviet orbit. More particularly, these programs have sought to encourage defection of Soviet and key satellite nationals, to assure escapees that they can live a constructive life in the free world, and to exploit the fact of escape to spread disaffection within the Soviet bloc. B. Summary Statement of Operating Progress in Relation to Major NSC Objectives 9. Operating Progress. U.S. programs concerning escapees and defectors have made a continuing contribution toward achievement of general U.S. objectives with respect to the USSR. . . . 10. Continuing Basic Validity of Policy. Basic U.S. policy and objectives concerning Soviet and satellite defectors as set out in Paragraphs 1 through 6 of NSC 86/1 continue to be valid in the light of the current world situation and despite the fact that there have been numerous significant developments since the acceptance of NSC 86/1 in April 1951. The intensity of the Soviet anti-emigration campaign evidences the sensitivity of Soviet leaders to the U.S. policy regarding defectors and escapees. The policies in NSC 86/1 have been reviewed and found to conform with the basic national security policies in NSC 5602/1.For text of NSC 5602/1, “Basic National Security Policy,” March 15, see vol. XIX, p. 242. 11. Soviet Counter Action. While the above holds true, the Soviet anti-emigration campaign, which in part is a counter measure to NSC 86/1, has been carefully calculated to challenge the ability of the United States to achieve its objectives under NSC 86/1 by exploiting the main weaknesses in the Western position, namely, (a) the limiting of the extension of asylum and the low standard of assistance to refugees in practice in certain areas; (b) unsatisfactory and demoralizing status of some earlier Soviet bloc refugees; and (c) uncertainty among refugees about the constancy of Western interest and support in the light of current East-West political developments. C. Major Problems or Areas of Difficulty 12. Soviet Bloc Efforts to Demoralize the Emigration. In apparent recognition of the damage to Soviet prestige resulting from an articulate anti-communist emigration and their activities in such organizations as the Voice of America, Committee for Free Europe, Radio Liberation, and the U.S. Escapee Program, Soviet bloc countries have launched a far-reaching program against the escapees. This campaign has included radio broadcasts, publications, personal appeals, chain letters, formal proclamations of amnesty, and isolated examples of personal violence against important individual escapees. The results have been a lowering of morale among escapees, the actual return and subsequent communist exploitation of some, and a decrease in willingness to cooperate in U.S. informational and political programs. 13. Sovereignty of Germany and Austria. The regaining of sovereignty by Germany and Austria and the latter’s neutrality status may pose serious problems for the continuation of U.S. Escapee Program operations. In order to assure continuation of USEP activities in Austria the program has been directed to discontinue (1) exploitation of assistance, and (2) support of debriefing centers. It is believed that apprehension in some quarters that operations of the program in Germany may have to be curtailed can largely be discounted in view of Germany’s liberal asylum policy and its economic well-being. 14. Escapees in Yugoslavia. A problem was posed during the period under review by the presence in Yugoslavia of satellite refugees (approximately 1,000) who desire to emigrate to the West and whose departure has been insisted upon by the Tito regime. U.S. efforts have resulted in some relaxation of pressure by the Yugoslav Government, and permission for limited, essential screening there. Italy has received 250 of these refugees for onward resettlement elsewhere, and arrangements are currently being made for the transfer on a transient basis of about 860 additional refugees to France, Greece and Belgium. These operations are largely at U.S. expense. As far as is known, the successful completion of the movement of these refugees from Yugoslavia will take care of all those who have officially declared themselves for resettlement in the West. It is anticipated that asylum will be arranged eventually for all of these people in free world countries. 15. The Refugee Relief Act. Although the rate of resettlement of former Soviet bloc nationals in the U.S. under the RRA has increased rapidly owing to intensified efforts to find assurances of employment, passage of amendments to the Refugee Relief Act as recommended by the President would be required for a further rise in the volume of escapee entries. 16. Effects of Soviet “Relaxation of Tensions”. Any show of friendliness between Soviet and free world leaders is likely to have a dampening effect upon the morale of escapees and upon their activities. Although U.S. programs will take this intangible factor into consideration, additional high-level statements may be required in the U.S. and other free world countries to meet future developments. [Here follows a financial annex.] 55. Despatch From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.64/4–2756. Secret. Drafted by John T. Rogers, Second Secretary and Consul at the Legation. Budapest, April 27, 1956. No. 421 REF Legdes 406In despatch 406, April 19, the Legation proposed sending the Hungarian Government a note charging it with “police-state methods” not in keeping with its stated policy of “peaceful co-existence” and “socialist legality.” This move would be part of a campaign to sow dissension among Hungarian Communists and to demonstrate to the rest of the world that Hungary was still Stalinist. (Ibid., 611.64/4–1956) SUBJECT Recommended United States Action with Regard to Rajk Revelations in Hungary This despatch is being written as a follow-up to the Legation’s despatch 406, since I believe that recent political and economic developments in Hungary and recent events affecting the Legation’s relations with this Government need to be considered within a single frame of reference in planning our next moves. We have attempted, as doubtless the Department has, to keep all recent developments and our reactions thereto tied together in our minds; but I feel it might be beneficial now to do so on paper as well. Our general view of the Hungarian scene prior to the Soviet Twentieth Congress has been made clear, I think, and we have had no indication that the Department’s view has been different. We have seen the past year as a period during which Rakosi endeavored to put his political house in order after the rapid erosion of political controls under Nagy. He cracked down in the countryside (grain collection and collectivization), in the private sector (sharp curtailment of the burgeoning private trade), in industry (better labor discipline), in the Party and in the arts. His primary, though by no means sole, concern was probably political rather than economic. We have felt that he used this period to restore political controls before undertaking a serious attempt to improve Hungary’s industrial efficiency and agricultural output. And in our opinion he has been reasonably successful in this political sphere; more successful than we thought a year ago would be the case. These efforts in the political field had their effect in the economic field also, and the year saw improvements in some areas, though not in others. In agriculture the regime was aided by better weather than in recent years; in industry at least a partial halt was called to the deterioration in respect to costs and waste which had been going on under Nagy. But although conditions have improved, they have by no means improved enough. Because the situation in both agriculture and industry is still very bad, the running sore of foreign trade debts has continued and apparently is becoming even worse. The new five-year plan will not only call for increased output, but will also require some reallocation of resources as a result of greater coordination with other countries in the bloc. This may add a further strain. Furthermore, there has also been the factor, we believe, that Rakosi, since the Nagy period, has been under somewhat greater pressure than before to show results. These efforts will call for greater sacrifices from the people, and so be unpopular by their very nature; the precondition for their undertaking, therefore, is firm political control. With sounder political bases under him, it would have been logical (and in fact we thought signs thereof were beginning to develop) for Rakosi to have launched a serious effort in the economic field during this year. Such an effort is also increasingly necessary. But what has happened? At precisely the moment when one might have anticipated that this would get under way, the repercussions of Stalin’s denigration (particularly, of course, the rehabilitation of RajkSee footnote 2, Document 53.) swept into Hungary and, initially at least, struck Rakosi a heavy blow and again upset his political balance. We cannot yet be sure whether he can survive this, or whether it was intended that he should. On the surface, at least, it would appear that he is still in Moscow’s good graces. As a matter of fact one can make a very good argument that Rakosi should be Moscow’s choice for the job, since Moscow has seen once, with Imre Nagy, what can happen in a satellite with a weaker hand at the helm. If there were to be storms here (and everyone must have anticipated them after the November writers’ revoltReference is to demands by Hungarian writers for cessation of bureaucratic restraints on artistic freedom and creativity which took its most dramatic form in a writers’ memorandum to the party leadership, written in mid-October 1955 and released in November. The Hungarian party leadership successfully counterattacked with a resolution of the Central Committee condemning the writers. The Legation’s reporting on these events is in telegram 243 from Budapest, December 16. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/12–1655)), the stronger and more reliable the hand at the helm, the better. And at first Rakosi seemed to show confidence. The tone of his report on the Twentieth Congress, unless the Legation and other Western observers in Budapest badly misread it, certainly seemed to indicate that, whatever was to happen to Stalin’s memory, Rakosi’s own position was not to be questioned. The personal cult had existed, it was admitted, lower down in the Party, but no suggestion was given that it included, of all people, Matyas Rakosi. The Party later went further and affirmed that the “fight against the internal enemy” would go on in Hungary, if not in Russia, implying strongly that Rakosi would continue for some time still to hold down the political hatches. We do not know, of course, whether this was the initial intent in Moscow, whether the magnitude of the effect here in Hungary was properly estimated from the beginning, or whether the reaction to the Stalin and Rajk revelations was greater than had been intended. In any event, there have been sharp reactions which have been quite openly admitted, and in the nature of things it would seem almost certain that there will be more. There have also been some indications, including the current high-level Hungarian delegation in Belgrade, that Hungary is finally going to pay the $120 million (or a large part of it) to Yugoslavia, which unless it is underwritten by the Soviets will add a further strain to the country’s finances. If the Hungarians do pay, this could perhaps be construed as the price for leaving Rakosi in his seat. On the other hand, the dominoes in Eastern Europe have begun to fall. Whatever course may have been intended for Hungary, it is certainly true that the situation here has deteriorated very rapidly, doubtless much faster and further than originally intended. The very sudden decision to postpone the transfer of Soviet Ambassador Andropov is probably an indication of Soviet concern. We are consequently now inclined to believe that there are good chances for Rakosi’s eventual removal—just how good, we of course cannot say definitely. But whatever the Soviets may intend to do with Rakosi, or whatever they finally decide they must do with him, they have certainly made his political position precarious and they may have added to his financial problems. His position is sufficiently precarious, we believe, to offer a possibility for United States action to have some effect on future developments. With the above background, we have been trying to examine the problem of coordinated United States action. Before going further, however, I think we should have our objectives clearly in mind, or rather what we may realistically hope to achieve thanks to the Rajk revelations and the apparent blessing given to collective leadership. I would submit that, unless the Soviets have more up their sleeve than they have thus far disclosed, we can hardly hope to realize more this time than a repeat, on perhaps a slightly larger scale, of what happened without pressure from us during the Nagy era, when a more “moderate” element was brought into power. To realize this would again set the stage for weakening Party control over its stalwarts, and theirs over the masses, in turn bringing a general weakening of the regime’s political and economic controls. It is, of course, by no means certain that this will be achieved (although the weakening process may have already begun), but I believe that this is a realistic short-term goal which can be reasonably hoped for and striven for. Even this should not be sneered at. Whether such an accomplishment would then move Hungary into a position where she could later be “nudged” still another step is a moot question. But chances appear at least as good as in 1954 and perhaps better, considering the disgrace of Stalin, the position of Tito and the times in general. The problem of Rakosi’s personal position is closely connected with these general objectives and hopes. For the immediate future, at least, we believe this to be paramount. His removal or retirement, even with high honors, in the near future would be interpreted by the anti-Rakosi faction as a victory for it, by Tito as a victory for him, and by the general population as a victory for passive resistance. It would be interpreted by everyone as a defeat for the policy in effect in Hungary during the past year, which was then fully approved and supported by Moscow. Therefore, as a single target, the removal of Rakosi is our most important short-term aim, however directly or indirectly we try to achieve it. The Rajk statement provides us with a unique opportunity to attempt to exert pressure. There are other objectives, however, which can also be served by an attack based on the Rajk revelations, and which make such an attack seem worthwhile even if its prime purpose of unseating Rakosi be not attained. These are the following: 1. To bolster anti-Rakosi strength within the regime itself. This strength has always existed and is now growing. A strong approach properly made by us could encourage this and give ammunition to Rakosi’s opponents. We are convinced that many, perhaps even a majority of Party members, are not fully aware of what the “state within a state” has been up to or of its activities under Rakosi’s direction. Exposing this would, we believe, heap new fuel on the already smoldering fire. 2. To demonstrate the real intent behind the anti-Stalin campaign in the U.S.S.R., at least as far as it affects the outside world. To go as far as they have in the U.S.S.R. and the satellites, at least in Hungary, without removing the one man who was primarily responsible here for the worst excesses of the period, is to brand the campaign as primarily propaganda. It may be that there is ample evidence of this in the U.S.S.R. itself; but if not, or if it cannot be used, a made-to-order example exists in Hungary. 3. To maintain our proper posture before the general public. The United States was blasphemed and insulted during the Rajk and other trials, and we should seize every opportunity to clear the record. To fail to do so when presented with such an opportunity as this could be construed as a lack of interest in both that record and in the fate of the Hungarian people. To summarize, I believe that the present situation in Hungary is such that appropriate United States action could influence future developments. The Legation has already transmitted its initial views on the proper handling of this situation. We have also strongly recommended (Legdes 399Despatch 399, April 13, dealt with Hungary’s international credit position as an opportunity for leverage. (Ibid., 864.10/4–1356). and previous) the examination of possibilities for curtailment of Western credits, and action of this type would be particularly appropriate in the near future. Now a third possibility would be an official request to Hungary for an apology to the United States Government and to certain of its representatives for the treatment they received from elements in this Government which are now discredited. I believe that such a request, if properly handled and if given full publicity, would demonstrate to the world and the Soviet Union the anomaly of permitting Hungary to follow the Soviet lead only half way; of calling Rajk innocent but not lifting the charges against the United States. It would point to the continuation today of practices current in 1950, which the regime is now condemning; and would indicate to everyone who knows Hungary that as long as Rakosi sits on his throne there will be doubts as to Soviet sincerity. All this, we hope, would present the Soviets with a choice between ousting Rakosi or tacitly acknowledging that the anti-Stalinist campaign is a fraud. We would be gambling on their being more interested in global than in internal satellite reactions, and furthermore, on their being willing to run the risks inherent in ditching Rakosi. It is of course true that any real effort to call black black in Hungary may involve the United States in some risks. If we fail to achieve our end we may draw down the wrath of Rakosi even more on our heads. In our view this is a risk to be recognized and taken. Anti-American propaganda can hardly sink to depths much lower than those already plumbed, and in any event such tactics probably hurt the regime as much as, if not more than, they hurt us. We are most susceptible in relations between the Legation and the Government; but some risk can hardly be avoided here without a complete compromise of principle. In order to bring maximum pressure to bear on the Soviet Union, and at the same time to have maximum influence in Hungary, it would seem reasonable to take successive actions over a period of time, with the first move coming as quickly as possible. Initially we had thought of the first note on the Sergeants’ caseReference is to the case of two Army attachés, Sergeants Henry Lybrand and Jennings Siegfried, who were stopped, detained, and questioned by Soviet Army and Hungarian police personnel on April 1 after they passed in front of a Soviet military installation in the Hungarian city of Jaszbereny. (Telegram 374 from Budapest, April 3; ibid., 120.162164/4–356) and the second one on the general treatment of the Legation by the Hungarians (tentative draft forwarded with Legdes 406) as setting the stage for the Rajk matter later. Whatever disposition is made of the Sergeants’ note, and even if the protest regarding the TiedtkesFred Tiedtke, Attaché at the Legation, and his wife were arrested by Hungarian police and charged with smuggling. The Department of State subsequently instructed the Legation in Budapest to inform the Hungarian Foreign Office orally that irrespective of Tiedtkes’ alleged activities, the police acted improperly in arresting a holder of a diplomatic passport. (Telegram 271 to Budapest, May 15; ibid., 123–Fred Tiedtkes) is removed from the second note, I would still recommend that the essence of the latter be made use of. The most important element of that note is that it points to the continuing activity of the same state within a state which was responsible for the Rajk “provocation” and which has now been discredited. It also should be evident that Rakosi himself was just as involved as the secret police in 1950 and continues to be today. The Legation has not tried to draft a note on the Rajk case, since the Department has more complete information available on details of the case and on its relation to the Mindszenty and other cases; and also because it will require legal talent to demonstrate these interrelationships. The Legation’s general ideas, however, would be along the following lines: a) to say that the United States had welcomed Rakosi’s statement in EgerApparent reference to Rákosi’s announcement of March 27; see footnote 2, Document 53. about the Rajk trial, hoping that it portended a sincere intent to right the wrongs of that day; b) that while this may have been the intent, some time has now passed since that statement, and clearly very little has yet been done; c) that insofar as the United States Government is concerned its name was slandered in earlier trials and thus far no apology has been forthcoming; d) that furthermore, the United States and its official personnel stationed in Hungary were insulted and materially harmed through the declaration of___Legation members as persona non grata; e) that the United States has received further material damage at the hands of the same elements in Hungary now discredited in the Eger statement, through the unwarranted arrest of numerous Hungarian employees of the Legation in Budapest and through the harassment of American personnel stationed there; this activity, as indicated by the recent note of___, has in fact continued and even increased to date; and f) the note should present a legal argument to demonstrate that the charge against Rajk consisted basically of plotting with outside powers, among which the United States, for the overthrow of the regime then in power in Hungary; and that if Rajk is innocent, the charge must be false including the allegations against the United States. g) If possible, the note should carry this argument over into the Mindszenty and Grosz trials.Joseph Grösz, Archbishop of Kalocsa, was arrested in May 1951, found guilty of treason, and sentenced in June 1951 to life imprisonment. In October 1955 the Hungarian Government released him. It should go on to say, after this presentation of legal argument, that the United States had long hoped for improvement in its relations with Hungary, that it had conducted itself with considerable restraint in view of the past provocations directed against it by the Hungarian Government and that it would welcome any development in Hungary which would give a promise of better relations in the future. It had, in fact, believed some months ago that there might be a chance for such an improvement, but had been forced to cancel plans for any serious discussions with the Hungarian Government because of the activities of precisely those elements which have now been discredited. h) We should then call upon the Hungarian Government to carry the process begun at Eger to its logical conclusion, and to clear the record of the infamous charges which have long sullied not only U.S.-Hungarian relations but also the reputation of the Hungarian Government throughout the world. We should refer to our earlier notes and call upon the Hungarian Government also to curb the continuing harassment of the American Legation in Budapest. We should say that, assuming these requests are met, we would foresee an era of definite improvement in relations between the two countries, and would welcome any opportunity to discuss concrete means of achieving this goal. I sincerely believe that today the United States has the best opportunity in several years to play a constructive role and to undertake positive action to influence the trend of events in Hungary; and that this opportunity should be seized with both vigor and speed. C.M. Ravndal 56. Letter From the Secretary of State to the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge)Source: Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Volunteer Freedom Corps. Top Secret. Drafted by Joseph Palmer, and cleared with EUR, GER, EE, IO, and S/P. Washington, April 30, 1956. Dear Cabot: I have given careful consideration to your letters of January 18 and March 15, 1956,In his January 18 letter, Lodge presented his arguments for the Volunteer Freedom Corps. He made six points: (1) The Volunteer Freedom Corps would be a step toward carrying out U.S. obligations to the satellite nations; (2) it would combat the Soviet re-defection campaign; (3) it would alleviate fears of West German rearmament by stationing a VFC battalion in Germany; (4) it would provide “nuisance value” and could be a bargaining chip in future negotiations; (5) it would serve as proof to the rest of the Free World that the West is committed to the fight for “freedom and individual dignity”; and (6) it would provide a cadre of trained officers able to “assimilate the mass of anti-communist Slavs” in the event of general war. (Ibid.: Lot 62 D 430, Volunteer Freedom Corps) The letter of March 15 has not been found. proposing that we now proceed with the implementation of the NSC decision of last SeptemberReference is to NSC Action No. 1434; see footnote 5, Document 30. for activation of the Volunteer Freedom Corps on a token basis. As you will recall, the NSC decision left the timing of the initiation of action to my discretion, in consultation with the Secretary of Defense. At that time, of course, the principal inhibiting factor was the Four Power Conference which was about to begin in Geneva. The picture has changed somewhat in view of the outcome of this conference and in view also of the categorical refusal of the Soviet Government to discuss any change in the status of the Eastern European satellites. At the same time, there are certain other considerations which have convinced me that the present time is not appropriate for implementation of this project. The most important of these considerations are as follows: 1. It seems clear that the Soviet bloc is currently trying to de-emphasize the military aspects of its aggressive program and is placing reliance on a large-scale political, economic and psychological offensive aimed at neutralizing and dividing our allies and spreading Communist influence in the uncommitted areas. From the point of view of free world opinion, I think it would be a mistake for us to be in the position of seeming to respond to these new tactics by an action which would be regarded as having an essentially military character. While I fully appreciate the fact that the principal value of the Volunteer Freedom Corps would be psychological rather than military, it is by no means certain that this fact would be understood and accepted in other parts of the free world. 2. I know that you will also agree on the importance of our being in the strongest possible position in the disarmament discussions which have now been resumed. We are all conscious of the necessity that world opinion be convinced of the merits of our position on this subject, and that we avoid implying any lack of confidence in the possibility of success. Although the formation of the Volunteer Freedom Corps would be aimed at the Soviet bloc only in a psychological sense, there is danger that it would be misunderstood by Free World opinion and exploited by the Soviets as being inconsistent with the objectives of the disarmament negotiations. 3. You will recall that the NSC decision provided that this project would be implemented only with the cooperation of the West German Government. Last September we asked Ambassador Conant what he thought Chancellor Adenauer’s reactions to the proposal might be. He told us that he thought its adoption would raise major political difficulties for the Chancellor and expressed the hope that we would not approach him again on the subject.The correspondence referred to took place in August; see footnote 3, Document 30. We have recently taken it up with Conant once more and he has informed us that he is still of the same opinion. I hope you will agree that my reasons for deferring action are sound. From a political point of view, I feel that we must make proper timing a paramount consideration in order fully to realize the advantages of the project and to minimize the risk of adverse consequences. I assure you that I intend to keep the matter under periodic review with these considerations in mind. Sincerely yours, John Foster DullesPrinted from a copy that bears this stamped signature. 57. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.64/5–556. Secret; Priority. Budapest, May 5, 1956—2 p.m. 405. After dinner at Polish Embassy last night, Lajos Acs, second ranking Secretary Hungarian Communist Party, played 20th Congress record for my edification. Claimed ad nauseam, Commies have really changed, wish improve relations with US and settle outstanding issues. I countered with willingness explore any problem but made explicitly clear that progress toward better relations impossible until Hungarian secret police brought under control. Gave him in presence Karpathy, Deputy Foreign Minister, and Szigeti, Anglo-American Desk Officer, substance our complaints, and when he suggested I acquaint Sik with facts, I told him that Foreign Office was fully aware of situation but had told me it powerless because secret police constitute state within state. Acs contrived appear astonished when heard of continuing police harassment after Hungarian adoption 20th Congress line and emphatically asserted he would order police to stop. Conversation, which lasted some two hours, was tense only when I spoke of state within state. Ended with Acs again requesting me talk with Sik, which I intend do informally middle next week assuming no objection.In telegram 408 from Budapest, May 8, Ravndal reported an hour’s conversation he had with Karpathy on May 8 (Sik and Boldocsky were both out of town) in which the Hungarian Deputy Foreign Minister confided to Ravndal that he was pleased that Ravndal had raised the question of the secret police with Acs and requested an American note detailing specifics that the Legation presumed the Foreign Office would use in attempting to bring the secret police into line. (Ibid., 611.64/5–856) Under circumstances, recommend no publicity substance proposed second noteSee Document 55. pending Department’s receipt full Legation report. Ravndal 58. Memorandum of Discussion at the 285th Meeting of the National Security Council, Washington, May 17, 1956Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Drafted by Gleason on May 18. Washington, May 17, 1956 [Here follows a paragraph listing the participants at the meeting.] 1. Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. Security [Here follows Allen Dulles’ briefing on unrelated subjects.] With respect to the Soviet satellites, Mr. [Allen] Dulles said that Poland had been most seriously affected by the development of the de-Stalinization campaign. This campaign had gone to greater lengths there than in any other satellite, and Mr. Dulles expressed the view that the United States should take particular pains to see what it could do to exploit developments in Poland in our national interest. Mr. Dulles added that he hoped to present to the Council next week the text of the now famous statement made by Khrushchev before the Twentieth Party Congress in Moscow. The text that we have is the one allegedly transmitted by Moscow to the governments of the Soviet satellites. It was a very interesting document, although it was not clear whether the present version had been expurgated or not. At any rate, it purports to contain just what Khrushchev had had to say at the Moscow meeting. Secretary Dulles said he understood that Khrushchev had spoken extemporaneously on this occasion. Mr. Allen Dulles replied that he spoke both from a prepared text and extemporaneously. Secretary Dulles then indicated his view that whatever text we got would have been “doctored” before being sent out of Moscow. [Here follow the remainder of the Allen Dulles’ briefing and agenda items 2 and 3.] 4. United States Policy on Soviet and Satellite Defectors (NSC 86/1; Progress Report, dated April 18, 1956, by OCB on NSC 86/1Document 54.) Mr. Anderson briefed the Council on the highlights of this Progress Report, and emphasized in his conclusion the problem represented by Soviet successes in their newly launched redefection campaign. (A copy of Mr. Anderson’s brief is filed in the minutes of the meeting.)Not found. In response to Mr. Anderson’s last point, the President inquired whether it was the influence of family and friends at home which had induced Soviet defectors to return to the USSR. Mr. Allen Dulles replied that this was so, and that the defectors got many letters from their families urging them to return. The defectors sometimes suspect these letters to be faked. Secretary Dulles stated that in the last few days the Government of Communist China had issued a decree requiring all citizens of Communist China to register with the Government if they had any relatives living in the United States. Secretary Dulles predicted that this move would be the basis for an elaborate redefection campaign to induce Chinese in the United States to go back to China. As far as he was personally concerned, Secretary Dulles said, he could perceive no objection to these Chinese returning, provided they were not coerced into doing so. Why do we care whether or not they go back if they go back freely? In point of fact, this was our actual policy on this issue. The President said he agreed with Secretary Dulles’ view, and Mr. Allen Dulles pointed out that in any case we had no legal means of restraining Chinese in the United States from returning to Communist China if they so desired. Secretary Dulles repeated his question as to what reason there was for the United States to try to keep any of these Chinese from going back. Secretary Humphrey also added that it could make no possible difference to us. Mr. Allen Dulles, however, pointed out the serious morale effect if large numbers of defectors voluntarily went back to slavery in their Communist homelands. Mr. Dulles added parenthetically that he was by no means sure that the five redefecting “Tuapse” sailors had not decided on their own to return to the USSR.See footnote 12, Document 35. It was significant that if they had wished to avoid returning, there were at least three places between New York and Moscow that they could have got off their plane and sought asylum. They had not taken advantage of these opportunities. Mr. William Jackson stated that our trouble in the matter of redefection stemmed from the fact that we tried to take too much credit for the original defections. Accordingly when some of the defectors redefected, the United States was placed in an embarrassing position. The President insisted that he still did not know why Communists who had escaped to this country would want to return to Communism when they were free to stay here. What appeal could there be to any rational mind to go back to a life behind the Iron Curtain? Secretary Humphrey added that in any case he still could see no reason for keeping any of those who wished to return from leaving the United States. The Attorney General stated his agreement with the point just made by Mr. Jackson, and suggested that language to cover Mr. Jackson’s point be inserted in the policy paper, NSC 86/1. The President again sought an answer to the question he had posed. Mr. Allen Dulles replied by pointing out that many of the Soviet defectors became lonely in the unfamiliar environment in the United States, and were as a matter of fact often unstable people who took to drink and were a considerable nuisance. Secretary Wilson added that of course there were people in the world who simply did not relish the responsibilities of freedom. Secretary Dulles then recommended that NSC 86/1 be re-examined by the NSC Planning Board in the light of this discussion. The President agreed, and indicated that this reexamination should include discussion as to why the United States should be so concerned about redefection. Mr. Allen Dulles again pointed out the very considerable intelligence benefits which we derived from defectors from behind the Iron Curtain. A good start had been made on inducing such defections, and he hoped that further progress would be possible. Governor Stassen emphasized the fact that the Soviet redefection campaign was world-wide in scope and intensively pursued. This indicated that defections must be a matter of very great concern to the Soviet leaders. Moreover, it reflected a grave weakness in the Soviet system. The President pointed out that in any review of the policy in NSC 86/1 there should be a clear definition of the advantages and disadvantages to the United States of defection and redefection. Admiral Strauss thought it would be very dangerous if word got about that the United States Government would not protect defectors from being shanghaied and forcibly returned to the Communist countries of their origin. If such views became widespread, we could anticipate a cessation of the flow of defectors. Secretary Dulles hastened to say that he was making no suggestion that we would not protect defectors from forcible return. He had only meant to suggest that if defectors voluntarily wished to return, he could see no sense in our trying to keep them here in the United States. Governor Stassen said he agreed with the warning statement of Admiral Strauss. It is widely believed that the five “Tuapse” sailors were in fact shanghaied. This belief is dangerous for the United States and gives the public a completely erroneous impression. On the other hand, Governor Stassen agreed that it was all right to send defectors back if they decide of their own free will that they wish to return. Secretary Wilson said that above all, we must take care that no coercion is exerted by the U.S. authorities. Secretary Dulles said that we should frankly face the fact that as more and more changes occur in the Soviet Union in the direction of liberalization, more and more defectors will wish to return. Some of the changes in the Soviet Union which had occurred in recent months were obviously genuine changes. If the Soviet Union proceeds to liquidate labor camps and to cease to compel its citizens to be tied to their jobs, defectors will desire to go back. We should take great pains not to let such a return movement be signalled as a defeat for the United States in the cold war. After all, it is one of our great objectives to induce Soviet Russia to become a decent member of the society of nations. There is now evidence that the Soviet Union is moving in that direction. We should welcome and facilitate such developments, and make no issue whatever of voluntary redefection. To do so would be to create a false issue. The tendency underlying the current policy paper is that we should undertake to try to prevent defectors from returning to their Communist homelands, and that failure to prevent their return must be regarded as a defeat for U.S. policy. This was fundamentally erroneous. The President expressed agreement with the points made by Secretary Dulles, as did Secretary Wilson. The latter pointed out that it would be quite wrong to regard these very hopeful recent developments in the Soviet Union as evidence that the United States is being licked in the cold war. Admiral Strauss asked whether there was any firm evidence that the Soviet Union was adopting a more enlightened labor policy and would no longer compel citizens to remain in jobs against their will. Secretary Dulles replied that all he knew on this subject he had learned from George Meany, who seemed to believe that the recent decree permitting freedom of movement in jobs was genuine enough. Governor Stassen also thought that it must be a genuine move, for the simple reason that the decree had been so widely publicized within the Soviet Union. The President said that this was quite enough to indicate the desirability of reviewing the policy stated in NSC 86/1. The Attorney General said that there was one last aspect of the problem which he would like to bring up. It related to the activities of representatives of the Soviet Government assigned to the United Nations headquarters in New York. These agents of the Soviet Government were certainly molesting and bringing pressure on Soviet defectors and escapees. Furthermore, they were involved in espionage activities. Accordingly, the Attorney General wondered whether our policy respecting these individuals was sufficiently established to enable us to proceed effectively against them. He invited comment on this problem from the Secretary of State. Secretary Dulles did not comment. The National Security Council:Paragraphs a–b that follow constitute NSC Action No. 1553, approved by the President on May 24. (Department of State, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council) a. Noted and discussed the reference Progress Report on the subject by the Operations Coordinating Board. b. Directed the NSC Planning Board to review the policy in NSC 86/1 in the light of the discussion at the meeting. [Here follow the remaining agenda items.] S. Everett Gleason 59. Editorial Note On May 17, the Operations Coordinating Board’s Special Working Group on Stalinism, chaired by Deputy Assistant Secretary Jacob Beam, submitted to the Board for transmission to the National Security Council a summary report on United States policy guidance and actions to be taken to exploit the anti-Stalin campaign in the Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc in Eastern Europe. For text of the report, see volume XXIV, page 99. The report listed as an objective of the campaign to exploit anti-Stalinism a loosening of the ties that bound the satellites to the Soviet Union and the creation of conditions which would permit the evolution of independence. As part of the guidance for relevant agencies, the report encouraged pressure for greater freedom in the satellites and exploitation of intraparty dissension and differences with the Soviet Union. The special report of May 17 was considered at the May 23 Operations Coordinating Board meeting and was noted by the Board and approved for forwarding to the NSC. (Notes by Richards; Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430, Preliminary Notes) 60. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/5–1856. Confidential; Priority. Warsaw, May 18, 1956—10 a.m. 845. Saw Under Secretary Winiewicz about hour and half morning May 17 partly because told him some days ago would like see him and partly because he asked see me. We discussed various matters reported in four separate messages,Reference is to telegrams 846, 847, 848, and 849 from Budapest, all May 18, reporting on a variety of problems in U.S.-Polish relations, including activities of Polish émigrés in the United States, visa problems, restrictions on Polish diplomats in the United States, and exit permits for Polish citizens with relatives in the United States. (Ibid., 611.48/5–1856, 911.6248/5–1856, 911.48/5–1856, and 848.181/5–1856, respectively) all referring this one. Despite his protest and objections as reported separate message, themes of Winiewicz’s remarks were: Great changes are taking place in Poland, other Soviet orbit countries which West and particularly USA should recognize as warranting adjustments in their policies and attitudes toward Poland; that Polish Government is sincerely desirous improving relations with USA; that Poland cannot and should not sever its friendly ties with USSR; and that there can be no return to status quo ante conditions in Poland. These are not new themes with Winiewicz, but he belabored his points stronger than ever. He has been talking in similar vein with some other Chiefs of Mission. Jacobs 61. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/5–2456. Secret. Budapest, May 24, 1956—4 p.m. 430. Reports from diverse sources indicate that Rakosi’s May 18 speechReference is to a major speech made before party activists in Budapest. The speech is analyzed and the translated text transmitted in despatch 446, May 25. The Legation noted that “the tone of Rakosi’s speech seemed almost like a throwback to the old Stalinist times. This was particularly noticeable in the section on foreign affairs, where he ranted against U.S. imperialism and spoke openly about alleged American support of spies and saboteurs in Hungary.” (Ibid., 764.00/5–2556) has produced optimum situation politically and psychologically for type diplomatic offensive recommended by Legation and under consideration by Department for past several weeks. Even pessimistic locals were willing give odds that some clear-cut break with past policies would be discernable in speech and that Rakosi would, at the least, be forced make some concessions of substantive nature in face pressures which have clearly been building up against him from below and in effort smooth out some of more striking anomalies between past year’s policies here and trends now observable in Soviet Union and in several of other satellites. Tone and content Rakosi’s speech has disappointed locals harboring even most cautious hopes and has given rise even greater general discontent and disaffection towards Rakosi. It has also greatly reinforced Legation’s conviction that only with Rakosi’s removal will road leading to genuine liberalization be opened and that our only means of assisting this is through pressure plus public exposure of realities Hungarian situation under Rakosi’s Stalinist rule. Apart from these considerations, Rakosi’s pointed reference to “imperialist US which continues try smuggle spies and saboteurs into our country” and other gutter-like anti-US statements, particularly coming after Rajk trial disavowal, Grosz rehabilitation and admissions of run-away secret police activity, cannot in our view go unchallenged if US is to retain respect or prestige in eyes captive peoples. Our conversations over past month have convinced us, moreover, that there are not only elements in Foreign Office but in party’s leadership as well who would welcome and silently acclaim a diplomatic offensive aimed against Rakosi and his secret police which they could use as leverage in their current efforts effect changes here (Legtels 405Document 57. and 408See footnote 2, ibid.). There are many indications that dissension within central leadership is spreading and sharpening; we should lose no opportunity add fuel to fire and we are convinced that now is propitious moment. While I have not since receipt Deptel 271See footnote 7, Document 55. discussed Tiedtke case with Foreign Office, I have referred to it without specific identification along lines recommended reftel in recent conversations with Foreign Office officials as well as with Acs (Legtel 405). Rather strong language has thus far failed provoke rejoinders and only response has been positive one that we submit note specifying our grievances (Legtel, 408). While appreciating considerations behind Department’s decision not make formal written protest dealing this case alone, I continue believe strongly that case (treated along lines suggested Legation despatch 406See footnote 2, ibid. but with moderated language free of recrimination) should be included in general note we have been requested by Foreign Office to submit. . . . While we cannot, of course, rule out possibility propaganda blast by Hungarians, above opinion now strengthened by fact that almost identical French and Italian cases recently given publicity have not aroused much furor in West and have received no mention here. Having these previous exposures on record might serve take some sting out Tiedtke case in event Hungarians attempt use it; . . . On balance, therefore, I recommend early transmission note detailing our grievances which would include reference Tiedtke case. To fail send note after specific request would be equivalent saying US has no grievances. Like present circumstances, question publicity should be deferred pending Hungarian reaction. We would earnestly hope see this note closely followed by one dealing Rajk–Rakosi complex with full and sustained publicity. Content Rakosi’s May 18 speech makes clear that our failure act promptly will result further US prestige loss and Rakosi gain. Ravndal 62. Memorandum of Discussion at the 13th Meeting of the Special Working Group on Stalinism, Department of State, Washington, May 22, 1956, 4 p.m.Source: Department of State, P/PG Files: Lot 60 D 661, Miscellaneous 1956. Secret. Drafted on May 25 by Roman V. Mrozinski. No complete set of the records of the Special Working Group on Stalinism or its successor committee exists. Those that do exist are either ibid., Miscellaneous Files or Central File 104–OCB. Washington, May 22, 1956, 4 p.m. PARTICIPANTS State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman State—Mr. Francis B. Stevens State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. Boris Klosson State—Mr. William Harben CIA—Representative present USIA—Mr. Alfred V. Boerner OCB—Mr. Roman V. Mrozinski, Staff Representative 1. A memorandumThe memorandum, in undated draft form, is ibid., EUR Files: Lot 59 D 233, Memos 1956–7. was distributed to all the participants by the Chairman outlining a revised mission for the group as set forth at the OCB meeting of May 9.Notes of the May 9 OCB meeting are ibid., OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430, Preliminary Notes. This revised mission included a study of (1) the opportunities which may exist to profit from differences within the orbit and to widen the cracks in the satellite countries, and (2) what can be done to challenge the Soviet and satellite governments to lift the Iron Curtain. 2. The group discussed various techniques that might be useful in encouraging nationalistic and pro-Western elements in the satellites through exchange visits and increased information activities. 3. Various participants were asked by the Chairman to prepare studiesFinal versions of these studies have not been found, but draft versions of some are in Department of State, P/PG Files: Lot 60 D 605, OCB Group, Extension of Responsibilities. prior to the next meeting on (1) evidence of a weakening of ties between the satellites and the Soviet Union, (2) . . . and (3) the types of pro-Western and anti-Soviet appeals to which individual satellites (government-bureaucracy) may be susceptible.At its May 23 meeting, the Operations Coordinating Board took the following action: “Agreed that it would be desirable to maintain an interdepartmental group at the same level as the special working group on Stalinism so as to provide a forum in which new developments in the Soviet Union and the Soviet Satellites could be discussed and an evaluation made of the impact of such developments on existing operations.” (Extract from the minutes of the May 23 meeting, as quoted in the terms of reference for the OCB Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, June 26; ibid.: Lot 62 D 316, Soviet and Related Problems (Beam File)). The terms of reference for the OCB Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, dated June 26, were approved by the OCB Board Assistants on June 22 on behalf of their principals. The terms of reference noted that the Special Committee succeeded the Special Working Group on Stalinism and broadened its function to include special assignments related to the Soviet Union and the Eastern European satellites and their impact on existing operations. The Special Committee was also empowered to initiate consideration of subjects in this general area which it wished to draw to the attention of the Board. (Terms of reference, June 26, and covering memorandum of the same date by Charles E. Johnson, OCB Executive Assistant; ibid.) R. V. MrozinskiPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature.OCB Staff Representative 63. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/5–2956. Confidential. Warsaw, May 29, 1956—8 p.m. 892. Following represents Embassy’s views this date on “liberation [liberalization]” trend Poland first five months 1956. “Liberalization” internal and external policies Poland has been treated more optimistically in western, including US, press than Embassy believes warranted. While Poland may, as some commentators allege, be far ahead of other satellites in this respect, there seems be no reason this time consider changes as more than surface nature. Trend appears be extension and expansion “Geneva spirit” abetted by XXth Congress CPSU developments and remains, as evaluated Department’s instruction CA–1363, August 17, 1955,Not printed. (Ibid., 611.00/8–1755) “application classic Communist maneuver ‘zig-zag’”. Basic policies appear unchanged and indistinguishable from Soviet policies except for certain tactical expediencies, e.g., special treatment Catholic Church, peculiar to Poland and which have always emitted in post-war period. Surface changes have been quite numerous and, to casual observers, neutral-minded individuals, and visiting correspondents, probably impressive. Their publicized impressions tend give air respectability to Communist regime. Embassy believes importance these changes consists principally in whether they contain possibility becoming irreversible trend (i.e., ferment that cannot be controlled). Perhaps most important surface change was spate criticism of regime from press and radio as result greenlight received from XXth Congress CPSU. Embassy believes this wave criticism exceeded regime’s intention to permit, or perhaps even foster, criticism cult of individual and Stalin. Noteworthy, however, that no more than word from Ochab was necessary to establish firm limits to criticism. Consequently, freedom criticize regime is far from irreversible trend although zeal with which Poles seized opportunity demonstrates vividly opportunities dormant but far from dead this field. Criticism and “free debate” in Sejm, though vaunted in western press, was much better controlled than general criticism described above, in Embassy’s opinion, [and] veiled only thinly Sejm’s continuing rubber stamp character. “Loyal opposition” parties (SD, ZSL and Catholic Deputies) continue now almost historic subservience regime. Only move during recent session approaching hostile opposition was ineffective Catholic Deputies stand against abortion law. This, however, could have been cleverly planned maneuver designed emphasize possibility “opposition”, particularly from Catholic Church. Thus, Embassy believes Sejm still completely ineffective rubberstamp existing to legalize decisions regime. Here again however, spark of democracy far from dead. While amnesty to 30,000 included by government admission 9000 “political” prisoners, Embassy believes their release does not significantly increase opposition to regime. Even if they not “re-educated”, government appears fully able control them. Moreover, Embassy believes amnesty does not reflect real regime humanitarianism but rather caused by practical considerations concerned with labor force, repatriation drive and desire give appearance humanitarianism to regime. In any event, this still seems to be controlled operation. Regime’s desire cloak real self under “new look” also reflected in fair number personnel shifts government structure, some (such as “resignations” Berman and RadkiewiczThe resignation of Jakub Berman, Deputy Premier and member of the Politburo, was announced on May 6. An analysis of the importance of this development is in a memorandum from Trivers to Stevens, May 7. (Ibid., Polish Desk Files: Lot 60 D 55, General Political Affairs) Stanlislaw Radkiewicz was the head of the Ministry of Public Security until he was demoted in December 1954 to Minister of State Farms. In April 1956, he was dismissed from that post. ) probably carried out in hope their identification with “cult individual” and Beriaism era would foster idea “new day” dawning Poland. We should not lose sight fact old Communist stooges of USSR in control; Soviet army still here; and Poland’s economy still at mercy USSR. Final major point alleged “changes” is possibility Poland pursue “own road Socialism” as result Khrushchev-Tito meeting Belgrade.See Document 15. Embassy believes this is misconception and that Poland’s divergence from USSR in handling e.g. collectivization and church does not represent “own road” but rather is matter expediency based on failure traditional Communist methods solve certain problems. Furthermore, these divergencies present long before Belgrade meeting. Although church greatly weakened in post-war period, Embassy believes its traditionally independent peasants and dissatisfied intellectuals continue represent fertile ground for exploitation in event irreversible trends becomes apparent. Number minor surface changes have developed Poland last few months. There seems be somewhat less police control, Poles appear less afraid contact westerners, there is trickle information coming in from west (e.g. 200 copies each Manchester Guardian, London Times and Le Monde are on sale daily Warsaw), technical achievements west are admitted and even praised, semi official Poles express desire contact Embassy officers. Singly these are easily controlled and can be reversed by the regime at will. Taken collectively, there is perhaps possibility that actual and purported changes may engender in independence loving Poles such strong feelings that regime may find it expedient grant further concessions. In time, this could become an irreversible trend. As of moment, however, Embassy believes “changes” well under control.The Department of State commended the Embassy for telegram 892 in airgram A–288, June 27, and recommended that the Embassy prepare a similar analysis in approximately 3 months. (Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/6–2756) Department pouch desired. Jacobs 64. Telegram From the Legation in Romania to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.66/6–456. Confidential. Bucharest, June 4, 1956—2 p.m. 445. At Rumanian Assembly reception for visiting members Supreme Soviet I had half hour talk with Gheorghiu-Dej. Present were chief delegate Supreme Soviet who is General Secretary Central Committee Leningrad, and Soviet Ambassador Yrpishev with Foreign Minister acting as interpreter. Conversation in Russian with Soviets attentive but not participating. Dej opened discussion by asking why US against disarmament. I replied this not the fact as evidenced by President’s proposals and all our efforts Disarmament Subcommittee. Dej said as former naval officer I must know navigation and importance steering proper course. I agreed but said first duty navigator look out for shoals, particularly hidden ones not appearing above surface. Dej shifted his metaphors and asked me if doctor gave patient pills to cure him and patient refused pills and remained ill was not patient at fault and not doctor. I replied that depended upon nature pills; if pills were poison patient showed justifiable intelligence not taking them. Dej said but supposing pills are accepted by entire world as being a definite cure. I told him that under those circumstances it wouldn’t be necessary to have doctor but just buy pills and most intelligent course anyway is to take necessary precautions against becoming ill. Dej said US-Rumanian relations showed improvement but were not moving fast enough. He commented on fact I was permitted to travel everywhere I wanted in Rumania without being followed and yet Rumanian envoys in US constantly tailed. I replied this information inaccurate since on recent motor trip to northern Rumania I was under constant surveillance by Securitate car. He replied that possibly my professional experience as prosecutor gave me preconceived notion all cars were Securitate. I told him Securitate easily identified and travel restrictions were childish and required only by nations lacking confidence in their international security and asked him why he did not lift all travel restrictions. He said that [he] would soon but emphasized our own reluctance to grant visas to many Rumanians and Soviets who desired enter US. He said it was necessary for us to get down to specifics in discussing present Rumanian-US problems and set up detailed balance sheet of these problems so that they could be carefully examined and discussed. I told him that was exactly what US had proposed in its noteThe U.S. note was in response to a Romanian suggestion of March 7 that economic negotiations between Romania and the United States should be initiated. The discussions were to concern U.S. claims against Romania, Romanian assets blocked in the United States, and trade exchanges. The United States replied in a note (transmitted to Bucharest in telegram 232, April 23) that it would discuss these issues along with others such as the establishment of a USIA reading room in Bucharest and a loosening of restrictions on American diplomats in Romania. (Ibid., 411.6641/3–756) and that we would welcome such balance sheet from Rumanians. He looked blankly at Foreign Minister who was obviously embarrassed. (Foreign Minister had earlier told me answer to US note out of his hands and awaiting higher action. Prime Minister Stoica, however, had later told me it was in Foreign Minister’s hands. Believe this indication Politburo to date preoccupied with political matters and have not yet reached question reply US note.) Dej particularly stressed commercial relations saying it was essential Rumanians obtain technical assistance and machinery necessary for its development best supplied by US. He urged agreement for increased technical and cultural exchanges. He emphasized Rumanians making sincere effort normalize Rumanian-US relations. Dej in particularly good humor, bubbling over with self-confidence and cordiality. Insisted on having photograph taken with me and Soviet Ambassador. He had spent large part evening in earnest conversation with [garble—Yugo?] and Soviet Ambassadors. All members Politburo present and no outward signs any international disagreements. Thayer 65. Despatch From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.49/6–2556. Confidential. Prague, June 25, 1956. No. 457 SUBJECT The Attitude of the Czechoslovak Government toward Relations with the United States During the past months a number of indications have appeared that the Czechoslovak Government desires to improve and extend its relations with the United States. On the personal and social side, as compared with a year or two ago, the Czechs are noticeably making an effort to put themselves on better personal terms with representatives of the United States. This is true not only of myself and members of the Embassy staff but we also note that the change is making itself felt on the social side in Washington. Among concrete instances there may be mentioned the behavior of Premier Siroky who on such occasions as the Liberation Day reception on May 9 or a meeting of the National Assembly has taken the initiative in opening a conversation with me. Deputy Premier Kopecky made a point of attending the Porgy and Bess reception which Mrs. Johnson and I gave at the Residence. He has for some time, and particularly at the airport upon the arrival of the Indian Vice-President, Dr. Radhakrishman and again at Siroky’s dinner in his honor, been overwhelmingly cordial toward me and paid me unusual attention. At gatherings he has gone out of his way to greet me and introduce me to Czechoslovak officials. Foreign Minister David was unprecedently friendly and expansive when I called on him on February 13 and Deputy Foreign Minister Sekaninova as well as Deputy Foreign Minister Nosek and his wife have obviously endeavored to be personally cordial toward my wife and myself at receptions and dinners. Sekaninova and the Noseks have conducted themselves in a similar manner toward the Vedelers and at concerts during the Prague Musical Festival Sekaninova was noticeably forthcoming. At receptions given by the Czechs such as that on Liberation Day and in honor of the Indian Vice-President no attempt is made at segregation of Westerners and Czech officials endeavor to mix with and be agreeable to Americans. At the reception on Liberation Day the Army Attaché conversed on friendly terms with a Colonel of the Czechoslovak Army and the Air Attaché had his first opportunity to talk with General Vosahlo, First Deputy Minister of Defense. The Czechoslovak officials with whom we have conducted economic discussions gave a dinner to the Embassy staff members who have participated and the dinner recently given by the Czechoslovak Ambassador at Washington for members of the Department represents a new departure. In the political sphere the Czechs changed their practice regarding invitations for Liberation Day this year when for the first time in some years their invitations to the reception here and apparently at a number of missions abroad no longer contained the objectionable wording “in celebration of the liberation of Czechoslovakia by the Soviet Army”. We believe that the change was made after great deliberation in order to take account of our attitude as we have manifested it by our conspicuous absence at their National Day celebrations during the past years. They desired us to attend and acted so as to make it possible for us to do so. For almost two years it was impossible in spite of repeated efforts on the Embassy’s part to fly into Czechoslovakia a United States Air Force plane for my travel. Within a month, however, we have obtained permission for three flights (made on May 10, May 23 and June 7) even though the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has reiterated on each occasion the permission was not to be considered a usual diplomatic privilege. As regards travel, the Czechs are beginning to encourage tourists from the United States to visit Czechoslovakia. Toward this end they publicize tourist possibilities in this country, arrange tours through CEDOK, the official travel agency, and sell abroad tourist accommodations at reduced rates which ignore the official rate of exchange. They have also acceded fully to our interpretation that under the Treaty of Naturalization American citizens of Czechoslovak origin naturalized since the beginning of the War are not to be considered Czechoslovak citizens and treated as such while traveling in Czechoslovakia. They are allowing a few visitors in exceptional cases to go from Czechoslovakia to the United States. They are also granting a few more exit permits for immigrants to rejoin separated families in the United States. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has proposed that the Embassy resume full visa services and has raised the matter of reopening Czechoslovak consulates in the United States on the basis that it is prepared to see the reestablishment of the American Consulate General in Bratislava and the removal of limitations on the size of the Embassy staff. The attitude and conduct of the Czechs in the current economic negotiations reveal a desire to see a readjustment of relations in this field. The Czechoslovak officials give the impression that they are aware of the costly mistake represented by the economic consequences of the Oatis caseWilliam N. Oatis was the Associated Press correspondent in Prague when he was arrested on espionage charges in April 23, 1951. He was convicted and sentenced to 10 years in prison. After vigorous American protests and the blocking of Czechoslovak assets in the United States, he was released on May 15, 1953. For documentation relating to the case, see Foreign Relations, 1951, vol. IV, Part 2, pp. 1338. ff. and ibid., 1952–1954, vol. VIII, pp. 1 ff. and are unhappy about the serious deterioration in economic relations that characterized the period 1951–54. They are unhappy that the state of economic unsettlement continues and we believe that they would like to see a solution of the outstanding economic issues between the two countries if the price is one which they think they can bear. While they are hard bargainers and have not yet offered any substantial concessions, they have carefully refrained from pushing the exchange to the point of our breaking off discussion. On several occasions when debate has reached a sharp point they have drawn back and taken a more reasonable attitude. It is clear from their statements both in and outside the negotiations that the Czechs are interested in rebuilding their trade with the United States. They would like to obtain the restoration of MFN benefits but the argument that the solution of outstanding economic problems will provide some stimulus to the growth of trade by creating a more favorable atmosphere may have some plausibility with them in spite of what they say in the economic discussions. They are of course interested in the dollar income from increased trade. In addition they would doubtless like to demonstrate a return to a more normal condition and an ability to do as well as Poland at the present time and their non-Communist precursors in Czechoslovakia. The regime’s efforts to broaden cultural relations with the United States are reflected in the sponsorship of Porgy and Bess involving a considerable dollar outlay for the Ministry of Finance and the invitations to American musicians to participate in the International Musical Festival, to the American pianist Julius Katchen and the American singer Hubert Dilworth to give a series of separate concerts in Prague and provincial cities, and to American skaters and tennis stars to appear in Czechoslovakia. It should be noted that the Czechs took the initiative in each of these cases to bring the American performers here and no official American interest was expressed in any of their visits. While this involves some expected reciprocity, the Government has not yet asked for much in return, apparently only seeking to arrange a tour in the United States for the Smetana Quartet. As we have previously reported and as we see it from the Embassy, the benefits of these cultural visits are proving very much in our favor. Since the regime must be aware in some measure of the advantages accruing to the United States from cultural visits to Czechoslovakia the question of course arises as to why they are permitted or even sought. The regime may consider these advantages not too dangerous in comparison with the effects of admitting the entry of American books, magazines and newspapers. At the same time such cultural visits help the regime to gain a certain amount of respectability through promoting culture, through giving some support to the claim of lowering the Iron Curtain, and through giving the people something that they strongly desire. We see little if any reason to think that this interest in extending cultural relations will reach in the near future to matters of a more purely informational character. We have seen no indication of a willingness to stop jamming or to permit the entry of Western publications. There appears no imminent possibility of opening a United States Information Service Library or even a substitute in the form of a reference library under some other name. Whatever limited changes have occurred so far since the Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union the regime continues to reject any concessions looking toward freedom of information. The reaction to the students’ demands, particularly as revealed in the recent National Conference of the Communist Party, leaves no doubt on this score. The regime continues to be very strict regarding any encroachments on its ideological monopoly. The main interest of the regime in improving and extending relations with the United States is doubtless explained as an aspect of the Soviet bloc’s campaign for peaceful coexistence and the relaxation of international tension. It may be noted, however, that a number of officials below the top leaders seem to welcome personally the opportunity permitted by present Soviet tactics in international affairs to take a more friendly attitude toward the United States and things American. Many of them, like the people generally, are sick of the isolation forced upon Czechoslovakia in the Stalinist period and are glad to come out into the light of contacts and exchange with the West. They do not like the reputation of maintaining an Iron Curtain and wish to do something to rid the regime of that onus. And finally the regime cannot altogether neglect the attitude of the people whose admiration and affection for the United States have not diminished. Such an attitude on the part of the Czechoslovak Government does not of course prevent the secret police from maintaining surveillance over Embassy staff members, installing microphones in the Chancery or other American quarters and opening a secret entry to the Chancery attic. These efforts of the police to ascertain intelligence about the operations of the Embassy or to restrict those operations will doubtless continue as long as the Communist regime exists. Nor will its efforts cease to combat by both diplomatic and propaganda means balloon transmissions and what it describes as American “espionage” activities. The Embassy has already suggested in a number of separate communications to the Department its conclusions from these developments. It is believed that advantage should be taken of them to extend our efforts to settle outstanding problems in the relations of the two governments such as economic issues, the imprisonment of the American citizen Jaromir Zastera, exit documentation for American citizens and for close relatives of American citizens. The Embassy also considers it desirable to utilize such opportunities as are presented by this modification of attitude to increase the influence of the United States among the Czechoslovak people by facilitating the travel of Americans to Czechoslovakia, encouraging the visits of recognized American artists and other performers, arranging exhibits of American art, reopening the Consulate General at Bratislava, resuming certain visa services, and resuming payments by Treasury check to individual recipients of benefits now denied them in actual effect. U. Alexis Johnson U.S. Government Response to the Riots in Poznań, June 28, 1956; Adoption by the National Security Council of NSC 5608/1, July 18, 1957; Rákosi’S Resignation as Head of the Hungarian Communist Party, July 18, 1956; Restoration of Political Rights to Gomulka in Poland, August 1956 66. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of Central Intelligence (Dulles), Washington, June 28, 1956, 5:55 p.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Prepared in the office of the Secretary of State. Washington, June 28, 1956, 5:55 p.m. TELEPHONE CALL FROM ALLEN DULLES The Sec. returned the call, and AWD said there has been a riot in Posen [Poznań]. Don’t know what it is about but it is coming out on the ticker and he read from it.Serious rioting in Poznań was later reported in telegrams 992 and 1000 from Warsaw, midnight, June 28 and 1 p.m., June 29. (Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/6–2856 and 748.00/6–2956) The Poznań riots grew from a demonstration by workers for better economic conditions, but escalated into demands for freedom, religous liberty, and an end to Soviet domination of Poland. The internal security forces and the civil militia with the aid of tanks supressed the rioting on June 28 and 29. See Documents 70 and 71. When they begin to crack, said the Sec., they can crack fast. We have to keep the pressure on.On the next day, at 11:59 a.m., Allen Dulles was called by Secretary Dulles and part of the conversation concerned the Poznań riots: “The Sec. asked him also to think re using the Poznan thing. The Sec. mentioned his bringing up in Staff Meeting treating it as an emergency under Sec. [P.L.] 480. AWD said it is worth considering. The Sec. mentioned getting news of this into the Arab countries, India, etc. . . . AWD referred to what the Pres. of the Polish National Alliance said and questioned what he meant re ‘American silence’. They mentioned someone handling this fellow. (I got the ticker, Sec. saw and WBM [Macomber] has.)” (Memorandum of telephone conversation; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations) A. has not gotten hold of Simpson, but will try right away. 67. Notes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting, Department of State, Washington, June 29, 1956, 9:15 a.m.Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75. Secret. Drafted by Fisher Howe. According to an attendance sheet attached to the source text, among those present were the Secretary, Hoover, Murphy, Prochnow, Bowie, McCardle, Armstrong, and Elbrick. Washington, June 29, 1956, 9:15 a.m. 1. Intelligence Briefing —Mr. Armstrong’s outline attached.Attached but not printed. 2. Satellite Unrest—Considerable discussion at various points in the meeting on the problem of exploiting unrest in the satellites particularly brought to light by the Poznan riots reported in the morning papers. In the first place, there was a discussion of the line which USIA should take, Mr. Hoover pointing out that official statements should probably not be used but quotable statements from the floor of Congress might be helpful as would the statements of the businessmen who come out from Poland having stressed the Poznan riots. The Secretary spoke about the need of spreading widely the actions and claims of the USSR in its foreign aid programs because it would place the USSR in the dilemma of denying the claims and thus hurting their good will abroad or in affirming the claims and thus offending the Soviet people themselves who were being squeezed in order to support such aid programs. The Secretary went on to discuss the view he has held that the Soviet economy is overextended: they are trying to match and indeed surpass the U.S. military effort; they are trying to increase their capital development; they are trying to develop their foreign aid program. All of this in the face of a bad agricultural situation. He pointed out that if the U.S., with its far greater industrial base, attempted such programs it would be staggered by the load. The Secretary thought there was a need for us to develop the pressures on these economic vulnerabilities and that by publicizing expansively the Soviet foreign aid offers forcing them into the dilemma of acknowledgment or denial was an important direction in which we could go. Discussion shifted to the appropriate utilization of the barter amendment to PL 480Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, approved July 10. (68 Stat. 454) which Mr. Hill thought might be passed within ten days or so. The Secretary felt that we could develop an offer to the Poles, as well as to other satellites, which would be very appealing and which the USSR would now allow. There was also discussion prompted by the Secretary’s report of Senator Humphrey’s inquiry to him as to whether the world shortage of cement might be a commodity we could usefully seek from the USSR and the satellites in our barter offers. As an aside during the discussion, the Secretary spoke eloquently on the need to take risks in the development of our policies, especially if we are to be “on the offensive”. Nothing is achieved that does not have some risk to it and we should not seek to make all our programs riskless. He pointed out that the coordination process often is deadening in this regard as each participant seeks to remove possible dangers. Action: (1) P to prepare appropriate guidelines in the USIA exploitation of the Poznań riot. (2) P to guide USIA in the full publicizing of Soviet foreign aid programs and claims, seeking to place the USSR in the dilemma of acknowledging or denying. (3) E, in coordination with EUR, to step up its preparation of proposals (Staff Record, June 18)The reference is in error; it should refer to the June 15 Staff Meeting, in which the barter amendment was discussed. (Department of State, Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75) for carrying out the barter amendment to PL 480, without awaiting its passage, to focus particular attention on the current Polish situation, and to consider cement as a useful commodity in barter arrangements. [Here follows discussion of unrelated items.] 68. Memorandum of Telephone Conversations by the Secretary of State, Washington, June 29, 1956Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Phyllis D. Bernau. Washington, June 29, 1956 TELEPHONE CALL TO ALLEN DULLES, 1:24 p.m. The Sec. said what would you think of our making an offer of foodstuffs to the Polish Govt.The offer of food to Poland took final form as a letter of June 30 from Hoover to Harold Starr, General Counsel, American Red Cross. The text is printed in Department of State Bulletin, July 9, 1956, p. 55. Upon receipt of Hoover’s letter, Starr advised the League of Red Cross Societies in Geneva of the offer. The League agreed to accept responsibility for the program of assistance if it was acceptable to the Polish Red Cross. The Polish Red Cross rejected the offer. (Letters from Hoover to Starr, July 7; Starr to Hoover, July 2; and Starr to Hoover, July 6, enclosing cable from the Polish Red Cross; ibid., July 23, 1956, pp. 151–152) to meet the emergency with the understanding that the Soviet Union would agree not to exploit Poland further. Then the Sec. read the statement he just dictated.Reference is to a statement made by Lincoln White to Department of State press correspondents on June 29. For text, see ibid., July 9, 1956, p. 55. They discussed it and the Sec. made a few changes. The Sec. said to think re the offer of food. The Sec. will call back. AWD said he would not condition it. The Sec. said if there is no hooker, we will be in trouble. TELEPHONE CALL TO LINC WHITE, 1:31 p.m. The Sec. gave him the changes as agreed to with AWD. He told W. to consult with someone in EUR before giving it out. TELEPHONE CALL FROM LINC WHITE, 1:42 p.m. W. said Beam agreed and suggested inserting vice Soviet rulers at the end—the Polish people will be allowed a government etc.Beam’s suggestion was incorporated into the final statement. 69. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of Central Intelligence (Dulles), Washington, June 29, 1956, 3:28 p.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Phyllis D. Bernau. Washington, June 29, 1956, 3:28 p.m. TELEPHONE CALL FROM ALLEN DULLES Secretary returned the call. AWD said he is sending messages off on the matter discussed yesterday.The reference is unclear. They briefly discussed the Poznań riots; see Document 66. He did not know if the Sec. would have the chance to get a letter off to A, [?] and was adjusting the cable accordingly. The Sec. said he will probably. On the food matter, AWD thinks it is pretty important to set it up so it does not look like propaganda. He wondered about the possibility of us making an inquiry. Sec. read his draft cable.The reference is unclear. It apparently refers to a draft of telegram 2237 to Geneva, June 30, enclosing the letter from Hoover to Starr, June 30, and confirming to the League of Red Cross Societies the American offer of food to Poland. (Department of State, Central Files, 848.49/6–3056) AWD thinks that is the way to do it. He read Elbrick’s memorandumNot found in Department of State files. and said he was not sure he agrees with it. AWD said we do not have intelligence that there was much of a food shortage. It was in the slogan. Sec. said he could suggest wheat or other food stuffs in the cable. AWD said he would rather do it tomorrow than wait. He asked if we had the legal right. Sec. thinks so if it is an emergency. We have to check to see if the International Red Cross is willing.According to a memorandum of telephone conversation between Dulles and Smith of the American Red Cross, June 29, 4:05 p.m., Dulles made such an inquiry. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations) They agreed they would not like the American Red Cross. 70. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/7–256. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Moscow, Bonn, USAREUR, and USAFE. Warsaw, July 2, 1956—6 p.m. 9. Department pass Defense. Embassy telegram 1.This telegram, July 1, reported that all was quiet in Poznań and promised speculative comments on the Poznań events after further study. (Ibid., 748.00/7–156) Eyewitness, secondhand and regime press reports Poznan riots understandably disagree many details. However, broadest outlines based above sources seem fairly well established although definite verification lacking several points. Following is composite picture based all sources. Regime admits that as result recent cut wages and inability support selves Zispo (Stalin Works) workers sent delegation Warsaw recently make “just demands” re betterment economic status. Delegation allegedly delivered ultimatum that continuation status quo would result demonstration Poznan. Bureaucratic regime apparently did nothing or at least moved too slowly to suit workers. Consequently, demonstration began about 0800 June 28 as peaceful demand betterment material life workers and, according to some reports, demand freedom Zispo delegation and leaders of strike few days previous who at time reportedly imprisoned Poznan. Large number students and children were in the crowd. Peaceful demonstration became mob action probably as result combination following: (1) Cumulative “mob” feeling arising from thousands (estimates run to 20,000), packed in University Square; (2) Authorities (possibly UB) shooting over head crowd; (3) Alleged killing some children during warning shots; (4) Emotional effect crowd singing traditional national anthem; (5) Feeling mass power since this first large popular demonstration Poznan if not Poland since war; (6) Quick popular reaction to inflammatory statements less responsible elements. When crowd became mob, militia, troops and tanks appeared but took no immediate effective action. Regime says reason was orders were issued deal peacefully with crowd; contrarily, other sources claim many militia and soldiers refused fight, soldiers left tanks, because they sympathized with crowd. Some said abandoned tanks subsequently manned by Russians in Polish uniform. Embassy not only unable confirm but on basis information available to date inclined to disbelieve this. Sources allege (and regime implies) first shots against crowd fired by UB. Militia and soldiers later helped restore order, including use gun fire. Seems certain mob: (1) Attacked UB building and burned some UB documents; (2) Overturned streetcars, etc.; (3) Invaded jamming station, threw equipment out window and smashed it; (4) Changed [garble] anti-Soviet and anti-UB slogans; (5) Carried banners expressing similar sentiments; (6) Released prisoners from jail; (7) Tore down Red flags (USSR and Chinese) displayed in connection with the fair; flags then torn into banners with slogans scribbled thereon in school chalk. Allegedly, mob concentrated fury on UB. Several unverified stories described extremely vicious killings UB agents by mob. Mob partially armed. Sources arms not clear. Variously reported as arriving from Zispo (where arms produced) and obtained from raid police headquarters. Regime admits 48 dead. Embassy believes number high. As previously stated most reports say 200 maximum. Several hundred wounded. Later telegram with Embassy view re causes riotInfra. will follow and then another telegram on possible repercussions. Department pass as desired. Jacobs 71. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/7–356. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Moscow, Bonn, USAFE, and USAREUR. Warsaw, July 3, 1956—3 p.m. 14. Department pass Defense. Reference: Embassy telegram 9 repeated Moscow 3, Bonn 2.Supra. Following is Embassy’s estimate basic and immediate causes Poznan demonstrations, subject change as additional information becomes available. Workers J. Stalin Metal Factory Poznan planned demonstration Thursday, June 28 (Embassy telegram 9) as protest economic conditions and possibly against imprisonment workers delegation. Demonstration as economic affair apparently planned considerably in advance, culmination long brewing dispute workers over decreased pay scales (even previously low), bad working conditions, lack overtime pay and alleged ineptitude management. Possible that workers intentionally scheduled demonstration during Poznan Fair to impress foreigners with economic facts of life Poland. While bread shortage mentioned among slogans during demonstration, Embassy believes this merely symbolic inability workers procure necessities life with low pay scales, prevailing high prices. Other food items such as fruits, vegetables, dairy products currently in equally short supply and high priced (seasonal situation this time year before crops). High prices clothing, shoes also frequent cause grumbling. (Embassy believes no basic food shortage exists; problem is rather gap between food prices and wage level urban dwellers and workers.) Demonstration by workers re economic grievances fanned into riot with hastily improvised political slogans by combination circumstances cited Embassy telegram 9. Moreover, presence many foreigners Poznan and contrast Polish austerity with foreign wealth (apparent in foreign cars downtown as well as in foreign consumers goods exhibited at fair), Polish export consumers goods exhibited at fair but not available domestic consumption, all likely serve increase dissatisfaction Poznan residents this time. No concrete indication this second phase demonstration planned in advance. Banners with political slogans apparently hastily prepared as demonstration gained headway; arms in hands demonstrators reportedly obtained police, army or Stalin Factory after rioting began. In short Embassy believes demonstration began as workers grievance meeting but soon developed into opportunity display not only dissatisfaction economic conditions but also display such basic sentiments as hostility USSR and Poles desire independence. Some diplomats (recalling Communist strategy and tactics in past) speculating regime elements planned riots one or other ulterior purposes, viz: (1) Anti-Ochab elements instigated disturbance as means discrediting Ochab and forcing him and cohorts from regime; (2) regime itself fostered riot to provide excuse for repressing public which was getting out of hand as result “liberalization”; (3) security police (UB) purposely tantalized crowd in order convert peaceful demonstration into riot giving UB chance reinstitute more repression and regain its former prestige and autonomy which suffered under de-Stalinization. Since Ochab apparently hated even by regime colleagues and tainted brush Stalin, he and followers could well lose positions as immediate result riot. It does not follow, however, that his enemies would resort to highly dangerous expedient fostering riot which might easily get out of hand in country like Poland where majority people bitterly anti-regime. Moreover, even if Ochab’s enemies willing take this chance, Poznan would not likely be chosen as locale at time when hundreds Western businessmen there to carry back eyewitness reports very damaging to regime. Similarly, regime itself unlikely take risk serious riots and unfavorable publicity only to provide excuse reinstate more repressive measures. Regime has probably learned past 11 years that repression is one principal factor antagonizing public whose resentment clearly evident many ways, including lethargic response contribution to failure economy operate. Government may, of course, institute more repressive measures, if they appear necessary but Embassy believes this would be done only as last resort. In any event, it would not signify that regime planned riots to provide excuse reinstate more repression. Thesis number 3 somewhat more plausible. UB probably does resent loss former power and autonomy and some of its more irresponsible elements might have provoked crowd purposely. However, such action would be spur of moment spark rather than planned cause per se. Jacobs 72. Notes on a Meeting of the Operations Coordinating Board, Washington, July 3, 1956Source: Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430, Preliminary Notes. Secret. Drafted by Richards. Washington, July 3, 1956 1. Soviet and Related Problems Mr. Beam, Chairman of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, briefed the Board orally on developments following the State Department publication of the Khrushchev speech.Published on June 4. He pointed out that the Department had issued two statementsApparent reference to the statements, June 30 and July 2, by Lincoln White; for texts, see Department of State Bulletin, July 9, 1956, p. 55. which had wide publicity in the American press and had been widely disseminated abroad. These statements included eye-witness accounts of the riots in Poznan and pointed up the fact that the riots were based on dissatisfaction of workers with the Communist regime. The US Government’s offer of food to relieve the distress in Poland had also been given wide publicity. The fact that the Communist regime would be judged throughout the world on the basis of its behavior in the future, especially as regards treatment of the workers in Poznan, had also been emphasized. Mr. Beam commented that the demonstrations were the only means of expression of the workers. . . . Mr. Hoover commented that we should maintain a propaganda offensive in the face of Soviet efforts to pin the riots on the United States. Mr. Dulles, commenting on the fact that the riots were labor demonstrations, inquired whether international labor had taken up the matter. If not, he thought the ICFTU might be encouraged to protest in the name of international labor. Mr. Beam commented that a factual hour-by-hour report on the development and progress of the riots would be ready within a couple of days and could be turned into valuable publicity. Mr. William Jackson stated that, if possible, we should encourage such projects as petitions for free elections in Poland and other Satellite countries; also encourage the exchange of information regarding disturbances. He felt that the demonstrations should be regarded in the light of the right of labor to appeal impossible labor conditions. Mr. Hoover and Mr. Dulles commented on the possibility that the riots might be discussed in the Security Council or in ECOSOC. Mr. Beam voiced a caution in this regard, stating that it might be harmful to our long-term interest should these internal disturbances become a matter of discussion by a UN agency. [Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.] 73. National Security Council ReportSource: Department of State, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1, Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe. Top Secret. At its 280th meeting on March 22, in NSC Action No. 1530, the NSC directed the Planning Board to revise NSC 174; see Document 50. For text of NSC 174, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, p. 110. A draft of NSC 5608 by Richard H. Davis of S/P, May 11, is in Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 66 D 487, R. Davis chron. Regarding the Planning Board revisions to NSC 5608, see Document 78. The NSC discussed NSC 5608 on July 12; see Document 79. It was approved as NSC 5608/1 on July 18; see Document 80. Washington, July 3, 1956. NSC 5608 NOTE BY THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY TO THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL ON U.S. POLICY TOWARD THE SOVIET SATELLITES IN EASTERN EUROPE REFERENCES A. NSC 174 B. NSC 5505/1For text of NSC 5505/1, see vol. XXIV, p. 3. C. NSC Action No. 1530–b The enclosed draft statement of policy on the subject, prepared by the NSC Planning Board pursuant to NSC Action No. 1530–b, is transmitted herewith for consideration by the National Security Council at its meeting on Thursday, July 12, 1956. A Staff Study on the subject is being prepared, and will be circulated for Council information in this connection, as an Annex to NSC 5608.Document 76. The enclosed policy does not appear to involve any unusual expenditures over or beyond funds which have been appropriated for normal operating programs of the agencies involved. Accordingly, no Financial Appendix is enclosed. The enclosed statement of policy, if adopted, is intended to supersede NSC 174. It is recommended that, if the Council adopts the enclosed statement of policy, it be submitted to the President with the recommendation that he approve it, direct its implementation by all appropriate Executive departments and agencies of the U.S. Government, and designate the Operations Coordinating Board as the coordinating agency. S. Everett GleasonPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. [Enclosure] DRAFT STATEMENT OF POLICY BY THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL ON UNITED STATES POLICY TOWARD THE SOVIET SATELLITES IN EASTERN EUROPE General Considerations 1. Soviet control over the Soviet satellites in Eastern Europe (Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, Albania and East GermanyWhile many of the considerations set forth in this paper with respect to the Eastern European satellite area as a whole also apply to East Germany, the specific problems of East Germany and Berlin are treated respectively in a supplement to NSC 160/1, being prepared pursuant to Council action on June 15, 1956, and in NSC 5404/1. [Footnote in the source text. The NSC Action of June 15 was 1575–c; NSC 5404/1, “US. Policy on Berlin, January 25, 1954, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VII, Part 2, p. 1390.]) has contributed importantly to the power disequilibrium in Europe and to the threat to the security of the United States. Despite economic dislocation and administrative difficulties, the Kremlin has made considerable progress in exploiting the industrial capacity of the satellites and expanding their military capabilities for use as a coordinated whole with those of the Soviet Union. Formation of the Warsaw Pact in May 1955 as a counter to NATO, which had just admitted West Germany, institutionalized and extended existing Soviet coordination and control over the military potential of the Eastern European bloc. The Soviet military position in Europe was affected little, if at all, by the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Austria in October 1955. 2. Impediments to the consolidation of Soviet control over the Eastern European satellites are: a. The anti-Communist attitude of the great majority of the population in each satellite. This anti-Communism is intensified particularly by loss of personal freedom and a reduced standard of living, as well as by outraged religious and national feelings; but its undiminished survival over the long run is jeopardized by Communist control over every aspect of the lives of the people, particularly the young, as well as by the new Moscow policy of allowing the satellites greater latitude in the conduct of their own affairs. b. The continued presence of nationalist sentiment among the people and even within the satellite Communist parties themselves. c. The continued refusal of the West to accept the permanence of the imposed satellite regimes as compatible with the freedom and self-determination of nations. 3. Despite these impediments, Soviet domination of the Eastern European satellites remains firm and there appears little immediate prospect of basic change in this regard. While the satellite regimes have not been able to overcome widespread popular dissatisfaction with their Communistic program and with their inclusion within the Soviet world, nevertheless there are no known underground groups capable of coordinated, sustained resistance activities to the governments in power in any of the countries concerned. As long as a Moscow-dominated Communist leadership remains in power in these countries and is backed by Soviet military force or threat of force, it is unlikely that Soviet ability to exercise effective control over and to exploit the resources of the European satellites can be appreciably reduced. 4. On the other hand, the many changes in the USSR since the death of Stalin—particularly the introduction of collective leadership, Moscow’s acceptance of Titoism and acknowledgment that there are “different roads to Socialism”, and the denigration of Stalin—are being reflected in current satellite developments. These developments have varied in pace and scope in each of the satellites and are continuing, but common to them all are a reduction in the role of the secret police embodied in the emphasis on the need for “socialist legality” and the admission of past errors attributed to the “cult of personality”. Some personnel changes have occurred at the top in certain satellite governments and others may follow. Although the basic political and economic policies and objectives have not been successfully challenged nor the fundamental subjection of the satellites to the Soviet Union effectively threatened, there are indications that Moscow now recognizes the advantage of using greater flexibility as well as more camouflage in its control of the satellites, and of giving them certain latitude or responsibility of decision on matters of local detail within the general framework of Soviet bloc policy. 5. Nationalism in the satellites, even within the Communist movement itself, remains a disruptive force in Soviet-satellite relations. There is a real and growing split in most satellite parties between those amenable to close Soviet control and the “national Communists”. However, since the combination of basic factors which made possible the successful Yugoslav break with Moscow is lacking in the satellites, it is unlikely that the Yugoslav experience will be repeated in any of them. Moreover, by its reconciliation with Tito, Moscow has sought with some success to neutralize the competing attraction originally exercised on the satellite governments by Belgrade’s independent position and policies. 6. Tito’s establishment of an independent Communist regime provides a standing example of successful defiance of the Kremlin and a demonstration that the West is prepared to assist nationalistic Communist leaders to assert their independence of Moscow. Despite Moscow’s apparent reconciliation with Belgrade, it may be still possible to exploit Yugoslavia’s unique position in promoting future changes in the Soviet satellite relationship. Any diminution of Yugoslavia’s independence of the Kremlin will limit its usefulness in this regard. On the other hand, a Yugoslavia which maintains a position of independence between East and West would be an important asset in promoting possible future changes in the Soviet-satellite relationship. 7. U.S. strategy and policy with respect to the German problem and the satellite issue are so closely interrelated that each must be considered in the light of its effect on the other. The intransigence of the Soviets on German reunification, at Geneva and subsequently, arises in part from their German policy and in part from their regard for Eastern Germany as an advanced position for control of the satellite area. These considerations provide strong Soviet incentives for postponing an agreement on German reunification. The inability of the West to make the satellite issue an agenda item at the negotiating table or to offer substantial promise of the early elimination of Soviet control depresses the hopes of the satellite peoples for freedom and reduces their will to resist, thereby increasing the tendency to accept accommodation with Moscow. 8. Nevertheless, Eastern Germany poses a special and more difficult problem of control for the USSR than do the other satellites. While the Eastern German regime has made some progress with the program of basic industrial development and socialization, and while there are various factors operating to weaken resistance of the Eastern German population to the Communist regime, there is little likelihood that the East Germans can be brought to accept the Communist system imposed on them. The fact that the main body of the German nation in the Federal Republic has made considerable advances in freedom and well-being, and the fact that West Berlin provides a means of contact with the Free World, serve to keep alive in Eastern Germany the hope for an escape from Soviet domination. The situation in East Germany provides opportunities for the West to continue to exploit strong popular anti-Communism, to maintain East Germany as a focal point and example of disaffection for the rest of the Soviet satellites, and to make difficult full utilization by the Soviet Union of East Germany’s economic resources. 9. The denigration of Stalin and Moscow’s acceptance of Titoism have created difficulties in Soviet relations with the satellites; they have raised questions as to the infallibility of Soviet leadership among important elements of the satellite Communist parties; they have aroused to varying degrees latent popular aspirations for relaxation of oppression, restoration of national independence, and the establishment of governments responsive to popular will. This fluid situation in the satellites has increased the previously limited U.S. capabilities to influence a basic change in Soviet domination of the satellites. Although the Eastern European peoples continue to feel that liberation is remote, they remain responsive to our interest in their independence, provided it is expressed persistently and in terms which make it clear that this is our basic objective. There is a possibility that an internal relaxation might result in the long run in the development of forces and pressures leading to fundamental changes of the satellite system in the direction of national independence and individual freedom and security. 74. Telegram From the Legation in Romania to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.66/7–556. Confidential. Bucharest, July 5, 1956—3 p.m. 5. At 4 July reception Gheorghiu-Dej engaged me in long conversation on variety of topics. He opened by inquiring impression General Twining had received from observation “Soviet air might.”U.S. Air Force Chief of Staff General Nathan F. Twining was in the Soviet Union at the invitation of the Soviet Government to view the extensive ceremonies marking Soviet Air Force Day, June 24. I said I had not seen report but assumed he must have had interesting trip. He stressed such visits important. I suggested our Army Attaché would be interested see Rumanian military and air force installations access to which he had not so far been permitted. Dej replied Rumanian military and air force so small could not be of much interest to great country like United States. However, saw no reason why this could not be arranged. I asked him how he felt about Tito’s visit.Tito visited Romania June 24–26, after an extensive visit to the Soviet Union, June 2–23. He said it was enormous success and of tremendous importance since it showed how countries building socialism could completely resolve their differences peacefully. I pointed out some countries like Poland were having serious difficulties building socialism. He dismissed Polish situation as small matter of economic adjustment which had been taken advantage of by some elements hostile to socialism. I asked him what he thought of rumors that Stalinist elements in Poland had fomented outburst in order prove their point that too quick relaxation tensions might have disastrous consequences. Gheorghiu-Dej said to interpreter in Rumanian “I will not discuss this question further,” which interpreter translated to me as “I do not believe there is yet sufficient information on Polish question to justify such rumors.” He immediately launched into question of exchange agricultural attacheś. I told him I understood basis for Rumanian suggestion agricultural attaché exchange was desire keep abreast American agricultural processes. He agreed. I pointed out Dumitru visa granted and visits already exchanged to each other’s agricultural areas and saw no reason for necessity establishing rigid formality of attaché exchange. Furthermore, I emphasized that creation of new diplomatic relationships must necessarily depend upon more normal general relationships between our two countries. I said that it was ridiculous in midst of all these protestations of friendship for United States and desire for closer relations to have my Legation staff constantly trailed by secret police wherever they went and refused permission to travel wherever they wanted to in Rumania. Dej thereupon engaged Foreign Minister in earnest whispered conversation and promptly said, “there is no reason why these things cannot be eliminated.” I said that furthermore we should be permitted to have reading room and disseminate accurate information on United States to Rumanian people who now only read false and absurd statements made about United States in Rumanian newspapers. Although I convinced Rumanian people did not believe what they read they remained completely in dark re current developments in American life. Dej launched into tirade against VOA and RFE broadcasts. I made usual reply that jamming prevented me listening to broadcasts and was unaware their content. Dej smiled and said that he was sure I knew very well that jamming was completely ineffective and that vast majority of Rumanian people were listening to these broadcasts, but fortunately information they received was being corrected by Rumanian radio and other media. I replied that I had told Foreign Minister who nodded assent I would be glad to take up any factual misstatements made by VOA but United States Government had no control over RFE. He asked where RFE money was coming from and I replied voluntary contributions from American people who have strong sympathy for inability Rumanian people to obtain information of what is going on in world. I remarked Rumanians knew nothing of present Polish situation since Polish newspapers banned for last two months. Dej said this internal affair with which United States not concerned. I said I had heard many expressions of friendship from him and other Government officials but that it was time to produce actions rather than words. He said Rumanian Government had made many gestures recently toward United States and I replied it was time stop making unimportant gestures in small matters and that Rumanian Government should show by some substantive fact such as granting permission to United States to open reading room, that it was sincere in its profession of friendship. I reminded him that effects of 10 years of bad relationships would not be overcome by words or gestures but only by meaningful action. Gheorghiu-Dej then proceeded make elaborate statement on importance of satisfying desires of Rumanian people for close economic, agricultural and cultural ties with United States. I said that U.S. people had great difficulty in believing that Rumanian people were independent and free to express their desires or that Rumanian Government itself was free to act without Soviet direction. I said if Gheorghiu-Dej could give me any specific facts indicating this was not the fact which I might report to my Government I was sure it would have tremendous effect upon our relations. He replied he knew there were certain circles in United States who had created word “satellites” and insisted on using it in an effort to undermine natural friendship existing between Rumanians and Soviets and that he was not interested in catering to views these few people, but he was sure that majority of American people were familiar with independence Rumanian people had finally obtained after many hundreds of years of occupation by foreign powers and interests. He proceeded into ideological discussion winding up with statement Americans must see inevitability of eventual triumph of socialism even in United States itself. I told him I doubted he really understood American system and emphasized rigidity of Communists’ insistence that theirs is only perfect system. I said I was willing agree there were imperfections in American system but we were progressive people and constantly changing system and improving it. I was convinced Communist system was in process of undergoing first of many inevitable changes and assumed Rumania would keep pace with these changes. Gheorghiu-Dej agreed his system not perfect but denied there would be any substantial changes in Communist system based as it was on entirely different concept of man and approach world problems. In further discussion he again pressed upon me agricultural attaché idea and emphasized there should be no difficulty in our getting together on normalization diplomatic relations. Above conversation dispersed with much friendly banter and exchange of barbs conducted in atmosphere of cordiality. Gheorghiu-Dej was accompanied by almost entire Politburo including Stoica, Bodnaras,General Emil Bodnares, a First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers. Chisinevschi, Moghioros,Alexandru Moghioros, a First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers. and Salajan.Colonel General Leotin Salajan, Minister of the Rumanian Armed Forces. Very large crowd outside residence applauded Gheorghiu-Dej departure and security agents permitted crowd to close around car as he entered which I am told most unusual. Thayer 75. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Wilcox) to the Acting Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/7–656. Confidential. Drafted by Elizabeth A. Brown (IO/UNP). Also sent to Murphy; a note on the source text indicates it was seen by Hoover and Dulles. This memorandum is a reworking of a previous memorandum from Wilcox to Hoover through Murphy, July 5, in which Wilcox argued against positive action in the United Nations on Poznań on the grounds that many members would see it as interference in Poland’s domestic affairs and would be reluctant to involve themselves in essentially a propaganda issue where constructive action was unlikely. Wilcox suggested the more limited approach of raising the issue in ECOSOC and sending a note based on the ECOSOC statement to the U.N. Secretary-General for distribution. (Ibid., 748.00/7–556) Washington, July 6, 1956. SUBJECT Arguments Re UN Action on the Polish Situation Pursuant to your request, IO has examined the arguments that can be adduced with respect to possible UN action on the Poznan riots. As was indicated in our meeting with you today,Apparent reference to the Acting Secretary’s Staff Meeting of July 6, 9:15 a.m., during which the matter was briefly discussed. (Ibid., Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75) At the Acting Secretary’s Staff Meeting of July 5, 9:15 a.m., IO was directed to “prepare for the Secretary’s information a memorandum setting forth our views with regard to UN action on the Poznan riots.” (Ibid.) the reasons why it is not feasible to seek United Nations action at this time on the Polish situation are more suitable for private discussion with members of the Congress most directly interested in the Polish situation than for use in public statements. However, should it become necessary for the Department to issue a public statement, I believe we can reexamine the arguments and adapt them to this purpose. As you requested at our meeting, I am undertaking, in collaboration with H, to telephone certain key members of the Congress. Following are the arguments that we plan to use with members of the Congress: (1) Article 2(7) of the Charter states that the United Nations is not authorized to intervene in matters essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any state. A majority of Members, including the colonial powers who desire to maintain intact the application of Article 2(7) to colonial issues, could be expected to regard the Polish situation as essentially a domestic problem. Their position would be modified only if we could show conclusively that the situation in Poland actually threatens international peace and security. Moreover, even if we could successfully overcome their arguments in this instance, it would open the way to requests from the Communist bloc and from the Afro-Asian states to consider other matters also of a domestic character, such as the Negro question in the United States, lynchings, or potentially embarrassing domestic situations elsewhere. The Latin American states, for example, frequently have to cope with mob action and would be unlikely to favor any action suggesting UN competence in such cases. (2) Many Members are reluctant to have the UN consider what they regard as propaganda issues in the cold war on which no constructive action can be expected. They fear that, if the UN deals with matters of this character, its prestige will suffer and its ability to deal with problems outside the East-West conflict may be reduced. At this time particularly, even though the Geneva spirit is somewhat tarnished, it would be extremely difficult to obtain support for what a majority of Members would regard as a cold war maneuver. (3) If we nevertheless succeeded in getting the Polish case before the UN, we must anticipate a strong counter-attack from the USSR and its satellites on the ground that the US played a role itself in instigating the riots. Certain aspects of the Mutual Security Program would be cited in support of this allegation. Despite our ability to refute such baseless charges, UN discussion would create enough doubt to deprive us of a decisive moral verdict. (4) If we sought UN action unsuccessfully or with inconclusive results, it could adversely affect continued US support for the UN. Indecisive UN action might also give the USSR a propaganda advantage in the present situation it would otherwise not enjoy. 76. National Security Council Staff StudySource: Department of State, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1, Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe. Top Secret. A table of contents; Appendix A (charts depicting estimated strength of satellite ground, naval, and air forces); and Appendix B, “Brief Survey of the Situation in the Eastern European Satellites”, are not printed. This Staff Study was prepared in response to NSC Action No. 1530 (see footnote 7, Document 50) and circulated to the NSC for information. It was discussed on July 12; see Document 79. It was revised after that meeting and approved and released as NSC 5608/1, Document 80. Washington, July 6, 1956. Annex to NSC 5608 U.S. POLICY TOWARD THE SOVIET SATELLITES IN EASTERN EUROPE Background Importance of the Satellites 1. The satellites are of importance in the current balance of power in Europe because they augment the political, military and economic power of the Soviet Union and extend Soviet power into the heart of Europe. The permanent consolidation of Soviet control in this area would represent a serious threat to the security of Western Europe and the United States. It is our traditional policy to recognize and support the right of all peoples to independence and to governments of their own choosing. The elimination of Soviet domination of the satellites is, therefore, in the fundamental interest of the United States. Soviet Domination of the Satellites 2. Soviet domination of the satellites remains a basic fact; there is no evidence that Moscow’s ability to control them has been fundamentally affected by anything that has happened since the death of Stalin. While it rests in the last analysis on Soviet military domination of Eastern Europe, the immediate basis of Moscow’s control is the reliable Communist leadership in each satellite, flanked by Soviet advisers in the state apparatus and armed forces and by a Soviet-supervised security police system. A contributing factor is the high degree of Soviet-satellite economic interdependence systematically developed since the war. In East Germany a large Soviet military occupation force furnishes an added element of control, without which the Communist government might be unable to maintain the populace in subjection; this was demonstrated when Soviet military force was required to suppress the 1953 riots. The smaller Soviet forces, totaling around 100,000, which are stationed in Poland, Hungary and Rumania are probably not essential to the maintenance of Soviet control over those countries; in them (as in Albania, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria, where no Soviet forces are stationed) what counts is rather Moscow’s over-all military ability to dominate the region. 3. The Kremlin has pushed forward with considerable success its plans to expand the industrial and military capabilities of the satellites and to coordinate their Sovietized political system, military establishments and economies with those of the USSR in a working totality. While tending on the whole to bind the individual satellites separately to the USSR, Moscow has permitted programs of cultural, economic and technical collaboration among them. Through such devices as the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA) and the Warsaw Security Pact it has geared them collectively with one another and with the USSR for specific economic and military purposes. To all intents and purposes the satellites are as much at Moscow’s disposal, economically, politically and militarily, as if they were formally member-republics of the USSR. On the other hand, the convenience to Moscow of their nominally independent status for purposes of UN activity (Albania, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Rumania were admitted to the UN in 1955), foreign trade promotion, propaganda, and other roles abroad, makes the actual incorporation of any of the satellites in the USSR appear unlikely in the foreseeable future. Opposition to Soviet Domination 4. The great majority of the population in each satellite continues to be deeply dissatisfied with the Communist regime, resenting the hard living conditions and lack of personal freedom for which the regime is held responsible. Aggrieved religious feelings resulting from Communist attacks on the churches have also served to intensify this widespread anti-Communism. The dissident majorities are, however, not in a position to develop active resistance of a kind which would seriously challenge Soviet control. Nevertheless, by passive resistance they have long impeded and undoubtedly will continue to impede the process of Sovietization, and they form the main element on which must be based eventual elimination of Soviet domination. At the same time, however, if the process of exclusive Communist indoctrination and education of the young proceeds without interruption and if Moscow continues its new policy of allowing the satellites greater latitude in the conduct of their own affairs, the prevailing anti-regime sentiment may be jeopardized over the long run. 5. In addition to anti-Communism per se, nationalism is a significant factor of opposition to Soviet control in all the satellites. These peoples will not reconcile themselves in a few years to the loss of national independence, a disregard of national traditions and the enforced glorification of the USSR. The nationalist sentiment focuses on the memory of better times in the past, hopes for the future, and the resentment felt at the injuries and insults experienced under the present regime. In many respects it is the strongest leverage available for strengthening the morale of the satellite populations, sustaining their spirit of resistance to Soviet imperialism, and encouraging their opposition to servile Communist regimes. Nationalism is, however, a double-edged weapon, raising a number of operational problems, as we have discovered in our propaganda work and dealings with the refugees. Besides arousing anti-Soviet feeling, nationalist sentiment also creates divisions among these peoples themselves, Magyars against Slavs and Rumanians, Slovaks against Czechs, Poles against Germans, and Germans against the Slavs. A problem which will become increasingly serious as nationalist sentiment ferments is that of the Polish-occupied areas of Germany east of the Oder–Neisse line. 6. Since the death of Stalin the new Soviet leadership has tried certain new approaches in its rule of the satellites. There has been a trend away from the enforced uniformity of the Stalin era, and more emphasis on individual satellite problems and local ways of carrying out socialization within the general framework of Communist dogma. The purge of Beria has been reflected in the satellites in a greater degree of subordination of their police apparatuses to Party control, and in a toning down of some of the more arbitrary and terroristic police-state practices of the Stalin era. Along with an increasing propaganda emphasis on “socialist legality” in the treatment of the ordinary citizen by the state, there has been a tendency to amnesty imprisoned opposition elements. In foreign relations the Soviet bloc has begun to encourage tourism, to expand cultural relations, and to urge the study of non-Soviet as well as Soviet achievements. In these and other ways it has sought to create the feeling that its increasing strength and stability justify a more confident and conciliatory approach to its own peoples and to other countries than in the past. In the economic sphere the USSR has gradually cut down its direct participation in the satellite economies by liquidating all but a few of its holdings of satellite industrial properties both in and outside of the Soviet-satellite joint companies. The satellites have been allowed to relax their previous over-emphasis on heavy industrial development and devote more resources to agriculture. They have been encouraged both to develop more economic interdependence through coordination of planning and development of regional specialization among themselves, and to expand trade with the free world. All evidence so far points to Soviet confidence in the maintenance of its economic power over the satellites under this new regime. The USSR still has ample diplomatic and party mechanisms for overseeing satellite economic programs, and still dominates the trade of each satellite, thus maintaining their prime economic dependence on the USSR. The USSR, furthermore, oversees their inter-satellite economic relations, and probably also their economic approaches to the free world, through the mechanism of the Soviet-dominated Council of Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA). 7. Accompanying these developments over the past months has been a sense of relaxation which in varying degrees, depending on the circumstances in each country, has in general given the population a greater feeling of ease and personal security. Moreover, the denigration of Stalin and Moscow’s acceptance of Titoism have created difficulties in Soviet relations with the satellites; they have raised questions as to the infallibility of Soviet leadership among important elements of the satellite Communist parties; they have aroused to varying degrees latent popular aspiration for relaxation of oppression, restoration of national independence, and the establishment of governments responsive to popular will. As a result, criticism of the regime and its policies, first encouraged as Communist “self-criticism”, has appeared in a number of the satellites and has undoubtedly gone beyond the bounds originally envisaged by those in authority. The intelligentsia, in particular, have seized this opportunity to express in vehement terms diverse criticisms of the regimes and their policies. The recent Writers’ Congresses in Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary offer strikingly similar examples of this phenomenon; the May demonstrations of Czech students and the resolutions adopted at Czech student meetings are other examples. This has led the regimes to seek to impose definite limits on criticism, which they saw was leading to questioning of basic policies and even Communist doctrine itself, and they have already threatened a crackdown where those limits were exceeded. However, it may be expected that the Eastern European intelligentsia will seek to utilize to the fullest opportunities for free expression and that they will exert pressure on the regimes for more freedom. Possibilities of “Titoism” 8. Nationalism in the satellites, even within the Communist movement itself, remains a disruptive force in Soviet-satellite relations. There is a real and growing split in most satellite parties between those amenable to close Soviet control and the “national Communists”. However, since the combination of basic factors which made possible the successful Yugoslav break with Moscow is lacking in the satellites, it is unlikely that the Yugoslav experience will be repeated in any of them. Moreover, by its reconciliation with Tito, Moscow has sought with some success to neutralize the competing attraction originally exercised on the satellite governments by Belgrade’s independent position and policies. 9. Tito is unique among the European satellite leaders in the degree of power that he achieved independently. He created an impressive military force, as well as a political organization, responsive to his own leadership which maintained itself inside Yugoslavia during the war and which, following withdrawal of the German forces, possessed the requisite power to impose its will upon the Yugoslav people without substantial assistance from the Soviet Army. Only the Hoxha regime in Albania achieved a similar success, on a much smaller scale. All the other Communist regimes were placed in power by the Soviet Army itself or by the threat of force which the Soviet Army represented. These regimes, therefore, were from the outset dependent on Soviet military power for their existence and have remained so. In East Germany, Poland, Hungary and Rumania the physical presence of sizable Soviet forces bears daily witness to Soviet domination of these satellites. In Poland the Minister of National Defense is a Soviet marshal, and Soviet officers occupy many of the higher posts throughout the Polish armed forces. In all the satellites there are Soviet military missions, some of them large, which supervise the build-up and Sovietization of the satellite armed forces, and Soviet advisers and technicians hold key positions in these forces as well as in the defense ministries. 10. In contrast to the leadership in the other satellites, Tito preserved exclusive control over his state security apparatus. His security forces were built up on the basis of personal loyalty demonstrated throughout the crucial wartime resistance struggle, and Tito knew that he could trust the overwhelming majority of the higher echelons of his command. In other satellites the security organs were created with a large measure of Soviet assistance and participation which continues to this day. In contrast, Tito steadfastly denied the Soviet liaison officials uncontrolled access to his security organization, a fact which contributed much to the friction that later reached its climax in the break between Tito and the Kremlin. 11. Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Rumania have a common land frontier with the USSR. Bulgaria has a common sea frontier. These states are accordingly more exposed to Soviet military intervention and hence more readily susceptible to Soviet pressure and control than was Yugoslavia, which shares no common frontier with the USSR. Furthermore, with Yugoslavia’s long sea coast facing the West, greater possibilities to obtain material support from the Western powers in the event of a break with Moscow were available to Tito than there would be to the other satellites, with the exception of Albania. 12. Following Tito’s defection in 1948 Stalin took stringent and thorough measures to guard against any similar development in other satellites. Leaders in whom any taint of independence was suspected were either shorn of all power, imprisoned, or liquidated. Sovietization was accelerated. The customary security safeguards were tightened and expanded, and contacts with the West restricted. A series of bilateral mutual assistance pacts was created among most of the satellites and between them and the USSR, signifying that they would go to each other’s aid in case of action from without—a commitment which in 1955 was transformed into a multilateral security pact embracing all of the satellites and the USSR and providing for a joint military command. The resultant relationship between the USSR and the satellites made it appear highly probable that the Soviet leaders could count on the satellite regimes to stay under their control, and that any unforeseen local challenge to that control would precipitate swift Soviet intervention. 13. The safeguards built up by Stalin against satellite Titoism have in general retained their effectiveness up to now. Viewed together with the geographic difficulties, they make the chances appear negligible that any existing satellite Communist regime would or could break away from Moscow under its own power or that any anti-Soviet faction could seize or hold power in a satellite and bring about its detachment from the Soviet bloc. 14. Albania represents a partial exception, albeit an extremely hypothetical one, in that, unlike the other satellites, it is geographically isolated from the rest of the Soviet bloc and has close access to the West by sea. However, this circumstance and the potentiality of the anti-Communist majority of the Albanian population for action against Soviet rule are offset by the current strength of the regime. The present Albanian leaders are loyal to the Kremlin and rule the country with an effective security apparatus. It is clear that they prefer allegiance to distant Moscow, without whose economic aid they could not exist for any length of time, to domination by some nearer neighbor. An important factor militating against any Albanian move away from the Soviet orbit is the bitter rivalry with respect to Albania of its three neighbors—Italy, Yugoslavia and Greece. 15. Nationalism may, nevertheless, continue to be a disruptive force within the Communist movement, open to exploitation by the United States. The fact that Moscow and the satellite Communist parties are giving increasing lip-service to the principle of national autonomy and diversity shows that they are conscious of its importance in the popular mind and would like to twist it to their own advantage. Writers, teachers, scientists, technicians, artists, and similar elements on whom the regime depends to help implement its program, are apt to be deeply imbued with the national tradition, or keenly aware of the local problems, and impatient of limitations or controls dictated by the requirements of distant Moscow or of Soviet-imposed policies. Even within the regime itself, not all satellite Communists are able or willing to serve Moscow’s interest without any regard for that of their own nation; the very problems of governing their respective territories and of meeting the goals which have been set seem to require at least a minimum of cooperation from the people and may lead certain local Communists to oppose as best they can those Kremlin demands and policies which put too great a strain upon their own position. Moreover if the Soviet leaders, out of awareness of these satellite stresses and strains, permit somewhat more local flexibility so as to ease the task of their satellite protégés, it is conceivable that such flexibility might at some point tend to get out of hand, inspire wider unrest, and even impair the general effectiveness of Soviet control. The latter possibility, however, so far appears to be remote. Significance of Yugoslavia in Policy Toward the Satellites 16. Even though no other satellite has followed or seems capable of following the path of Tito’s Yugoslavia under existing conditions, the Yugoslav example continues to be a significant factor in the satellite picture. Tito’s success in maintaining Yugoslavia’s independence constitutes a reflection on the past political competence and infallibility of the Soviet leadership. His political and ideological counter-offensive has been a disturbing factor within the satellite Communist parties. He has provided an example of a Communist alternative to Soviet domination. Though he has latterly tended to swing partly away from the Western allies, including Greece and Turkey, his close relationship with the Western allies has undoubtedly made a strong impression on the satellite peoples. The mere fact of substantial U.S. economic and military assistance to Yugoslavia has had an effect on both Communists and non-Communists in the satellites. 17. In connection with its new, conciliatory tactics toward Tito over the past year, Moscow has caused the satellites to cease their criticism of him and to adopt a conciliatory posture. Some of them have gone so far as to repudiate formally the charge of “Titoism” that was included in the indictment of certain of their major purge victims executed in 1949–52. Nevertheless, the Yugoslav leaders so far have moved slowly and cautiously with respect to the reestablishment of contacts with the Communist parties of the Soviet Union or the satellites. The Soviet Government, for its part, has been in no hurry to reshuffle satellite leaders who are distasteful to Tito; most of the satellites are still headed by Communists who spoke out strongest against him in 1948–53, such as Rakosi in Hungary, Hoxha and Shehu in Albania, and Gheorghiu-Dej in Rumania. One such leader, Chervenkov in Bulgaria, was recently removed, although internal party reasons also appeared to play a role in his ouster;Vulko Chervenkov was demoted from Prime Minister of Bulgaria to First Deputy Prime Minister in April 1956. and it was significant that reliable Bulgarian protégés of Moscow were just as prominent in the reshuffled leadership as before. Significance of Eastern European Political Exiles and Their Organizations 18. Since 1945 none of the organized political émigré groups from the Eastern European countries have been recognized by any of the free world countries as governments-in-exile. The passage of time, the proliferation of exile organizations, and the diverse voices raised to claim to represent the views of the peoples behind the Iron Curtain, have tended to discourage Eastern European political leaders and to diminish the effectiveness of their émigré organizations. In recognition of this trend, the exile leaders joined forces in 1954 to create the Assembly of Captive European Nations (ACEN) in order to provide a unified and cohesive forum for their national voices. Through periodic deliberations and actions in this forum, the exiles have been able to attract more serious attention of the U.S. and foreign press and of the free world statesmen, and thus the ACEN has become to date the most effective device of the Eastern European political exiles to exercise influence on and expound their views before public opinion outside and within the Iron Curtain. 19. For the past year or more the Soviet Union and satellite governments have conducted an intensified “redefection” campaign aimed at rendering ineffective and, if possible, eliminating the organized activities abroad of the political exiles. Although few exiles have been persuaded to return to their native countries (1158 known cases in the period January 1955–March 1956), this campaign has had a disturbing psychological effect in exile circles. The United States has countered this Soviet action with a program emphasizing (a) increased material assistance to escapees, (b) a propaganda counter-offensive, and (c) protection and security of the émigrés. The United States should continue to combat by all feasible means Soviet redefection efforts and should encourage and assist the exiles in opposing the redefection campaign. Means of Attacking Soviet Domination of the Satellites 20. The means available to the United States to assist opposition to, and the eventual breakdown of, Soviet domination of the satellites fall into the following general categories: (a) political and diplomatic; (b) economic; (c) propaganda; (d) covert; and (e) military. It must be recognized that, owing to the actual presence of Soviet power and the apparatus of Soviet control, all these means, with the exception of the military, are of limited effectiveness. Political and Diplomatic 21. The major political and diplomatic capability is to exert upon the existing Soviet-controlled regimes the pressure of the long-standing U.S. position defending the fundamental right of the satellite peoples to freedom. The United States can reaffirm its position on this subject on all appropriate occasions in discussions both with its free world partners and with Soviet and satellite representatives, with a view to strengthening and broadening pressure on the USSR and the satellite regimes. 22. The United States maintains diplomatic missions in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Rumania. This is advantageous in that it (a) provides useful opportunities for reporting and intelligence acquisition, (b) shows American concern for the rights, welfare and eventual independence of the satellite peoples, (c) makes possible direct contact with the government concerned and treatment of such problems as the protection of American citizens and property, (d) provides a vantage point which could be useful in the event of future developments which might be exploited in the U.S. interest, and (e) provides a means for evaluating and guiding our propaganda effort. The principal disadvantages are (a) the impression created in some quarters that diplomatic relations indicate the acceptance of the legitimacy of the Communist regimes, (b) the pressures and harassments to which American representatives in the satellite states are subjected, to the detriment of U.S. prestige, and (c) the security problems created by the presence of satellite missions in the United States. Diplomatic relations with Bulgaria and Albania should be resumed whenever those governments give satisfactory guarantees for the treatment of our missions and their personnel and exhibit a willingness to negotiate satisfactory settlements of outstanding bilateral issues between our governments. Economic The Treasury Department objects to paragraph 23 on the ground that it appears to be weighted against the retention of multilateral controls over lists II and III items and in favor of a relaxation of the unilateral U.S. export controls over these items on shipments to the satellites. The Treasury Department feels that this is an issue which should be carefully reviewed by EDAC and ACEP before broad sweeping conclusions are reached with respect to the efficacy of multilateral controls or the revision of U.S. export controls. [Footnote in the source text.] 23. Western controls of exports to the Soviet bloc, as well as the Soviet bloc drive for self-sufficiency, reduced the trade of Eastern Europe with the free world to a low level by 1953. Subsequently, the Eastern European countries have begun to show more interest in increasing imports from the free world, including the United States, and have taken steps to expand their exports to those areas, with a result that their trade with the West has increased substantially, though it continues to be small as compared to trade within the Bloc. The relatively low level of East-West trade and the size and strength of the Soviet bloc economy, together with Soviet autarchic policies, serve to limit the efficacy of economic pressures as implements to accomplish the general purposes of this paper. They might, however, have some harassment value or could serve as auxiliaries to a coordinated program based primarily on other measures. Existing trade controls have already made the economic problems of the satellites more difficult and to this extent contribute to realizing the specific purposes of U.S. policy toward the satellites. On the other hand, the application of controls on a general basis going beyond commodities of a primary strategic character, requires a large measure of agreement and cooperation among the free world countries, and the question accordingly arises whether they are worthwhile in terms of the general aspects of U.S. relations with the USSR and with our free world allies. Such general controls may also be self-defeating in so far as they tend to facilitate the integration of the satellites with the USSR. The unilateral application of economic pressures by the United States should therefore be considered on a case-by-case basis, bearing in mind the balance of advantage in each instance between the USSR and the free world. The Treasury Department objects to paragraph 24. It sees no justification, at the present time, for requesting broader authority from Congress which would permit either local currency sales of agricultural surpluses to the satellites or the granting of most-favored-nation treatment to the satellites under the Tariff laws. [Footnote in the source text.] 24. The existing low level of trade makes relatively more important economic incentives as a measure to promote U.S. policy toward the satellites. The ability of the United States to offer such incentives, however, is presently inhibited by legislative obstacles to trade with the Soviet bloc. Legislative restrictions on trade in U.S. Government-owned foodstuffs and the provisions of the Trade Agreements Act, which deny to Soviet bloc countries the benefits of most-favored-nation treatment, are presently applied to the bloc as a whole. They do not permit individual treatment as circumstances may warrant. It is desirable to attain greater flexibility in U.S. economic policies, in order that maximum advantage may be gained with the limited economic weapons at hand (both restrictions and incentives). Favorable Congressional action should be sought on amendatory legislation where necessary to provide the flexibility required to utilize increased trade as an incentive to promote the objectives of U.S. policy toward the satellites. Propaganda 25. The denial to the satellite peoples of access to truth and means of contact with the outside world has limited the possibilities in the propaganda field principally to broadcasting, although balloons, air drops, etc., are being used to supplement this medium. The operation of adequate technical facilities for broadcasting to the satellites and effective programming assume increasing importance in view of the need to conserve and promote anti-Communist sentiment in the face of the Communist monopoly over the various media of information. Utilization of our propaganda facilities is conditioned by the necessity of avoiding, on the one hand, any commitments regarding the time and means of achieving freedom from Soviet domination and any incitement to premature revolt, and, on the other hand, seeking to maintain faith in the eventual restoration of freedom. 26. One important means of sustaining the hope and faith of the satellite peoples in eventual freedom and independence would be a program of reciprocal exchanges, especially on the non-official level. The travel of Americans in the satellites and reciprocal visits to the United States can become an effective means of serving to remind the captive peoples of U.S. interest in their ultimate freedom, and correcting the distorted image of the West as mirrored in Communist propaganda media. 77. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge), Washington, July 10, 1956, 5:26 p.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Phyllis D. Bernau. Washington, July 10, 1956, 5:26 p.m. TELEPHONE CALL FROM AMB. LODGE The Sec. returned the call. L. said he is beginning to think we should do something about the Posnan riot. He is thinking primarily about the effect on Polish-Americans. L. mentioned a possibility was setting up a Peace Observation Commission because Poland has international status. Or go at it as we did re bacteriological chargesReference is to the American response to the campaign to condemn the United States for bacteriological warfare against North Korea during the Korean war. —propose we investigate the charge we instigated the riots. L. has been talking with the Polish Govt. in Exile and they are prepared for a Soviet veto but they seem to think something like this with a good preamble would be encouraging there. From what L. gets from Polish-Americans and Congress they would like it. They want a resolution in the SC which would be ultimately vetoed and which would have a preamble setting forth the facts of the situation in Poland today and which would call for a Peace Observation Commission in Poland. The Sec. said he is not negative on it but has been trying to think of some way usefully to bring it up and which won’t backfire. He will probably be questioned tomorrow and wonders what position to take. We don’t want to be too negative in denying we had anything to do with it because while it is true we never instigated anything at all and no money has been spent, nevertheless we do try to keep alive the spirit of liberty in these people. The President has stated they should have independence. If as a result of that, people have aspirations for better things, we don’t want to wholly deny a part. L. said another approach is that [Rokossovskiy?]Bernau left a blank at this point in the transcript; apparently Lodge was referring to Konstantin Rokossovskiy, Marshal of the Soviet Union and the Polish People’s Republic, Polish Minister of Defense, and Commander in Chief of the Polish Armed Forces. is a Russian general and Soviet troops are there and interfere with Poland which is a member of the UN. The Sec. said something like that strikes him as being more important than just to challenge an investigation on the ground we had nothing to do with it. From a purely political standpoint it is not too bad to let some think we did. L. said the approach on the Russian end is better. L. has talked with Wilcox about it and he has all L. has and has a lot of stuff the Dept has L. hasn’t got. The purpose of his calling is as an American politician and his UN position. L. was not enthused when Hammarskjold said it was an internal affair. They agreed it is not simple and there could be a lot of dividends if it is played right. The Sec. said he has been thinking about it and referred to the Dept statement.Apparent reference to a statement of June 29; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, July 9, 1956, p. 55. The Sec. said we would run into a prompt veto and does not believe we would get support from the British and French if we went in on the ground there is interference by the Soviet Union in the internal affairs of Poland. The Sec. said the British and French are weak when things are breaking our way. The Sec. shares L.’s feeling. He questioned if he could get any of these Poles in this country maybe to present a petition or something of that sort. Both have heard from Congressmen. The Sec. said a petition to the SC. L. said the HR passed a resolution on it.House Resolution 574, July 3, 1956, Congressional Record, Vol. 102, pt. 9, 84th Cong., 2d sess., pp. 11775–11780. The Sec. did not know about it. The Sec. said we should be able to capitalize on it. L. said we can get them to do anything if we figure out how and what to do. L. said he has been doing some editorial work on the platform and has everything done except that on foreign relations. The Sec. has a draft and will give it to him at Cabinet Friday. 78. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Elbrick) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 5608 series. Top Secret. Drafted by Stevens; concurred by McCardle. Washington, July 10, 1956. SUBJECT NSC 5608, “US Policy Toward the Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe”Document 73. Discussion: On July 12 the NSC will consider NSC 5608, “US Policy Toward The Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe”, which is an up-dating of NSC 174 on the same subject.See infra. The revision of this paper was undertaken pursuant to NSC Action No. 1530–bSee footnote 7, Document 50. with a view to bringing US policy toward the Eastern European satellites into harmony with the evolutionary concept in NSC 5505/1.For text of NSC 5505/l, see vol. XXIV, p. 20. The paper was drafted in the Department and was approved by the NSC Planning Board without serious modifications. The most serious issue in the discussions in the Planning Board concerned the present influence of the Yugoslav example on the satellites, the Department of Defense and Joint Chiefs taking the position that, as a result of Tito’s recent visit to Moscow,Tito visited Moscow June 1–23, 1956. the position of Yugoslavia was virtually indistinguishable from that of a satellite. The present paper has somewhat modified the statement of US basic objectives in Eastern Europe and has redefined the general courses of action to bring them into conformity with the present situation in Eastern Europe and with a more realistic assessment of US capabilities to effect developments in that area. The only bracketed language occurs in paragraph 25, on page 11, where the Treasury Department proposes restrictions with respect to the recommendation to ask authority for greater flexibility in US economic policy towards the satellites. EUR would prefer to have the bracketed section dropped in order to assure that the general courses of action not enter into unnecessary detail, but has no substantive objection to the proposal since it is not contemplated that authority would be sought to take the specific steps which Treasury desires to guard against. Recommendation: That you support approval of NSC 5608 in its present form. 79. Memorandum of Discussion at the 290th Meeting of the National Security Council, Washington, July 12, 1956Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Drafted by Gleason on July 13. Washington, July 12, 1956 [Here follows a paragraph listing the participants at the meeting. The Vice President presided at the meeting.] 1. U.S. Policy Toward the Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe (NSC 5608Document 73. and Annex to NSC 5608;Document 76. NSC Action No. 1530–b;See footnote 7, Document 50. NSC 5505/1; NSC 174; Memos for All Holders of NSC 5608, dated July 5 and 6, 1956;Neither found. Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated July 11, 1956This memorandum transmitted the views of the JCS on NSC 5608. The JCS were of the view that NSC 5608 was acceptable from a military point of view. (Department of State, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1, Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe)) Mr. Anderson briefed the Council on the main features of the proposed new policy,Reference is to NSC 5608. particularly as it differed from the existing policy on the subject, NSC 174. When he reached paragraph 25, Mr. Anderson pointed out the split views. As proposed by the majority of the Planning Board, the paragraph would read: The Treasury member of the Planning Board wished to delete the first four words. Mr. Anderson suggested that this might be a suitable time for the Council to determine which version it preferred, and invited Secretary Humphrey to speak to the Treasury position. Secretary Humphrey said that the position of the Treasury Department was quite a simple one. It seemed to them that, with all the difficulties which the Administration was now encountering with the Congress, it was wholly unrealistic to go to the Congress and ask them to agree to legislation which would permit us to give surplus agricultural commodities to the Soviet satellites. It was simply impossible, according to Secretary Humphrey, to get any such concession from Congress. They were opposed to any liberalization of Public Law 480 vis-à-vis the Soviet satellites. To make the attempt to induce a liberalization would only succeed in arousing a storm of protest in Congress and further complicate our already involved situation. Dr. Flemming inquired whether the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Agriculture had not already requested authority from Congress for greater flexibility in carrying out economic policies toward the satellites. Secretary Dulles replied that all that they had sought was authority to barter goods with countries behind the Iron Curtain. Moreover, he added, he had not in mind asking anything more of the Congress by way of authority in this area. Secretary Wilson said that he went along with the position taken by Secretary Humphrey toward this course of action, but that he did so for different reasons than Secretary Humphrey. He was not opposed to seeking additional authority from Congress simply because to do so was inexpedient at this time, but rather because he did not wish to see the standard of living in the satellites raised through the agency of U.S. surplus food. If the satellite standard of living was raised, it would indirectly promote both the political stability and the military power of the satellite states. In sum, trading on a preferred basis with the Communists in items of food value was a very doubtful course of action. It would be doubtful even if the people of the United States and the Congress could be induced to support it. . . . In concluding, Secretary Dulles once again repeated that he was not now seeking any new authority, along the lines suggested by paragraph 25, from the Congress at this time. Mr. Anderson pointed out that it was generally understood that an effort would be made to secure Congressional agreement for the sale of surplus commodities in return for local currencies. This, he believed, underlay paragraph 25. Secretary Humphrey said that in general when this Government sold surplus agricultural commodities to foreign countries, it gave back the local currencies thus generated to the country which received the surplus food. This being the general pattern of our performance, Secretary Humphrey predicted that we would get into terrible trouble if we followed this pattern of operations in dealing with the satellites. The Vice President agreed that from the practical standpoint the language of paragraph 25, calling for additional authority and greater flexibility in U.S. economic policies toward the satellites from the Congress, posed a political impossibility at this time. Later on we may educate Congress into understanding more clearly our reasons for seeking such additional flexibility. Accordingly, the Vice President said he agreed with the Treasury proposal to delete the first four words of the paragraph. Secretary Dulles again stated emphatically that he hadn’t the slightest idea of going before Congress for anything at the present time; and if any such proposal as this was inherent in paragraph 25, it was nothing less than ridiculous, particularly with the Congress about to adjourn. Was anybody, he asked, actually suggesting that the Administration should now go to Congress for more authority . . . ? Accordingly, he said, he was quite prepared to agree to drop the bracketed four words. Subsequently, if the situation warranted, we could seek authority for more flexible action from the Congress. Mr. Anderson proposed deletion of the first four words of paragraph 25, the Council agreed, and Mr. Anderson went on to conclude his briefing of the remainder of the paper. (A copy of Mr. Anderson’s brief is filed in the minutes of the meeting.)Not found. The National Security Council:Paragraphs a–c and the Note that follow constitute NSC Action No. 1580, approved by the President on July 13. (Department of State, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council) a. Noted and discussed the draft statement of policy contained in NSC 5608, prepared by the NSC Planning Board pursuant to NSC Action No. 1530–b, in the light of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff transmitted by the reference memorandum of July 11. b. Adopted the statement of policy contained in NSC 5608, subject to the following amendments: (4) Paragraph 25: Delete the bracketed phrase and the footnote relating thereto. c. Agreed that the NSC Planning Board would delete from the statement of policy in NSC 5608 especially sensitive statements as indicated in the discussion, and that such statements, with the addition of the sentence discussed at the meeting which would require the authorization of the Secretary of State for certain operations, should be circulated as a separate Appendix with special limited distribution.Printed as an appendix to NSC 5608/1, infra. Note: The statement of policy in NSC 5608, as amended and edited in accordance with the actions in b and c above, subsequently approved by the President subject to the following additional amendments: The statement of policy in NSC 5608 as amended, edited, and approved by the President, subsequently circulated as NSC 5608/1 and the Appendix thereto; and referred to the Operations Coordinating Board as the coordinating agency designated by the President. [Here follow agenda items unrelated to Eastern Europe, with the exception of the following portion of Allen Dulles’ briefing on “Significant Developments Affecting U.S. National Security.”] [Here follows the remainder of the agenda items.] S. Everett Gleason 80. National Security Council ReportSource: Department of State, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1, Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe. Top Secret. Washington, July 18, 1956. NSC 5608/1 NOTE BY THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY TO THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL ON U.S. POLICY TOWARD THE SOVIET SATELLITES IN EASTERN EUROPE REFERENCES A. NSC 174 B. NSC 5505/1 C. NSC 5608 D. NSC Actions Nos. 1530–b and 1580Regarding NSC Action No. 1580, see footnote 9, Supra. The National Security Council, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, Mr. Amos J. Peaslee for the Special Assistant to the President for Disarmament, and the Director, Bureau of the Budget, at the 290th meeting of the Council on July 12, 1956, adopted the statement of policy contained in NSC 5608, prepared by the NSC Planning Board pursuant to NSC Action No. 1530–b, subject to amendment and editing as set forth in NSC Action No. 1580–b. The President, subject to further amendments as indicated in the Note to NSC Action No. 1580, has this date approved the statement of policy in NSC 5608 as amended and edited at the 290th NSC meeting. The statement of policy in NSC 5608, as amended, edited, and approved by the President, is enclosed herewith as NSC 5608/1 for implementation by all appropriate Executive departments and agencies of the U.S. Government, under the coordination of the Operations Coordinating Board. The statement of policy in NSC 5608/1 supersedes NSC 174, except with respect to policy toward East Germany, which will be the subject of separate policy recommendationsReference is presumably to NSC 5727, Supplement II (“U.S. Policy Toward East Germany”), issued as an annex to NSC 5803, February 7, 1958. being prepared pursuant to NSC Actions Nos. 1530–b and 1575–c.NSC Action No. 1575 directed the Planning Board to prepare for NSC consideration a supplement to NSC 160/1, “U.S. Policy Toward East Germany”, September 12, 1956. The supplement to NSC 160/1 is scheduled for publication in volume XXVI. James S. Lay, Jr.Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. [Enclosure] STATEMENT OF POLICY ON U.S. POLICY TOWARD THE SOVIET SATELLITES IN EASTERN EUROPE General Considerations 1. Soviet control over the Soviet satellites in Eastern Europe (Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, Albania and East GermanyWhile many of the considerations set forth in this paper with respect to the Eastern European satellite area as a whole also apply to East Germany, the specific problems of East Germany and Berlin are treated respectively in a supplement to NSC 160/1, being prepared pursuant to Council action on June 15, 1956, and in NSC 5404/1. [Footnote in the source text. Reference is to NSC Action No. 1575. NSC 5404/1, “U.S. Policy on Berlin,” January 25, 1954, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VII, Part 2, p. 1390]) has contributed importantly to the power disequilibrium in Europe and to the threat to the security of the United States. Despite economic dislocation and administrative difficulties, the Kremlin has made considerable progress in exploiting the industrial capacity of the satellites and expanding their military capabilities for use as a coordinated whole with those of the Soviet Union. Formation of the Warsaw Pact in May 1955 as a counter to NATO, which had just admitted West Germany, institutionalized and extended existing Soviet coordination and control over the military potential of the Eastern European bloc. The Soviet military position in Europe was affected little, if at all, by the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Austria in October 1955. 2. Impediments to the consolidation of Soviet control over the Eastern European satellites are: a. The anti-Communist attitude of the great majority of the population in each satellite. This anti-Communism is intensified particularly by loss of personal freedom and a reduced standard of living, as well as by outraged religious and national feelings; but its undiminished survival over the long run is jeopardized by Communist control over every aspect of the lives of the people, particularly the young, as well as by the new Moscow policy of allowing the satellites greater latitude in the conduct of their own affairs. b. The continued presence of nationalist sentiment among the people and even within the satellite Communist parties themselves. c. The continued refusal of the West to accept the permanence of the imposed satellite regimes as compatible with the freedom and self-determination of nations. 3. Despite these impediments, Soviet domination of the Eastern European satellites remains firm and there appears little immediate prospect of basic change in this regard. While the satellite regimes have not been able to overcome widespread popular dissatisfaction with their Communistic program and with their inclusion within the Soviet world, nevertheless there are no known underground groups capable of coordinated, sustained resistance activities to the governments in power in any of the countries concerned. As long as a Moscow-dominated Communist leadership remains in power in these countries and is backed by Soviet military force or threat of force, it is unlikely that Soviet ability to exercise effective control over and to exploit the resources of the European satellites can be appreciably reduced. 4. On the other hand, the many changes in the USSR since the death of Stalin—particularly the introduction of collective leadership, Moscow’s acceptance of Titoism and acknowledgment that there are “different roads to Socialism”, and the denigration of Stalin—are being reflected in current satellite developments. These developments have varied in pace and scope in each of the satellites and are continuing, but common to them all are a reduction in the role of the secret police embodied in the emphasis on the need for “socialist legality” and the admission of past errors attributed to the “cult of personality”. Some personnel changes have occurred at the top in certain satellite governments and others may follow. Although the basic political and economic policies and objectives have not been successfully challenged nor the fundamental subjection of the satellites to the Soviet Union effectively threatened, there are indications that Moscow now recognizes the advantage of using greater flexibility as well as more camouflage in its control of the satellites, and of giving them certain latitude or responsibility of decision on matters of local detail within the general framework of Soviet bloc policy. 5. Nationalism in the satellites, even within the Communist movement itself, remains a disruptive force in Soviet-satellite relations. There is a real and growing split in most satellite parties between those amenable to close Soviet control and the “national Communists”. However, since the combination of basic factors which made possible the successful Yugoslav break with Moscow is lacking in the satellites, it is unlikely that the Yugoslav experience will be repeated in any of them. Moreover, by its reconciliation with Tito, Moscow has sought with some success to neutralize the competing attraction originally exercised on the satellite governments by Belgrade’s independent position and policies. 6. Tito’s establishment of an independent Communist regime provides a standing example of successful defiance of the Kremlin and a demonstration that the West is prepared to assist nationalistic Communist leaders to assert their independence of Moscow. Despite Moscow’s apparent reconciliation with Belgrade, it may be still possible to exploit Yugoslavia’s unique position in promoting future changes in the Soviet satellite relationship. Any diminution of Yugoslavia’s independence of the Kremlin will limit its usefulness in this regard. On the other hand, a Yugoslavia which maintains a position of independence between East and West would be an important asset in promoting possible future changes in the Soviet-satellite relationship. 7. U.S. strategy and policy with respect to the German problem and the satellite issue are so closely interrelated that each must be considered in the light of its effect on the other. The intransigence of the Soviets on German reunification, at Geneva and subsequently, arises in part from their German policy and in part from their regard for Eastern Germany as an advanced position for control of the satellite area. These considerations provide strong Soviet incentives for postponing an agreement on German reunification. The inability of the West to make the satellite issue an agenda item at the negotiating table or to offer substantial promise of the early elimination of Soviet control depresses the hopes of the satellite peoples for freedom and reduces their will to resist, thereby increasing the tendency to accept accommodation with Moscow. 8. Nevertheless, Eastern Germany poses a special and more difficult problem of control for the USSR than do the other satellites. While the Eastern German regime has made some progress with the program of basic industrial development and socialization, and while there are various factors operating to weaken resistance of the Eastern German population to the Communist regime, there is little likelihood that the East Germans can be brought to accept the Communist system imposed on them. The fact that the main body of the German nation in the Federal Republic has made considerable advances in freedom and well-being, and the fact that West Berlin provides a means of contact with the Free World, serve to keep alive in Eastern Germany the hope for an escape from Soviet domination. The situation in East Germany provides opportunities for the West to continue to exploit strong popular anti-Communism, to maintain East Germany as a focal point and example of disaffection for the rest of the Soviet satellites, and to make difficult full utilization by the Soviet Union of East Germany’s economic resources. 9. The denigration of Stalin and Moscow’s acceptance of Titoism have created difficulties in Soviet relations with the satellites; they have raised questions as to the infallibility of Soviet leadership among important elements of the satellite Communist parties; they have aroused to varying degrees latent popular aspirations for relaxation of oppression, restoration of national independence, and the establishment of governments responsive to popular will. This fluid situation in the satellites has increased the previously limited U.S. capabilities to influence a basic change in Soviet domination of the satellites. Although the Eastern European peoples continue to feel that liberation is remote, they remain responsive to our interest in their independence, provided it is expressed persistently and in terms which make it clear that this is our basic objective. There is a possibility that an internal relaxation might result in the long run in the development of forces and pressures leading to fundamental changes of the satellite system in the direction of national independence and individual freedom and security. 81. Notes on a Meeting of the Operations Coordinating Board, Washington, July 18, 1956Source: Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Minutes—Preliminary Notes. Secret. Drafted by Richards. Washington, July 18, 1956 [Here follows discussion of unrelated items.] 3. Report on Work of the Special Committee on the Soviet and Related Problems Mr. Beam reported briefly and orally to the Board on the work of the Special Committee. He itemized the following developments: 1) Eye-witness accounts of the Poznan riots were being collected and were being made available for appropriate use by USIA, . . . and newspapers. 2) At US initiative, and with Canadian support, the Poznan riots were discussed on July 14 at the North Atlantic Council. 3) Ambassador Lodge found an opportunity to mention the riots during a recent speech. 4) The US Delegation to ECOSOC had been instructed to mention the Poznan riots in a speech when an opportunity presented itself. Mr. Beam commented that other governments were not being particularly helpful in the dissemination of stories regarding the Poznan riots,In circular telegram 44, July 19, the Department instructed 15 posts in Europe, the Western Hemisphere, and the Middle East to raise the issue of the Poznań riots with the respective host governments on the grounds that the Polish Government’s reaction to the riots might be tempered by “Free World interest.” (Ibid., Central Files, 749.00/7–1956) but it was believed that they might be influenced to be helpful when the trials started. In reply to a question, Mr. Beam stated that the Russian propaganda line is getting firmer, although it is not as yet as tough as before Stalin’s death. [Here follows discussion of unrelated items.] 82. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/7–1956. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Moscow and Munich. Budapest, July 19, 1956—1 p.m. 31. Department also pass USIA, Army, Air Force. Preceded by spate unverified rumors during day, and reports of activity in Parliament building until near dawn previous night, radio Budapest last evening announced meeting yesterday of central committee at which Rakosi resigned as first secretary of CC and Politburo. Gero “unanimously” chosen successor. Kadar, Marosan, Revai and Kiss went into Politburo with Kadar named Secretary. (Alternates also elected were Gaspar and Revai.) New CC members: Former alternates Matusek and Molnar and new members Foldes, Hazai, Imre Horvath, Kadar, Kallai, Marosan and Imre Meso (secretary budget party committee). Rakosi’s resignation said based on increasing poor health and errors in fields personal cult and socialist legality. Obvious however that party support had dwindled considerably in recent weeks probably to all-time low, and that opposition in party ranks was not weakened in its determination to force show down despite evidence Soviet support for certain of Rakosi’s policies. Recent press line, Pravda criticism of Petofi ClubThe Petöfi Circle or Club was formed and approved on March 17 as a debating club under the sponsorship of the Federation of Working Youth. Named for the 19th-century Hungarian poet, Sándor Petöfi, the club became a focal point for intellecual opposition and criticism of the Rákosi regime, and its impact within Hungary extended well beyond its immediate circle. proceedings, reported visit last few days by Mikoyan, and preliminary information on proceedings at yesterday’s meeting point clearly to considerable Soviet intervention and unwillingness give unqualified support to either wing. Choice of Erno Gero as new CC First Secretary suggests intent is to make Rakosi’s sacrifice more symbol than substance, and represents to Legation smallest sacrifice which could have been made. Nevertheless, disappearance Rakosi’s figure if not influence certain to be welcomed by Hungarian people, even though they may feel intense disappointment at Gero as successor. Both Hegedus and Gero’s speeches pointed specifically to continuing danger from right wing party elements. Legation understands that, particularly in foreign broadcasts, slight reduction in 5-year plan goals and further 15,000 man reduction armed forces been used in attempt to characterize change as major concession. Further details and analysis follows,See infra. but suggest media handle question as first step or inter-regnum won by basic opposition to system. Obvious that no true Hungary [Hungarian] nor even right wing party group will be placated by this change of guard. Ravndal 83. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/7–1956. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Vienna and Munich. Budapest, July 19, 1956—10 p.m. 32. Department pass USIA. Legtel 31.Supra. Further factual details drawn from press accounts of recent HWP Central Committee meeting include following. Rakosi’s speech accompanying letter of resignationFor Rákosi’s letter of resignation and accompanying speech, published July 19, see Zinner, ed., National Communism, pp. 340–342. dilated further on his health, and also on his mistakes in violation Socialist legality and in field of personal cult which “made party work more difficult . . . diminished attractive power of party . . . obstructed constructive criticism and . . . democratism . . . offered points of weakness for enemy to attack”, etc.All ellipses are in the source text. Hegedus speech brief, largely devoted to outlining changes in party organs, praises Rakosi for services before blaming for mistakes and also attacked Nagy. Long speech delivered by GeroFor extracts, see Zinner, National Communism, pp. 342–345. stressed: successes of Socialist camp and fading of imperialism, with less chance of war; continued danger from imperialist enemy, who tries to sow discord in Communist bloc, using “liquidation of personal cult centered around Stalin” as tool (Poznan, Petofi Club, Western spies also cited); party democracy gaining, but enemy at home had some successes in confusing many members, and Politburo has not had full support even of CC; control of debates and press been mistakenly allowed to slip out of party hands; economic situation better but still tense; must appeal to financial interest of individual; plan for industrial expansion, capital investments and national income to be reduced small amounts, but 25 percent increase in real wages retained; no more national loans; further reduction of 15,000 in armed forces; collectivization to be continued but only per voluntary principle, and even kulaks’ rights to be respected; unity and discipline essential to party and nation; less bureaucracy needed; “Socialist legality” essential; army and security organs must have full support; both right deviations (Nagy attacked) and “sectarianism” to be guarded against; most “differences of opinion” occur with intelligentsia, which must be won over by party. Reactions other Western Legations (only limited number contacted thus far but these well-informed) show generally two schools of thought which differ mainly in emphasis: (1) [One] School considers Soviet role as that of brake in preventing situation from going much further. Action taken estimated by Soviets as minimum concession to stave off further party revolt, and one which would at same time permit restoration order. According this reasoning Poznan (and possibly even Petofi Club) riot strengthened Rakosi’s hand and perhaps resulted in smaller concession being worked out than might otherwise eventually have come about. Future situation probably to be highlighted by renewed party revolts within reasonably short period of time since present solution satisfies no one. Regime now setting about to forestall these revolts extent possible. Future concessions will be determined by relative strength these actions as well as by international situation. (2) Another school views situation as evolutionary, not revolutionary; despite minuteness of concession, nevertheless Rakosi is gone and Kadar is installed. Gero’s health poor, his role may not be paramount for long. Some concessions have been granted to non-Stalinist party faction and to general public. There will probably be room within framework of new regime’s controls for more freedom of expression within party. If flare-ups do not come too quickly or too sharply, then in course of time gradual liberalization is probable. In Legation view based on analysis possible thus far, situation suggests that conflicting forces engendered by recent developments i.e., trend toward surface liberality sparked by 20th Soviet Party Congress on one hand, and reaction influenced by such open criticism of local party as voiced in Petofi Club, and by Poznan riots, on other, have resulted in curious and perhaps unstable compromise, i.e.: Number 1 Stalinist Rakosi out as First Secretary Party—but Gero with hardly more savory record in; new blood in Politburo includes such relatively non-doctrinaire elements as Kadar and Marosan—but old gang with exception Rakosi still there; some lip service paid to Socialist legality and free criticism, slightly smaller industry investments and abolition peace loan, as well as softer words for erstwhile “kulaks”—but need for party solidarity behind central leadership, danger from “enemy” abroad and at home (latter including Imre Nagy and right deviationists) stressed. In any event, evident that those at controls felt something should finally be done, after continuing postponements of meeting to aid letting off steam of current discontent. But whether such solution can satisfy any group for long seems most doubtful. While too soon yet to reach definitive conclusion, we tend toward belief that Soviet pressure was exercised in favor of minimum concession possible at time, and that fact changes made in spite of previous Soviet support of Rakosi, evident up to Mikoyan’s arrival, show deep and broad nature opposition to Rakosi as personification of old system. We doubt that opposition will be satisfied with this crumb for very long and believe that any efforts to reinstitute tighter controls might in fact work to speed new outburst. While much depends of course upon Kadar’s role in future, we are not inclined to think at moment that his role is intended to be paramount nor that it is now intended that he use new position as stepping stone to become Gero’s successor. On whole Legation inclined to foresee some period of uneasy equilibrium followed later by clearer trend direction of which depends on results achieved by present Hungarian leadership at home and of current Soviet policies on international plane. Suggestions for media treatment follow: Insofar possible judge up to now, reaction Hungarian people to Rakosi’s departure seems to be one of relief, tempered however by usual skepticism, fundamental lack of public interest in Communist party maneuverings and disappointment over Gero as successor. This change in leaders, viewed against background post-20th Congress atmosphere, probably considered by part Hungarian people as small landmark on road to liberalization and possible symbol new changes and better things to come. Consequently believe media justified in cautiously supporting current relatively hopeful and expectant mood on part Hungarian people by playing up point that change came basically from below, forced on reluctant Russian masters and Hungarian Stalinists by Hungarian situation. Suggest media review recent Hungarian actions beginning with writers revolt and climaxing in Petofi Club, which forced this change. While media can make clear that Gero also old pro-Russian Stalinist, and acceptable to Russians only because of this, and that his new line not yet proved, he nevertheless caught in irreversible stream of events in which Hungarian people now clearly playing large role. Legation believes Western press and public opinion will be shocked at minimum nature of concessions in light promises made since March. If this the case, believe media can profitably play this up. Ravndal 84. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 20, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/7–2056. Confidential. Drafted by Lister. Washington, July 20, 1956 SUBJECT Proposed United States Action Concerning Poznan RiotsIn a meeting on July 13, Beam, Stevens, and Lister met with General Bor-Komorowski and Josef Lipski to discuss the the Poznań riots and the American reaction. Both Poles felt that the Polish Government might be restrained from repression against Poznan rioters by expressions of “Free World interest.” They suggested a U.S. protest to Warsaw, and possibly Moscow, demanding international supervision of the trials of the Poznan demonstrators, and a corresponding protest to the United Nations. The émigrés offered to send food, which had been rejected by the Polish Government when officially proffered from Washington, to Poland through their own channels. Finally, they asked for help in publication of letters on Poznań to the editors of major newspapers. Beam offered help with the letters and promised to take their other proposals into consideration. (Memorandum of conversation by Lister, July 16; ibid., 748.00/7–1656) PARTICIPANTS Stanislaw Mikolajczyk, President of the International Peasant Union and Chairman of the Polish National Democratic Committee and the Polish Peasant Party Karol Popiel, Chairman of the Executive Board of the National Democratic Committee and the Polish Christian Labor Party G—Mr. Murphy EE—George Lister Mr. Mikolajczyk and Mr. Popiel called this afternoon at their request to discuss the recent Poznan riots and to suggest United States action in that connection. Mr. Mikolajczyk opened the conversation by stating that he did not agree with the argument that Free World activity and comment regarding Poznan would spur the Polish Government to more repressive measures. He said that on the contrary the Warsaw regime would be more likely to follow a policy of moderation if it felt the world was interested and watching. Mr. Murphy expressed his agreement with this point of view and said that while he did not feel it was desirable for us to exhort the Polish people to rise up we should not try to restrain or discourage them. He added that, with the exception of the Free Poles, he felt that it was inappropriate for the Free World to try to tell the Polish people what they should or should not do, and that advice of that sort was likely to arouse resentment among them. Mr. Mikolajczyk agreed and briefly criticized a Polish language leaflet which the Russian émigré NTS organization had sent into Poland and which appeared to speak for the Free Poles although it had no right to do so. Mr. Mikolajczyk then referred to the main purpose of his visit—to urge American action in connection with Poznan. He put forward two specific suggestions: 1) to bring to the Security Council of the UN a proposal to create a special committee to investigate the Poznan uprising; and 2) to state publicly that the United States intends to bring the question of free elections in Poland to the General Assembly when it meets (in November). Mr. Mikolajczyk said that he felt the second step should be taken regardless of whether the first measure is approved by the Security Council. He also discussed the urgent need for such action so that the Polish people as well as the Warsaw regime would not think that the Poznan uprising was disregarded in the West. He felt that the action he proposed would have a very desirable effect in Eastern Europe. Mr. Murphy thanked the Polish visitors for their visit and indicated the abovementioned suggestions would be taken into consideration. Mr. Mikolajczyk left two reports (see attached) of statements by the International Peasant Union and the Polish National Democratic Committee on Poznan.Dated July 5 and June 30, respectively, both attached, but not printed. 85. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/8–956. Confidential. Repeated to Moscow and Belgrade. Warsaw, August 9, 1956—1 p.m. 167. Embtel 157.Telegram 157 from Warsaw, August 6, reported the restoration of full party rights to Gomulka, Spychalski, and Kliszko and speculation that Gomulka might receive an important government post. (Ibid., 748.00/8–656) Restoration party rights Gomulka may have multiple purposes: (1) Give added credibility genuiness democratization here; (2) Further attempt convince non-bloc communists (including Yugoslavs) and socialist parties, and world opinion “separate roads to socialism” really possible, as witness return nationalist communist Gomulka; (3) Attempt increase unity party and national front. Embassy emphasizes Gomulka thus far only restored party rights and even if subsequently given important party and/or government post, such as Deputy-Premiership, this could be merely window dressing to serve above purpose. Embassy inclined doubt “democratization” party line has yet proceeded to point where “rehabilitated” communist will be allowed freedom action party circles. Seems particularly unlikely in case Gomulka whose policies castigated publicly by party leaders Morawski 26 March (Weeka 13)Joint Weeka 13, telegrams 690 and 691 from Warsaw, both March 30. (Ibid., 748.00(W)/3–3056) and Ochab April 6 (Weeka 15).Joint Weeka 15, telegrams 730 and 731 from Warsaw, both April 13. (Ibid., 748.00(W)/4–1356) Moreover, in face stated party disapproval Gomulkaism, former Gomulka adherents likely cautious re supporting him. Possibility cannot be excluded that Gomulka will be able exploit to his personal advantage reported indecision and factions within PZPR which accentuated by de-Stalinization and other implications for Poland of 20th Congress CPSU, and need resolve situation causing Poznan riots. Well-known stubbornness Gomulka presents possibility he refused return party ranks unless PZPR conceded somewhat his views and promised substantive position. In any event, he has not recanted publicly. Believe developments to date justify little, if any, optimism re potential contribution Gomulkaism to cleavage Poland–USSR. Moreover, particularly important recall that, although castigated by regime, Gomulka was and probably is ruthless, hard-core, anti-US communist. Barber 86. Despatch From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/8–3056. Confidential. Drafted by John T. Rogers, Second Secretary and Consul at the Legation. Budapest, August 30, 1956. No. 77 REF Legdes 57, August 17, 1956This 18-page despatch, August 17, contained as an introduction four summary conclusions regarding Rákosi’s resignation: (1) opposition to him came primarily from within the Hungarian Communist Party; (2) Yugoslav influence alone was not enough to bring on his removal although it helped “to create and maintain Party factionalism”; (3) the Soviet role was that of “controlling and guiding factors which were already in play”; and (4) opposition to Rákosi was ideological as much as personal. (Ibid., 764.00/8–1756) SUBJECT Hungarian Political Developments: The First Six Weeks After Rakosi Summary Although it is too soon properly to evaluate the new era in Hungary which began with the resignation of Rakosi, a number of characteristics of this period seem to be evident: 1. There has been no personality cult built up around Gero. 2. The influence of Kadar seems to be considerable. 3. An effort is being made to gain support from the Nagy element of the Party and from non-Communist parties. 4. The attitude toward intellectuals has definitely changed since the meeting of the Central Leadership in July. 5. A number of modest concessions have been made toward the general population. 6. A general review of economic policy may be under way. 7. The regime has adorned itself with a new halo of democracy, progressiveness and freedom. 8. There is some reason to believe that relations with the United States will gradually improve. An examination of these characteristics leads toward the conclusion that events have moved faster and more favorably than most observers anticipated. While it is true that many steps which have been taken must be labelled as concessions made desirable because of the strength of the opposition and designed to head it off; and while it is also true that the basic conflict continues between those wishing to cushion the effect of the 20th Congress in Hungary and those willing or wishing to permit a more natural development of ideological thought and political practice (within limits); nevertheless the arena of political conflict, and perhaps of economic, appears to be further to the right than six weeks ago, and in many cases further to the right than under Nagy during 1953–54. There is reason to believe it will move still further in this direction in the next few months. What was possibly the first overt Soviet intrusion into the domestic scene since Rakosi’s resignation took place recently; whether or not this interpretation is the correct one, there is little doubt that such an intrusion will occur if developments in Hungary move too fast. Whether it could now be resisted more successfully than in the past, and the effect of Soviet intervention on Hungarian political developments, are very important questions for the future. The reference despatch reviewed certain of the events which preceded and led up to the removal of Rakosi from his pre-eminent position in this country. His removal, although properly referred to as the ending of the Stalinist era, may also be called the beginning of a new era in Hungary which so far cannot be adequately designated. While it is true that many events and developments which have become evident since Rakosi’s demission had their origin long before July 18, the changes that have occurred recently and are still continuing have already resulted, as the Hungarian regime has been the first and loudest to claim, in a noticeably different atmosphere here. Although it is still far too soon after Rakosi’s dismissal to describe, and particularly to evaluate accurately, the era now beginning, it is not too early to set down certain of its highlights and characteristics as they have become evident since July 18. The following appear worthy of note: 1. There has been no personality cult built up around Gero. While his name has appeared regularly in the press since the end of Parliament, he has made no public speeches (despite many opportunities) and has been referred to only casually (although favorably) by other speakers. His principal public statement was made in a Pravda article dated August 26, reprinted in Szabad Nep on August 28. This Pravda support is of course significant in itself but would in our opinion be much more so were Gero playing a more active role in public life and were there more marked differences in viewpoint between Gero and others. Rumors about Gero’s health have been conflicting: It is known that some time ago he was in poor health (ulcers), yet in Parliament July 30 he appeared brown and healthy, and he gave that same impression to New York Times correspondent John MacCormac on August 14. A later unconfirmed report was received, however, to the effect that his general health is still very poor; and in fact that he uses facial make-up in order to conceal his pallor and poor appearance. 2. The influence of Kadar seems to be considerable. This judgment is admittedly based largely on his speech at Salgotarjan on August 12, which was reported in detailed summary in Szabad Nep and almost completely in the Nograd County paper. The Legation considers it certainly interesting and probably significant that Kadar was the first and is still the only top figure except Gero to devote himself primarily to internal political matters, or at least the only top figure prominently covered in Szabad Nep as so doing. Exceptions to this might be Marton Horvath in his editorial of August 12, and Marosan’s article of August 19, but both of the latter statements were obviously directed toward particular goals. Other spokesmen have devoted themselves largely to economic problems or to special topics, such as relations with Yugoslavia. The Legation’s first impression of the Kadar speech, as reported in Legtel 70Dated August 15, not printed. (Ibid., 764.00/8–1556) and based on the Szabad Nep summary, was that it was rather moderate in tone. We were also impressed by Kadar’s reversal of the usual order of Rakosi’s shortcomings, and by his implication that the errors of rightist deviation were due in part to the earlier errors of the Stalinist period, i.e., blaming Rakosi for anything Nagy may have done. Based on the full version of the speech, the moderateness of Kadar’s tone is not nearly so obvious. In fact the main difference between Kadar and Gero’s speech of July 18 to the Central Leadership appears to the Legation to be the difference in approach to the People’s Political Front (see Paragraph 3d below). As an aside on the question of Kadar’s present role, a recent remark of the Soviet Ambassador to the Belgian Minister should be mentioned: Mr. Andropov said that he liked Mr. Kadar very much, placing particular emphasis on the “very”. On the other hand, reports have been received that would indicate that Kadar is not very highly regarded in non-Communist circles, being considered neither extremely intelligent nor very strong. The fact that relations with Yugoslavia have continued to develop favorably, both economically and politically (Yugoslavia is to send a Parliamentary delegation to Budapest before the end of the year, and both countries’ missions are to be raised to Embassy level) may possibly throw light on the Yugoslav reaction to Kadar. Since the Yugoslavs can hardly view Gero with great affection, and since they have long been rumored as supporters of Kadar, present Yugoslav-Hungarian relations, if they show anything, probably also point to Kadar’s significance in the regime. 3. An effort is under way to gain support from the Nagy faction of the Party and from non-Communist parties. This development, of which there was little sign prior to the removal of Rakosi, may represent one of the most significant characteristics of the new regime. There has been considerable evidence to support the conclusion that this effort is under way and that it is a strong one: a) The constant rumors, supported by a number of public statements, that Nagy can return to the Party the day he accepts certain conditions (which are reported to be only the briefest admission of error—an admission which Nagy has so far not felt free to make). Kadar’s statement referred to above, that Nagy’s errors were the fault of Rakosi, may even mean that he will not have to make this confession, and, as reported in Legtel 70, the issue of Nagy’s return to some official position may easily be hanging fire over the amount of influence he would be allowed to exert. b) The public statements of Marosan and Szakasitz (Weeka 34),Joint Weeka 34, telegrams B–187 and B–188 from Budapest, August 25. (Ibid., 764.00(W)/8–2556) which emphasized the unity of the international laboring classes. c) The overtures to non-Communist Party leaders (Legation despatches 52 and 68In these despatches, dated August 15 and 24, respectively, the Legation reported that it had received reports that former Democratic Party Leader Anna Kéthly and former Secretary General of the Smallholder Party Béla Kovacs had been informally contacted on behalf of the Hungarian Government to resume public life. (Ibid., 764.00/8–1556 and 764.00/8–2456, respectively) —Secret). d) The changed attitude toward the People’s Patriotic Front. In discussing the PPF, Kadar on August 12 did not place such emphasis on the leading role of the Party within the PPF as was the case before July 18, or even the case in Gero’s closing speech to the Central Leadership, but rather on the definition of the PPF as the “joint political movement of Communists and non-Communists for common goals in which they agree . . . ”; and he added “There are (many such goals) in which honest patriots, Party and non-Party workers are of the same opinion. . . . ” Gero, on the other hand, said on July 18 that “we must see to it that the People’s Front should actually be led by the Party . . . ”,All ellipses in this document are in the source text. although he did not feel that Communists should constitute a majority “everywhere and in each organ.” The significance of Gero’s statement is emphasized by his remarks in the Pravda article of August 26: “The PPF comprises the broadest strata of our people: workers, peasants, and intellectuals, working small people, all patriots who love the people, and everyone who wants a lasting peace and supports the easing of international tension. The role of the Patriotic People’s Front became somewhat dimmed recently. This was also due to the efforts of certain rightist elements to deny the right of Party leadership in the Patriotic People’s Front and to place the Patriotic People’s Front in a certain respect above the Party, which would have practically meant bringing the Party into opposition to the Patriotic People’s Front. On the other hand, there asserted themselves also sectarian views as a result of which the People’s Front, as a broad mass movement, was underrated. This fault was remedied by the July resolution of our Central Leadership.” In this connection, it has been rumored that a new pro-Nagy publication (possibly edited by Ivan Boldiszar—see Legdes 73)Dated August 29, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/8–2956) is to be started, and that the “Party man” on Magyar Nemzet, Imre Komor, is to be removed and replaced by Geza Losonczy, who is definitely pro-Nagy. It is possible, in fact that Magyar Nemzet might become a “pro-Nagy” organ if Losonczy becomes its real chief. Prior to the Pravda article, the Legation viewed the efforts mentioned above under (a), (b) and (c), as well as Kadar’s change in emphasis concerning the PPF and the rumored pro-Nagy paper or periodical, as directed primarily at gaining broader non-Party but still political (as opposed to popular) support. This policy, it was thought, stemmed basically from the increasing realization within the Party that its political support (that is, its support among “political” circles) as well as its popular support, is so small. Kadar seemed to be saying that the Party has shut itself off from the rest of the country when he said “You must not be afraid of listening to the opinions expressed by non-Party workers in the PPF and of hearing time and again views which are neither Marxist nor Communist.” He seemed to mean that the basic purpose of this admonition is to “consolidate unity” between the Party and other groups, and he pleaded with both Party members and working masses to have confidence in the Central Leadership. He went on to say that “of course no one can work miracles and neither can the Central Leadership of the Party. At present the situation is, however, such that the Central Leadership can guarantee an unwavering, consistent and unequivocal leadership and conscientious careful dealings with the cause of the state, the working masses and the people. The Central Leadership is determined . . . to submit to the arty membership, the working masses and the people, in the spirit of confidence, the most important problems even if these problems are grave and difficult ones. We assume that our Party membership, our worker’s class and all our working people have learned a great deal and have developed politically in recent times.” This statement certainly does not sound as though there were great discord today within the Central Committee of the Party; although it is true that the latter has always attempted to present a monolithic surface to the public, even when the Committee was almost rent asunder by dissension (witness the October 1954 and March 1955 resolutions). Yet the different emphasis regarding the PPF as between Gero (in his July speech and his Pravda article) and Kadar seems to signify at least a difference in approach and perhaps a conflict between the two views. Even though Gero stated that the fault of underrating the Party role in the PPF had been corrected by the July Central Committee Resolution, Kadar spoke after that resolution. Perhaps the Gero article constitutes a warning, the first public warning thus far noted, that the Soviets are concerned lest the effort to broaden the political base of the Party might weaken Party control. On the other hand, it may mean only a slightly different emphasis given for publication in Moscow. 4. The attitude toward intellectuals has definitely changed since the meeting of the Central Leadership in July. (See Legdes 78.)In this despatch from Budapest, August 30, the Legation reported on a recent undated resolution of the central leadership of the Hungarian Workers Party in which the shortcomings of the intelligentsia in Hungary were detailed and recommendations to overcome them were offered. (Ibid., 764.00/8–3056) Inter alia, a number of developments are evident: The sharp criticism of the Petofi Club excesses have died out; Marton Horvath in an important article on August 12 implied that the leaders of the opposition were not really to blame, which seems to indicate that they may be readmitted to the Party—as in fact rumor already has them; the regime appears to be moving to liberalize its treatment of intellectuals’ children (although its discrimination against such children did not apply to leading Party intellectuals); and literary magazines are already beginning to speak out about the special privileges enjoyed by the top Party hierarchy. The changes in this field were formalized in a recent Central Committee resolution which was probably designed to anticipate future demands from the intellectual groups, as well as to define the limitations within which intellectual freedom will be free to move. The most revealing reaction to this resolution was an article by pro-Nagyist Geza Losonczy in Muvelt Nep of Sept. 2. Losonczy welcomed the words of the resolution, at least as a partial statement of the requirements of the intelligentsia, but pointed out that their fulfillment could be realized only by means of struggle. Losonczy referred to the June 30 resolution of the Central Leadership, which cracked down on the Petofi Club, as an example of the kind of mistrust with which the intellectuals have had to contend down to the present. The article seemed to augur that the regime could hope to win the fight for the mind of the intellectual only by vying with a vocal rightist element. 5. A number of modest concessions have been made toward the general population. These were described in more detail in Legdes 56, August 17,These concessions included promises by the supreme prosecutor to control the secret police, to abolish special courts and return control of courts and prisons to the Ministry of Justice, to release 300 political prisoners, to make economic concessions to private peasant farmers and farm cooperatives, and to tolerate religious instruction for children. (Despatch 56 from Budapest, August 17; ibid., 764.21/8–1756) and included primarily improvements in the judicial field (control of secret police and abolition of special courts, improved “socialist legality”, economic concessions and removal of hindrances to religious instruction). 6. A general review of economic policy may be under way. Although this statement cannot be confirmed, there is the following evidence to support it: a) The fact that the second five-year plan is to be presented to Parliament only in December, after one full year of the period is over. Parliament is also to meet in October. After the “full country-wide discussion” of the plan which took place in early summer, there would seem to be no obvious reason why Parliamentary examination of the plan should wait until December (although it can also be argued that if there is then no major change in the plan this fact would demonstrate the unimportant role of Parliament, since the plan would have been accepted as a fait accompli long before Parliament had a chance to examine it). b) The logic of the situation. One would expect Hungary to make modifications in the plan, largely imposed upon it by the USSR, as soon as its relations with that country permitted. While we do not know that things have gone so far, some changes within certain limits might be assayed if they were felt warranted by other developments. c) The economic situation, which has not improved. Since the goals under the new plan were to be attained primarily from an increase in productivity, continuing difficulties in this regard and with production costs should make the initial goals less attainable. d) The reports that Nagy wishes to make changes in economic policy (Legtel 70). e) The change in priority in the speech of Marton Horvath at Pecs (about August 18—see Hungarian Press Summary No. 193),Not found. when he reversed the usual order and referred to the need to insure a higher living standard even if other goals had to be adjusted. 7. The regime has adorned itself with a new halo of democracy, progressiveness and freedom. This was most evident in Parliament (Legdes 56), but has not been limited to that short period. Nor in fact has the placing of this halo been limited to any one intentional act carried out by the Hungarian regime. The fact that the average individual has felt an improvement in his personal security, and even greater freedom to contact Westerners has been attested to in Budapest by small events: an obviously greater willingness on the part of Hungarian individuals to have contact with even that blackest of bete noires in Hungary, a member of the U.S. Legation; two personal visits to the Legation in the last few days to ask for a collection of modern American literature (Legtel 80)“Dated August 27, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 511.642/8–2756) and material on medical schools (Legdes 76);Dated August 29, not printed. (Ibid., 864.432/8–2856) etc. 8. There is some reason to believe that relations with the United States will gradually improve (Legdes 66).In this despatch, August 24, the Legation listed and described five measures taken by the Hungarian Government to remove obstacles to discussion of Hungarian-U.S. problems. The measures were the release from prison of two ex-employees of the Legation, the release of U.S. correspondents, reduction in the “tailing” of Legation personnel, cooperation with the Legation in some administrative matters, and elimination of travel notification requirements. (Ibid., 611.64/8–2456) While it is too soon to make a conclusive judgment in this regard, a number of steps have been taken recently which appear to indicate that a slow improvement in relations with the United States is desired by the Hungarian Government. Comment and Conclusions An observer’s interpretation of the above developments will of course depend on a number of factors, including whether the developments turn out to be real ones, the reaction of the Hungarian population, and the extent to which the observer himself, or in this case the American Legation, is also being wooed. The Legation’s reaction has been to interpret the recent changes, including Rakosi’s ouster, as conciliatory steps made desirable by the strength of the opposition to the Stalinist faction, first represented by Rakosi and now by Gero, and concurred in by the Soviets. The steps have been interpreted as designed to head off this opposition and to permit the present regime to bridle the opposing forces, who have become more unruly due to the Twentieth Congress, for as long as possible. Further concessions will be made as and if they become necessary in the eyes of the regime; or on the other hand, some already placed before the altar of the public may be withdrawn when the regime has attained sufficient strength. The basic forces here might be described as: 1) the relatively pro-Soviet forces which are anxious to cushion the shock of the Twentieth Congress within Hungary; and 2) the more liberal groups which are attempting, at least for the moment, to permit a natural development of political and intellectual endeavor, albeit within certain limits. These more liberal groups of course include a wide range, united in the past primarily in their opposition to the “doctrinaires”. Both groups are also motivated by the necessity of bringing about economic improvement within the country, although they would follow different roads towards this goal. It may not be correct, however, to polarize the two groups so clearly into opposing forces; or rather, it may not be correct to characterize them today as the old pro-Rakosi-ites on the one hand and everyone else on the other. This period is one of flux, when because of the ideological effect of the Twentieth Congress and because of the personal effect of the removal of Rakosi, new ideological and personal relationships, and new limits to the freedom within which individuals and groups can act, are being worked out. Although these limitations still remain, present “policy” (while ostensibly under the control of Gero) is considerably more liberal—or promises to be—in many respects (religious instruction, control of secret police, freedom of discussion, Parliamentary behavior) than previously under Nagy. Presumably, Nagy has in the meantime moved somewhat further to the right. Therefore the eventual resting point of Hungarian policy cannot yet be foreseen, because the liberalizing factors which have been set in motion are still at work and will be for some time to come. At this time, the reporting officer believes that there are strong liberalizing forces in Hungary which are now freer to operate than in the past, and that the full effect of their activity has not yet come about. At the same time, restraining forces continue to be voiced and felt, as they will in the future. And on the whole the present political line, or arena of conflict, dividing these two forces, and perhaps also the economic line, is to the right of its position before July 18. It is to be expected that the “line” would change less rapidly in the case of foreign affairs than in the case of internal, as has been the case. To adopt a very different foreign policy line would mean a clear break with the Soviet Union, which even a much more liberal internal policy would not, at least to the same extent, imply. Furthermore, foreign policy is more a matter of propaganda in many fields than a matter of day-by-day existence, and there is consequently not so much pressure for an immediate change. In addition, as already pointed out, there is some evidence that foreign policy is changing, although very slowly and not yet very significantly. Events in Hungary have moved faster and farther since the removal of Rakosi than was anticipated by many at the time. While much that has reportedly taken place has not yet been fully confirmed, and while many promises have not yet been fulfilled, there is without doubt a new atmosphere in the country. The main question at the moment is not so much “What is present policy?” as it is “What will happen in the next six months?” There has so far been little evidence of the Soviet brake being reapplied (although the Gero article in Pravda may possibly be the first), but if developments move too fast there is no doubt that an effort will be made to use this brake. Whether, as in July, Soviet influence will be considerable, or whether the Hungarians can emulate what their Polish brethren are apparently doing and reduce Soviet influence remains to be seen. Distribution: The Department is requested to forward processed copies of this despatch to USIA, MRC Munich, PAD Vienna, other Iron Curtain Missions, AmEmbassy Belgrade, and one processed copy to this Legation. N. Spencer BarnesChargé d’Affaires, a.i. 87. Editorial Note According to reports from the Yugoslav Government and other sources, the Soviet Union sent a circular on September 3 to its Eastern European satellites denying Marshal Tito’s status as a bona fide Communist, warning the satellites not to follow the Yugoslav example too closely, and attacking Yugoslav foreign policy as pro-Western. No official statement of this warning was released by the Soviet Union or the satellites. (Soviet Affairs, October 1956, page 1; Department of State, INR Files) Seemingly as a consequence of the deterioration of Soviet-Yugoslav relations, First Secretary Khrushchev suddenly went to Yugoslavia on September 17 for an 8-day stay which included discussions with Tito. The Khrushchev visit was officially described as “of a private nature for the purpose of rest,” although some U.S. officials believed there was much more to the trip, as evidenced by the following extract from the briefing on “Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. Security,” by Acting Director of Central Intelligence Cabell at the 297th meeting of the National Security Council, September 20: “General Cabell then turned to the subject of Khrushchev’s current ‘vacation’ in Yugoslavia. There were various speculations on the reasons for this visit. It was thought, for example, that the Soviet leaders were considerably worried about the rate at which some of the Soviet satellites, notably Poland, were proceeding along the course which would lead to national communism. They were inclined to blame Tito for the rapidity of these developments and Khrushchev may have gone to Yugoslavia to warn Tito about the dangers inherent in this course. Tito in turn may use the Khrushchev visit in an effort to get commitments from the Soviet leaders on the timing and speed of the movement toward greater independence for the Soviet satellites.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman Papers, NSC Records) Speculation was further excited when Tito flew to the Crimea on September 27 to continue his discussions with Khrushchev, Chairman Bulganin, other Soviet leaders, and First Secretary of the Hungarian Workers’ Party Gerö. Cabell briefed the National Security Council on these visits during his discussion of “Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. Security,” at the 298th meeting, September 28, as follows: “General Cabell then said he had a few remarks on the alleged split among Soviet policy makers regarding the problem of Marshal Tito. To everyone’s surprise we had learned that Tito had flown back to Moscow [Yalta?] with Khrushchev who had been Tito’s guest for a few days in Yugoslavia. Following this development there had been a flood of intelligence material alleging new and serious rifts over the Yugoslav problem among the Soviet leaders. It was the burden of many of these reports that Khrushchev was now completely isolated in support of the new and more liberal approach to Yugoslavia. Certain Yugoslav sources were insisting that Khrushchev’s opponents are arguing that Tito’s policies are dangerously weakening the control of the USSR over its satellites. Whatever the precise truth of all these rumors, General Cabell said that the CIA believed that recently Soviet policy toward the satellites had given rise to concern and that the Soviet leaders believed they will now have to shift their course and again tighten their controls. On the other hand, General Cabell pointed out that Bulganin and Mikoyan had been at least as closely associated with the new policy of liberalism toward the satellites as Khrushchev himself. Accordingly, General Cabell was inclined to doubt if there existed any genuine crisis in the top Soviet leadership.” (Ibid. ) 88. Letter From the Secretary of State to the PresidentSource: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles–Herter Series. Washington, September 5, 1956. Dear Mr. President: We spoke yesterday of Stevenson’s reference to the “liberation” pledge in the Republican Platform.Reference is presumably to the 1952 campaign platform. The following portion of a telephone conversation between Dulles and Hagerty, September 5, 9:15 a.m., makes this clearer: “The Secretary called Hagerty and said McCardle thought the President might be quizzed on Stevenson’s reference to our breaking the pledge concerning liberation of satellite countries which Stevenson had stated was in 1952 Republician Platform. The Sec. said no pledge was broken, that he was in the city at the time of the Poznan riots, etc. Sec. said we had, through Voice of America and in other ways, been keeping alive in the satellite countries the love of liberty. To have taken action which misrepresented us as being the instigator of this thing would have been to Communist gain.” (Ibid., Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations) Adlai Stevenson was the Democratic Party’s candidate for President in 1956. There was no such “pledge”. It was stated at one point that it would be made clear “that United States policy, as one of its peaceful purposes, looks happily forward to the genuine independence of those captive peoples”. And at another point it was said, “The policies we espouse will revive the contagious, liberating influences which are inherent in freedom. They will inevitably set up strains and stresses within the captive world which will make the rulers impotent to continue in their monstrous ways and mark the beginning of the end”. Certainly you and I have consistently made it clear, and you notably at the Geneva Summit Conference, that we seek the genuine independence of the captive peoples. Also I believe this Administration, through the Voice of America, etc., has done much to revive the influences which are inherent in freedom, that we have thereby contributed toward creating strains and stresses within the captive world, such as were manifested by the East German outbreaks of June 1953 and the Poznan outbreaks of this year. Also of course there are the very major adjustments going on within the Soviet Union to adjust domestic policies to take greater account of the aspirations of the people. Faithfully yours, JFD 89. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/9–2156. Confidential. Warsaw, September 21, 1956—4 p.m. 323. Department’s A–288 June 29See footnote 5, Document 63. and Embassy despatch 80 August 21.In despatch 80 the Embassy enclosed a copy of a despatch written by the British Ambassador in Poland and originally transmitted to London. The British Ambassador provided the Embassy with the copy and had no objection to it being sent to Washington. In the despatch, the British Ambassador argued that great changes had occurred in Poland during the last 2 years, and that Poland was pursuing a more independent policy and had taken advantage of the relaxation of Soviet domination to go their own independent way. The British Ambassador recommended that the West take advantage of this trend. The U.S. Embassy disagreed and stated that the changes in Poland were only surface; it promised its own view of the situation. (Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/8–2156) Embassy’s views on “liberalization” Poland basically those transmitted Embtel 892Document 63. even though subsequent developments have resulted some shift of emphasis by Polish regime. Polish regime thoroughly shaken by unexpected Poznan riots which must have raised urgent questions both here and in Moscow re feasibility and potentialities control liberalization program Poland and world-wide repercussions following therefrom. Simultaneously, regime apparently felt forced go all out in attempt redress worker grievances and woo general public. After admitting loss contact with masses and indifference their demands, party and government pronouncements stressed importance raising standard living, upping wages, and providing more and better housing, producing and importing more consumer goods, and took some immediate steps relieve common burden Poznan workers involved June 28 demonstration. On country wide basis, regime also wooed masses by vaunting allegedly increasing “socialist legality” (release 36,000 under amnesty, guarantee non-recurrence security police “deviations”, etc.), “rehabilitating” former leaders dead or alive (principally erstwhile party wheels Gomulka and Kliszko), putting stamp approval on and even building monuments to previously castigated wartime underground army AK, reducing armed forces and claiming defense industries gradually converting to civilian production since 1954, granting substantial number passports for temporary and permanent residence abroad, aiding small private business for purpose boosting production consumer goods, fostering “criticism” of numerous aspects life Poland, decentralizing political and economical structure, give more responsibility lower echelons, and stressing “ruling role” masses in all organs particularly Sejm which hailed as increasingly true representative body. These developments not always what they appeared at first glance. In important respects, word was far ahead of deed and, in other cases, unstated but real limitations robbed above factors of most their apparent value. For example, economic distress of masses understandably could not be liquidated over short period, with result economic millenium probably appeared far away as ever to Polish worker. Similarly, “rehabilitation” some former leaders and AK group appeared well controlled move and seemed unlikely in foreseeable future have much significance as real liberalizing factor. Selection type of men such as Gierek, Roman Nowak and Rapacki to fill Politburo vacancies indicates no liberalization in personalities. Gomulka reinstatement in party has as yet revealed no active participation in affairs. Further, “socialist legality” and related developments such as increased issuance passports for travel continued hold potential sudden reversal and were usually implemented in limited way (e.g. passports for visits abroad usually not issued to persons without relatives remaining Poland). Finally, praise for Sejm (which still nothing but rubberstamp), alleged “ruling role” of masses, and invitation “criticize” all transparently spurious. Criticisms still well under control not only as result Ochab April 6 warning not criticize basic policy but because Bulganin in July 22 national holiday putch [speech?] Warsaw warned press not misinterpret right criticize. Consequently, during period under review, criticism generally remained within limits desired by regime. Authoritative manner and conduct Bulganin July 22, continued presence large numbers Soviet troops Poland (reportedly increasing), fact Moscow stooges remain powerful in regime, fact UB though regimented still potent, fact Polish armed forces controlled by Russophile Rokossowski, plus number other factors, indicate clearly Poland politics and economy still at mercy USSR. Polish propaganda organs, however, appeared be purposely soft-pedaling usual praise USSR in effort make Poles feel control by Soviets declining. Similarly, in economic field, same purpose possibly served by having Soviets desist somewhat, at least on surface, from bleeding Poland economically. Actually, new CEMA arrangements and Polish-Czech agreements tie Poland into Soviet orbit more closely than ever. Politically, Polish leaders parrot Moscow’s statements and policies—in UN and other international organs on international questions such as Suez, disarmament, atomic energy, etc. One of principal Soviet stooges, Ochab, said July 6, that Poznan riots could not justify deviation from process democratization. Moreover, seeing relatively favorable results earlier relaxation in terms greater personal satisfaction masses (which, regime hoped, would be reflected in increased productivity) regime probably wishes, within confines Communist doctrine, liberalize life much as possible in hopes greater returns for regime. Significant criticism by press now rare, legislative processes September Sejm meeting not even as bold as April session, two western chiefs mission, both very hopeful about liberalization, believe trend now away from liberalization and high Foreign Office official has privately indicated he disheartened by difficulties selling liberalization program to officials. Above connection, often rumored since Poznan that regime split on how handle liberalization and other matters. While this not confirmed, “private” statements high representatives regime (e.g. Ambassador Gajewski Paris) plugging line somewhat different from official one, plus traditional nationalism Poles, raises possibility regime less monolithic than historic Communist would desire. These statements could, of course, be inspired plants but Embassy inclined believe regime leaders not in agreement among selves on liberalization and other important issues. Some observers even speculate Polish overtures to India and Yugoslavia, though made in keeping with Moscow’s policies, may have been willingly entered into in hope those countries might eventually support Poland if conditions ever made it possible for Poland enter upon independent course. In any event, mental confusion and frustration Communist minds following denigration Stalin likely not yet resolved and must contribute substantially to indecision this and other problems. Embassy has impression western journalists and western groups various kinds have begun take somewhat more realistic view developments Poland although some still see only outward appearances of liberalization and some even profess believe Poland has begun assert independence from USSR (e.g. Coblenz article in Herald Tribune Paris Edition September 11, Bonn dateline, re alleged views five million displaced Oder–Neisse Germans). While Embassy feels no evidence liberalization has developed into anything like “irreversible trend”, it is still too early assess extent recession is in process. Several months ago, when liberalization was new thing, all experiencing it closely probably felt considerable excitement at possibility this was beginning real evolution toward democracy in accepted sense word. With liberalization now in somewhat static state and first flush hope fading a little, Poles and observers alike may find difficulty evaluate potentialities properly. Some Embassy Polish sources seem depressed re prospects significant improvement saying life hard as ever and de-Stalinization merely reshuffling old pack cards. Others, chiefly semi-official contacts in fields science, agriculture, education, etc., continue be excited about possibilities professional contact with colleagues in US but agree life Poland will be difficult for long time. Such relaxation and change as there has been and will be in foreseeable future is, in Embassy view, designed solely perpetuate regime in power. Making life more bearable for masses is only means to this end. Department pouch as desired. Jacobs 90. Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the PresidentSource: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles–Herter Series. Limited Official Use. Washington, September 25, 1956. SUBJECT Suggested Presidential Statement on Poznan Trials Polish Communist authorities have announced that the trials of some of the persons arrested in connection with the Poznan riots of last June are to start on Thursday, September 27. I believe that Free World concern and interest can exert some restraining influence over the Warsaw regime’s policy in this instance. An appropriate statement by you early this week could not only serve this purpose but would also provide the Polish people with timely evidence that they have not been forgotten and that the importance and significance of the Poznan riots have not been overlooked. It might also be mentioned that the Assembly of Captive European Nations has just sent a telegram to you, as well as to the Vice President, Mr. Stevenson and to me in the hope of obtaining appropriate statements on the Poznan trials which could be read at the Assembly’s meeting scheduled for Thursday. Mr. Stevenson’s reply is now being prepared. I believe it would be preferable, from the point of view of domestic as well as of foreign affairs, if you could issue the enclosed statement as early as possible.The enclosure is not printed. On the source text, Eisenhower wrote: “approved, DE.” The statement, issued on September 26, is printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1956, p. 805. JFD 91. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Chargé in Hungary (Barnes) and the Yugoslav Minister (Soldatić), Budapest, October 12, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–556. Confidential. Enclosure to despatch 199 from Budapest, October 16. Budapest, October 12, 1956 The subject conversation lasted for about an hour and covered a number of topics, primarily general. It opened with a remark on the recent Crimea meetings of Marshal Tito, Gero and the Soviet leaders,Tito met Gerö on September 30 in what was, according to Yugoslav Ambassador to the Soviet Union Veljko Mićunović, an unexpected encounter. See Moscow Diary, pp. 116–117. in which Mr. Barnes expressed interest in any facts connected with these meetings but added that he was perhaps more interested in Mr. Soldatic’s appraisal of the broader trends affecting Hungary over the past few months. The Yugoslav Minister then observed that, in contrast to earlier developments which might have seemed to point in the direction of liberalism, for the first time the policies expressed in the July Party ResolutionSee Documents 82 and 83. had been adopted due to pressure from the masses of lower and middle level Party members rather than dictated from the top. He added that he did not think that public opinion, in terms of that held by the broad masses of the population, yet plays a very important role in this country; but he felt that majority opinion within the Party has recently come to exert an influence which is being felt. He went on to say that, in his opinion, Imre Nagy has for practical purposes already been rehabilitated through adoption of the most of his policies, even though not yet restored to a position of personal power.Nagy petitioned to be readmitted to the Hungarian Workers’ Party on October 4, and the Politburo approved this step on October 13. He added that if his advice were asked (which he said it was not) he would advise the Hungarian regime to leave Mr. Gero as Party chief—which would tend to satisfy the Kremlin—and put Imre Nagy in as Prime Minister. He said he felt, however, that a move of this kind would take more courage than there was at hand, if put into effect at one time, and that he considered a comeback in stages more likely. He clearly felt, in any event, that a comeback was in the cards. In this connection he observed that the mass ceremony held in connection with the Rajk reburialLàszlo Rajk and other victims of the 1949 purge trials were symbolically reinterred and given a State funeral on October 6 in a ceremony attended by some 200,000 persons including Nagy. represented a calculated risk; one which had worked out successfully but which might have brought on demonstrations that would not have been palatable to the regime. He felt that the Soviets were genuinely apprehensive that developments might move too fast and too far here. He added, though, that there were so many cross currents at work that it was hard to disentangle the factors involved. He felt, as he had for a long time, that rivalry exists among the Soviet leaders. He said that Stalinism could return here, and in the U.S.S.R.—though he implied that he doubted this would happen. He agreed that Bulganin and Khrushchev now have a vested interest in their own policies, that they genuinely favor a continuation of present trends within Eastern Europe, up to some point or other, as being in the long-run favorable to themselves. The logic here was that less discontented satellite peoples would give a sounder basis for the “co-operation” of these countries with the U.S.S.R. He left no doubt that in his opinion the Yugoslav Government is not dissatisfied with present trends in the satellites, and would like to have these trends go somewhat farther; in which connection its long-run objective still appeared to be that of greater independence of the other socialist states from Moscow. He said that there were differences in attitude between the U.S.S.R. and the Yugoslav Governments—this in answer to a question as to whether any real identity of views now exists between the two—but added here that this point was not discussed in the Crimea. He said there were ideological differences as well as practical, but that perhaps there had been some slight tendency toward the two growing together. In this connection “growing together” seemed to mean in his mind the Soviet view approaching the Yugoslav, rather than the reverse. On the whole, he considered it likely that present trends would continue over a considerable period, towards greater liberalism and independence for Hungary, but that there would be periodic interruptions in the major trends such as had taken place for a period in the middle of this year. He cited the case of Poland, where the Soviet press had emphasized imperialist interference over internal dissatisfaction as a reason for the Poznan riots, and where Bulganin had said that the U.S.S.R. was not satisfied with everything; but where the Poles had reversed the emphasis on Poznan on their own initiative, and had apparently introduced no changes in answer to Bulganin’s criticism. Mr. Soldatic remarked that the Hungarians have little knowledge of how things are done in Yugoslavia, but that they have recently been showing more interest. He said here that the regime has so far stuck stubbornly to their principle of agricultural collectivization, but that even in this field he had lately noticed some tendency on their part to begin to think critically—a good sign. In referring again to Imre Nagy, Mr. Soldatic said that not only the United States and other Western countries but also Yugoslavia had made a mistake in taking a too critical attitude toward him when he was Prime Minister. He volunteered the opinion, as he has in previous conversations, that we should all avoid putting obstacles in the way of “Nagyism”, and that he thought it would be perhaps well to meet positive or conciliatory moves by the Hungarians with equally positive reciprocation, even though it might not be advisable to take too much initiative in this direction. Here he added the advice that he thought the United States official position could profitably be one of “noting the present trend toward liberalism with satisfaction, while recognizing that the matter was still one of purely internal concern within Hungary”. He claimed that such an attitude would strengthen the position of liberal groups here, as well as undercut Soviet arguments for resisting such liberal trends. He obviously felt that the Soviets still maintain the major part of their control system intact, and are hardly prepared to let their control diminish greatly in the foreseeable future; but felt that, nevertheless, some diminishment would come in the long-run. He considered that present developments were being kept fairly well under control, and thought a sharp clamp-down would be likely only if such developments tended to get out of hand. 92. Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Polish, Baltic, and Czechoslovak Affairs (Trivers) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Beam)Source: Department of State, Poland Desk Files: Lot 60 D 55, General Political Affairs. Secret. Drafted by Sutterlin (EUR/EE). Washington, October 15, 1956. SUBJECT Current Developments of Importance in Poland The following is a brief summary of the most significant current developments in Poland: 1. The Poznan Trials—Of the three trials initiated in connection with the Poznan uprising, two have been completed and the third will apparently end in the next few days. Sentences so far have been mild, and there are rumors that further trials already announced for the near future will be abandoned or postponed. The Belgian and British lawyers who attended the trials as observers have issued statements praising the freedom of the trials themselves but criticizing many aspects of Polish “justice.” 2. Reply to Election Observer Invitation—The Polish Government has declined the invitation to send observers to witness the US elections but in an extremely conciliatory fashion. It has, at the same time, urged exchanges in other fields (such as parliamentary delegations) and the initiation of talks on mutual problems, such as blocked Polish assets in the US and restrictions on inheritances due to Polish citizens.Also invited were the Governments of the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Rumania. The Polish response to the September 21 U.S. invitation was unofficially translated and sent to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 144 from Warsaw, October 9. (Ibid., Central Files, 511.483/10–956) Telegram 406 from Warsaw, October 9, was a paraphrase of the October 8 Polish note. (Ibid., 511.603/10–956) 3. Preparations for December Elections—Discussions have been going on in the Sejm concerning the revision of the Polish electoral law prior to the elections in December. Revisions and perhaps an entirely new electoral law are to be expected and a certain choice among candidates may be given the electorate, but our Embassy in Warsaw does not anticipate the population will be given the opportunity to vote against the regime nor does it think a real opposition within the Sejm will be allowed. 4. Regime Personnel Changes—Hilary Minc has resigned from the Politburo and as First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers.Minc did so on October 9. He is known to have been seriously ill for a long time, but the Polish domestic coverage of the event conveys the impression that his “dismissal” was necessary for the process of democratization. Minc and BermanSee footnote 3, Document 63. (who resigned before him) were the two most prominent Jews in the Polish hierarchy. Four Deputy Ministers in the Ministry for Machine Industry have also been dropped, apparently as a repercussion of Poznan. Rumors concerning the future of former Party Secretary Gomulka have reached a new crescendo; all indications point to the likelihood of his being given a position of importance in the regime. The Polish Crisis and the Hungarian Rebellion, October 20-November 3, 1956: The Advent to Power of Gomulka in Poland and Nagy in Hungary; Soviet Military Intervention in and Subsequent Withdrawal From Hungary; Discussion of the Hungarian Question in the U.N. Security Council 93. Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Research for the USSR and Eastern Europe (Klosson)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/10–2056. Confidential. This memorandum evaluated the situation in Poland as of 2:30 p.m. on Saturday, October 20. It was sent to the Secretary by W. Park Armstrong, Jr. Washington, October 20, 1956. THE POLISH SITUATION 1. The following chronology appears firm. The Central Committee of the Polish Communist Party convened Friday morning. Soon afterwards a delegation of Soviet party leaders (Khrushchev, Mikoyan, Kaganovich, Molotov) arrived in Warsaw and went to the meeting.The Eighth Plenum of the PZPR convened on October 19 at 10 a.m. Its first order of business was to elect Wladyslaw Gomulka, Marian Spychalski, Ignacy Loga-Sowiński, and Zenon Kliszko to the Central Committee. Gomulka was also elevated to the position of Party First Secretary. Among those to be dropped was Konstantin Konstantinovich Rokossovskiy, Marshal of the Soviet Union and Marshal of the Polish People’s Republic, Polish Minister of Defense, and Deputy Commander of Warsaw Pact forces. It was to forestall these developments that the Soviet leaders arrived unannounced in Poland. Following discussions at the Belvedere Palace, the Soviet delegation departed and the Polish Central Committee resumed its session. Discussions between the Russians and members of the Polish Politburo as well as Gomulka began in the late morning and continued until at least late afternoon, if not later. A joint communiqué was broadcast by the Poles at approximately 2:45 a.m. Saturday, and by Moscow an hour later. The communiquéd simply acknowledged that discussions had taken place and that Polish Communist leaders would visit the USSR “shortly” to discuss cooperation between the two countries.Translation of the joint communiqué is printed in Zinner, National Communism, p. 197. Gomulka eventually led a delegation to the Soviet Union where talks were held between November 15 and 18. A Polish delegation, according to the United Press, arrived in Moscow Saturday night. Its composition was not revealed. 2. There is no confirmation yet for the following reports: The United Press correspondent in Warsaw reports— a statement by a lower-rank Polish Communist leader to a mass meeting in Warsaw that the USSR is moving troops into Poland from East Germany; sitdown strikes by Polish workers in the major cities; the occupation of Radio Warsaw by “Polish troops loyal to Gomulka”; the naming of Gomulka as party First Secretary, replacing Ochab. The French newspaper Le Monde, which has a correspondent in Warsaw, reports that Soviet troops and 800 tanks have moved from East Germany into Poland and that Polish Communist leaders are distributing arms to students and workers. The Swedish newspaper Expressen, with a correspondent in Warsaw, according to the United Press, said Khrushchev had warned Poles that the USSR would use force to put down any revolt. Earlier press reports of unusual military activity around Warsaw remain unconfirmed. The main body of the estimated 50,000 Soviet troops in Poland are in Western Poland, roughly 200 miles from Warsaw. Press reports of the participation of Soviet military chiefs in the Soviet delegation are also unconfirmed, and in the case of Marshal Zhukov seem disproved, since he was reported by the Soviet radio to have attended the party for the Japanese in Moscow Friday night.Japanese Prime Minister Ichiro Hatoyama led a delegation to the Soviet Union for the purpose of normalizing relations. 3. According to the Polish radio, the Polish press this morning gave heavy attention to the Central Committee meeting, but carried no commentary on the Soviet visit. The press included: (a) an editorial that said “the revolutionary intelligentsia and the working class have made it unequivocally clear that they have at their disposal the force necessary to resist the attempts to check the process of democratization, to implement the Polish road to socialism.” (b) reports that throughout Poland party organizations are holding meetings and adopting resolutions in this spirit. (c) a resolution by Warsaw University students last night which reaffirmed the Soviet-Polish alliance as the basis for Polish foreign policy, but asserted that “in no event can this alliance be in the way of the maintenance of the sovereignty of every one of the allied countries and their independent selection of ways leading to socialism.” 4. On the basis of present information, a picture emerges of increased Soviet concern over the trend of developments in Poland, a sudden decision to go to Warsaw, a possibly heated discussion with Polish Communist leaders, an agreement to continue discussions in Moscow presumably on the grounds of permitting the entire Soviet Presidium to participate, the formation of a new party leadership under Gomulka, and a wave of popular reaction in Poland against the USSR. The size and composition of the Soviet delegation obviously underlines the seriousness of Moscow’s concern and, if Yugoslav reports of a split in the Soviet party Presidium are true, marks an effort to display unity of the Soviet leadership before the Poles. Although Bulganin in July in WarsawBulganin and Zhukov had gone to Poland on July 20 to participate in the celebration of the twelfth anniversary of the liberation of that country from Nazi occupation. Their stay coincided with the Seventh Plenary Session of the PZPR Central Committee. had criticized the Polish press for becoming the tool of “hostile elements,” Polish newspapers and journals did not revise their line. Soviet and Polish periodicals have since exchanged criticism on literary principles, which spilled over into ideological discussions, but there had been no major Soviet critical comment. The major Polish development during the past week, which may have sparked the Soviet visit, was Gomulka’s attendance at a Politburo meeting on Monday.October 15. a. The Russians this morning showed more public concern over events in Poland than at any time previously. Pravda’s despatch from its correspondent in Warsaw, headlined “Anti-Socialist Articles in the Pages of the Polish Press” goes beyond Bulganin’s criticism. Pravda accuses the Polish press of publishing articles that (1) shake the foundations of the people’s democratic system; (2) publicly renounce Lenin and Marx; (3) contain anti-Soviet pronouncements; (4) seek to undermine socialism in Poland and call for restoration of capitalism; (5) “poison the minds of leaders with the imported venom of an ideology alien to the workers.” The text of the Pravda article has apparently not yet been broadcast by Radio Moscow. Only excerpts from press reports are available. b. The Soviet decision to go to Warsaw seems a sudden one. According to a Japanese press correspondent in Moscow, the Russians Thursday nightOctober 18. suddenly proposed the postponement of a signature of the Soviet-Japanese declaration from Friday until SundayOctober 21. on the grounds that Khrushchev, Mikoyan, and Molotov could not be present. The Japanese turned down the proposal. c. The Soviet-Polish talks were apparently polemical. The communiqué says that they took place in “friendly outspokenness,” an uncommon Communist description for party-to-party meetings. 94. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 20, 1956, 5 p.m.Source: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/10–2056. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Bennett. Washington, October 20, 1956, 5 p.m. SUBJECT Discussion of Situation in Poland PARTICIPANTS Mr. Spasowski, Ambassador of Poland Mr. Jaroszek, Counselor of Polish Embassy Mr. Murphy, G Mr. Beam, EUR Mr. Bennett, G After some difficulty of arrangement (the Ambassador having been at first reported as “very sick”), the Polish Ambassador came to the Department at 5:00 p.m. on Mr. Murphy’s request for a discussion of the developing situation in Poland. He was accompanied by Mr. Jaroszek, Counselor of the Embassy. Mr. Murphy began the conversation by saying that the Department was greatly interested in the reports emanating from Poland concerning changes in the government there and the visit of a number of ranking officials of the Soviet Union, headed by Mr. Khrushchev. Mr. Murphy continued that there were a great many newspaper reports on the situation but that we did not have much official confirmation as yet.According to President Eisenhower, he received “fragmentary intelligence reports” while he was on the campaign trail flying in the Columbine toward Denver. He called Dulles that evening at 9:30 from the Presidential plane. The Secretary received the call at the theater; no record of the conversation has been found in Department of State files. See Waging Peace, pp. 58–60. He emphasized that, as the Ambassador knew, there is very deep interest in the United States in Poland, and he was hopeful that the Ambassador might be able to provide some information which would help in clarifying the confusing welter of information which we had been receiving today. Turning to a collection of news reports on the table before him, Mr. Murphy remarked that there were two or three points which he particularly wanted to ask about. He mentioned first the reports of statements by Khrushchev on his arrival in Warsaw to the effect that Soviet blood had been shed in the defense of Poland against the Germans and that the USSR would never permit Polish leaders to turn their country over to “American imperialists”. There were also other allegations and threats reported as having been made by Khrushchev during his visit in Warsaw. Mr. Murphy said that he wanted to make it clear that, if Khrushchev’s statements had been correctly reported, they were quite indefensible. The United States, while deeply sympathetic to the Polish people and hopeful of Polish independence, has always recognized that Poland’s destiny is for the people of Poland alone to decide. We could not, therefore, accept the Khrushchev allegations, which deserved to be vigorously denounced. The Ambassador replied that the destiny of Poland is indeed close to the Polish people and declared that he had no way of knowing whether Khrushchev had in fact made such statements. Mr. Jaroszek commented that the newspaper reporters always tried to make things dramatic; he suggested that the reporters must be very alert since they were quoting things as happening both at the arrival of the Soviet delegation and then later as having come from private meetings at which they were not present. Mr. Murphy pointed out that similar reports were being received from a variety of sources, including American, French and Swedish correspondents. Mr. Murphy then called attention to the stories of troop movements near Warsaw and from East Germany into Poland. There were even some reports of clashes between Soviet and Polish forces. The Ambassador again replied that he was unable to confirm any of these stories, and he frankly admitted there were so many press reports coming in that it was extremely difficult to know what the situation was in fact. He said that it seemed confirmed that Mr. Gomulka had been reelected to the Central Committee of the Polish Communist Party but asserted that, so far as he knew, he had not as yet been named First Secretary of the Party. It was the Ambassador’s understanding that elections to the Politburo would be held today or tomorrow. So far as he knew, Marshal Rokossovsky was still a member of the Politburo, although he could not say what changes might be made in the Politburo as a result of the scheduled election.When the Eighth Plenum adjourned on October 21, Rokossovskiy was no longer a member of the Politburo. The Natolin faction of the PZPR, which opposed liberalization and the more independent course favored by Gomulka, fared badly in the election and Zenon Nowak, Franciszek Mazur, and Franciszek Jozwiak-Witold also lost their places. Newly elected with Gomulka and Loga-Sowinski were Stefan Jedrychowski and Jerzy Morawski. Mr. Jaroszek mentioned that the Central Committee would also be considering a 6-year economic plan for Poland. In this connection, in what was perhaps a calculated hint,In his published account of this meeting, Beam recalled that “Spasowski’s brash young aide loudly interrupted that, of course, assistance from the United States would be appropriate and welcome.” See Beam, Multiple Exposure, p. 64. he made reference to the difficult economic situation of his country and the problems which the Government would be facing in that regard. Mr. Murphy also called the Ambassador’s attention to the long article in Pravda attacking the Polish press and criticizing articles which had appeared there airing complaints of conditions and urging democratization in Polish life. The atmosphere of the conversation was friendly throughout. The Ambassador, although under a certain amount of strain, appeared to be rather pleased at being called in. 95. Editorial Note On October 20, Gomulka addressed the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers Party. Allen Dulles considered it “one of the most dramatic things since Khrushchev’s speech.” (Memorandum of telephone conversation by Bernau, October 23; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations) Gomulka spoke of the evils of the past and described Poznań as the workers’ response to “the distortions of the fundamental principles of socialism”. In that light, he indicated that the “clumsy attempt to present the painful Poznan tragedy as the work of imperialist agents and provocateurs was very naive politically.” “[N]ever and nowhere,” he said, “can they determine the attitude of the working class.” The causes of the upheaval and working class dissatisfaction were “to be found in ourselves, in the leadership of the Party, in the Government”. In the wake of the Twentieth Party Congress, the Polish leadership had not told the whole truth. The resolutions of the Seventh Party Plenum had not acknowledged the failures of the Six-Year Plan (1950–1955). The cult of personality and “domestic Beriaism” had afflicted Poland as well as the Soviet Union. He emphasized that “we are putting an end to it once and for all.” The party had to tell the whole truth and be “clean”. Thus he announced the establishment of a commission of inquiry to look into the errors of the past. For text of the address, see Zinner, National Communism, pages 197–238. Telegram 516 from Warsaw, October 23, dealt with the economic aspects of Gomulka’s remarks. (Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/10–2356) 96. Record of a Meeting of the Policy Planning Staff, Department of State, Washington, October 23, 1956Source: Department of State, PPS Files: Lot 66 D 487, Staff Meetings. Secret. No drafting information is given on the source text. Washington, October 23, 1956 PRESENT Messrs. Bowie, Stelle, Davis, Fuller, Leonhart, Savage, Mathews, Owen, Trezise, Klosson (OIR), Beam (EUR), Freers (EE), Trivers (EE), Johnson (Embassy Warsaw), Amory (CIA) 1. The Situation. The USSR has always been unpopular in Poland, as has its satellite regime in Warsaw. That unpopularity has been powerfully compounded lately by growing dissatisfaction with economic conditions, particularly among the large Polish working class. The Poznan riots showed that this situation could pose real dangers to the regime. To avert these dangers, and in response to its own growing internal pressures, the Communist Party re-admitted Gomulka and other nationalists to leadership. Their program is: (a) to gain a greater measure of support by a more independent position vis-à-vis the USSR, without going so far as to jeopardize their alliance with the USSR (which they probably value for a number of reasons, including the protection which it affords against Germany); (b) to improve economic conditions by making some changes in domestic policy and by a more pro-Polish trade policy. They probably do not now contemplate cutting back the investment program, but this would seem to be necessary if any lasting improvement in living standards is to be attained. Failing such an improvement, working class dissatisfaction—now alleviated by a wave of nationalist rejoicing—will re-occur, and will pose problems for a regime which can no longer rely on Stalin-type police controls. Both a new trade policy and a cutback in investment would result in some unscrambling of Bloc economic ties. 2. US Objectives. We would like to: (a) encourage Poland to become increasingly independent of the Soviets, so as to cut down on the power and prestige of the USSR; (b) avert Soviet forceful intervention in Poland, which would not only terminate that independence but might also involve a risk of spreading hostilities. 3. US Actions. To achieve these objectives: (a) We should make known quietly to the Polish regime our willingness to furnish economic assistance (e.g., PL 480 sales, EximBank loans) if that regime maintains its present position of increased independence from Moscow. We should indicate that we do not insist on a complete break with Moscow—much less on a pro-US alignment —as a precondition to giving aid which would spare Warsaw the necessity of relying completely on the USSR. We might consider urging some of the Western European countries also to offer aid. (b) We should strike a public posture which is restrained and which makes clear that while we welcome greater Polish independence we are not seeking to gain a position of special influence for ourselves in Poland.Murphy informed the Canadian Ambassador on October 23 that it would be best to adopt a dispassionate though sympathetic attitude toward events in Poland while avoiding any public comment which might compel an unconstructive Polish response. (Memorandum of conversation by Donald C. Bergus, October 23; Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/10–2356) (c) We should ready an appeal to the UN, for use in the event of Soviet intervention, and let the Poles and the Soviets know that the appeal is at hand. We should speak to neutralist countries on whose friendship the USSR evidently sets store (e.g., Yugoslavia, India) concerning the dangerous consequences of Soviet military intervention in Poland, in the hope that they would be moved to tell the Soviets what a dim view they would take of such intervention. 97. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2356. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Vienna and Munich. Budapest, October 23, 1956—2 p.m. 151. Department pass other EE posts as desired. Department pass USIA. Two meetings since October 16, attended by large audiences comprising in both cases probably more non-Communists than Communists, have brought first open Hungarian demands for withdrawal Soviet troops from Hungary. First meeting, held October 16 in Jokai Theater of Gyor and attended by 1,000 people was presided over by writer Gyula Hay.Winner of the Kossuth Prize for Literature. Gyor—Sopronmegyei Hirlap of October 19 characterized meeting as “first entirely free, public, and outspoken debate since year of change”. It continued, “one may use expression ‘completely free’ because nobody had to fear retaliation for criticizing Rakosi’s policy, for professing ideas of Hungarian Christianity, or for urging departure of Soviet military units in Hungary.” In reply to questions put to him about abolishing Soviet military bases in Hungary, Hay stated question formed part of problem of independent domestic and foreign policy in Hungary, which he hoped would develop more vigorously after Belgrade talks.Gerö led a Hungarian delegation to Belgrade on October 14, which did not return until the day the revolution began. During course of meeting Lajos Simon, Gyor journalist, reported having said our Soviet friends are welcome guests in Hungary but presence military units was no longer considered necessary. Amid stormy protests of audience another speaker stated presence Soviet troops in Hungary absolutely necessary. Second meeting was of four to five thousand students of engineering and transport school in Aula of Technical University on afternoon of October 22. This meeting, covered in Szabad Ifjusag of following day, resulted in bringing these students in alliance with recent action of students in Szeged creating student organization known as Mefesz which independent of DISZ. Meeting adopted 10 political demands among them “creation of completely equal economic and political relations with USSR and Yugoslavia, built on principle of no interference in each others internal affairs”. What newspaper does not report is stormy atmosphere of students and their rhythmic chant “menjen haza” (go home) in response to speaker’s question “by what right does Soviet Union maintain troops in Hungary?” Other references to Soviet troops brought similar reactions. Other aspects of two meetings almost as interesting as demands for withdrawal Soviet troops. At Gyor, in answer to questions from floor, Hay: (1) admitted Hungary has directed press but said fortunately such direction functioning more and more badly; he predicted general meeting of Hungarian journalists to be held October 28 will inflict heavy blow on retarding forces; (2) called for public trial of Mihaly FarkasHe and his son had recently been arrested for having violated “socialist legality.” even if threads of responsibility lead through Rakosi to Soviet Union; (3) deplored secrecy about Hungary’s recently discovered uranium depositsNeither the existence of the uranium deposits nor their exploitation for the benefit of the Soviet Union was generally known in Hungary. This was attested to in the Report of the Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary issued by the United Nations on June 12, 1957, p. 71. (A/3592) (Baranya county) claiming Hungarians entitled know what happens to their natural resources; he continued, “this is a question closely associated with problem of an independent domestic and foreign policy; in principle everything is all right in this respect, but practice proves opposite; we live in era of big changes; this change began in Soviet Union with Stalin’s death.March 5, 1953. Since then lot of things have happened. In Hungary–Soviet relations this change is, unfortunately, hardly noticeable, although it obvious no sound political relations could develop between Stalin’s Soviet Union and Rakosi’s Hungary. Yugoslavia succeeded in protecting her complete independence, and Poland and China are on way to develop a special way of building socialism based on national peculiarities and history of the countries; we must strive to develop this useful practice also in our country; that, by the way, depends also on us”. Another speaker demanded greater freedom for spreading of Christian ideas and the restoration of Mindszenty as Prince Primate, introduction of several party system, and abolition present election system. Thereafter in tone “suppressed excitement”, others demanded re-establishment of former Christian youth organizations and others called for free propagation of Christian philosophy. In answer Hay stated he approved of free spreading of Christian ideas, although he considered them idealistic and unsuited to solve real problems of country. At student meeting slighting references of a speaker to talks of Hungarian leaders with “second and third rate” politicians in Belgrade and to official expressions of satisfaction with these talks brought stormy approbation from students, who obviously as little prepared accept subservience to Belgrade as to Moscow. (Foregoing is for background use of the media only) In demands as listed in Szabad Ifjusag students called for: (1) Immediate meeting of Central Committee and formation of a new one by lower echelon leadership which elected in recent past, (2) reshaping composition government with Nagy as new leader, (3) equal, secret parliamentary elections with participation of parties in Popular Front, (4) reorganization Hungarian economic life, (5) adjustment of work norms and introduction of work autonomy into shops, (6) review of crop collection system and support for individual peasant, (7) full investigation of political and economic disputes, amnesty for political prisoners, for the unjustly condemned, and rehabilitation for those who have been suppressed into the background; open trial for Mihaly Farkas, (8) restoration of the KossuthLouis Kossuth was the leader of the 1848 Hungarian rebellion against Hapsburg rule, which was suppressed with the help of troops from Tsarist Russia. coat of arms in place of present one; making March 15A traditional national holiday commemorating the 1848 revolt. and October 6See footnote 5, Document 91. national holidays, (9) complete freedom of opinion, of press and radio; a new separate daily paper for Mefesz; exposing of cadre materials and their extinction, (10) (above mentioned point about relations with USSR and Yugoslavia). Comment: As in case of recent writers’ meeting Legation believes media should give full factual coverage, without comment, to events at two meetings. News of meeting in Gyor has not yet been carried into Budapest press. In coverage of student meeting Szabad Nep devotes space to whistling in dark, saying students will not exploit youth movement for any kind of restoration. Legation recommends that coverage, especially as regards demands withdrawal Soviet troops, be fast so that maximum advantage be taken of ever-mounting demands of Hungarians. These two meetings give media their first opportunity to break long US silence on question Soviet troops maintained here. In addition to media following in wake of Hungarian demands and giving publicity to them, Legation feels Department might, as recommended in Legation despatch 156,The reference is unclear for there is no despatch 156. now all the more reconsider its policy of maintaining official silence on question legal status of Soviet troops here. Student meeting attended briefly by two Legation officers after telephone call from student representative who said students inviting all foreign newspapermen, foreign diplomats, and anyone else who wants to come. Legation feels that since meeting was open, word of anti-Soviet statements and audience reaction could have been carried out of country within 24 hours by any number of means, and thus Legation has no objection to immediate use by media of its observations, if above-noted restriction on comment re talks with Yugoslavia is observed and if media plays it straight without attempting to make any inflammatory comments. Barnes 98. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2356. Official Use Only; Niact. Received at 4:32 p.m., October 25. Repeated to Vienna and Munich. Budapest, October 23, 1956—midnight. 154. Department pass USIA; ACSI and AFOIN for action. Legation telegram 153.Telegram 153, October 23, provided details about the demonstration before the statue of General Josef Bem, a Pole who had aided the Hungarians in their struggle for freedom in 1848. Hundreds were reported to have marched past the U.S. Legation calling for the departure of the Soviet Army. (Ibid., 764.00/10–2356) Student demonstrationThe demonstrators were inspired by the recital of Sándor Petöfi’s revolutionary poem, “Arise Hungarians.” which proceeded orderly fashion to Bem Ter this afternoon later moved to Parliament, where reached climax in moderating talk by Imre Nagy which coldly received by crowd. Crowd built up during evening at three points: Parliament (where now largely dispersed); Stalin Ter, where Stalin statue pulled over by trucks with winches after 4 hours work and Red Star ripped off Trade Union Building; and Central Office Budapest Radio Brody Sandor Building. Legation understands youth delegation entered building early in evening and temper of crowd built up rapidly when delegation failed reappear. 45 truck loads troops attempted enter street and backed out in friendly atmosphere when crowd failed give way. This scene eyewitnessed 8 p.m. Gero’s speech, which brief and not conciliatory, delivered as scheduled on radio 8 p.m.For text of the address, see Zinner, National Communism, pp. 402–407. Probably around 10 p.m. fighting broke out in radio area after tear gas and/or stink bombs used on crowd, and fighting and killing continued between students, populace on one hand and AVH and Army troops on other. Students seized trucks and are moving about in streets. Two Legation officers personally witnessed young man shot in face lying dead in street, covered with Hungarian flag. Ambulances moving about carrying away others. Security forces in evidence this area with at least one known instance of crowd freeing arrestee. Tanks also in evidence radio area around 10:45. Large number truck loads troops moved in area around 10:30. No Soviet forces yet seen. Anonymous telephone call stated around 60 killed, although rumors in area reached 30–40; second such call requested Legation call on government halt killing. Legation also received second-hand report that Hungarian troops refused fire on public, and fire initiated on unarmed public by Russian-speaking men in AVH uniforms. Areas city other than radio area appeared orderly, however, and most sections visited were quiet. Nagy speech delivered from Parliament balcony after considerable waiting by crowd, who in interim demanded removal of present government and Soviet troops. Frequent shouts of “Down with Gero” heard. Lights went out for 20 minutes, crowds burned Szabad Nep copies in torchlight demonstration. Red Star on Parliament extinguished, as were Red Stars all over city within short time. Crowd repeatedly called for Nagy, who when finally appeared asked demonstrators bide their time and wait for natural developments, which he said would lead to democratization in Hungary. Crowd hardly listened and Nagy said “you called me here to give my opinion and I’m giving it”. He asked crowd to sing “Szazat”The national anthem. and then go home. Crowd’s attitude after first moderating words very cool. Legation strongly urges media refrain from taking any kind of stand on Imre Nagy for time being. Media may use all above except telephone calls to Legation. Department pass other EE missions as desired. Barnes 99. Editorial Note President Eisenhower referred to events in Poland in an address to the Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America delivered in Washington at 10:15 p.m. on October 23, as follows: “A people, like the Poles, who have once known freedom cannot be for always deprived of their national independence and of their personal liberty. That truth applies to every people in Eastern Europe who have enjoyed independence and freedom.” The President continued: “The day of liberation may be postponed where armed forces for a time make protest suicidal. But all history testifies that the memory of freedom is not erased by the fear of guns and the love of freedom is more enduring than the power of tyrants. But it is necessary that the inspiration of freedom, and the benefits enjoyed by those who possess it, are known to those oppressed. “We, as a nation—in that light—have a job to do, a mission as the champion of human freedom. This is it: “First—So to conduct ourselves in all our international relations that we never compromise the fundamental principle that all peoples who have proved themselves capable of self-government have a right to an independent government of their own full, free choice. “Second—So to help those freedom-loving peoples who need and want and can profitably use our aid that they may advance in their ability for self-support and may add strength to the security and peace of the free world.” For text, see Department of State Bulletin, November 5, 1956, pages 702–703. 100. Memorandum From Philip H. Tresize of the Policy Planning Staff to the Director of the Staff (Bowie)Source: Department of State, PPS Files: Lot 66 D 487. Confidential. Washington, October 24, 1956. RE Further Thoughts on Poland 1. It seems to me that the crucial feature in the Polish scene is to be found in the forces that brought Gomulka back to power and enabled and pushed him to take the anti-Soviet stand that he did. 2. I would think it plain, after Poznan, that popular pressures had made the Communist Party itself not wholly reliable as an instrument of administration and control in Poland. We are much too prone to forget that Communists are human too. It must have been difficult in Poland to be the agent of a regime subservient to the Russians and responsible for a miserable economic situation as well. When the Soviets began to de-Stalinize and to talk of different roads to Socialism, it was inevitable that many of these people should have swung around to nationalist, anti-Soviet attitudes because these were the attitudes of their constituents, and indeed of their Polish selves. The Party officials and activists—the essential nucleus of the control system—probably were ready to be subverted, in this sense, rather quickly. Poznan demonstrated how far the process had gone. 3. Gomulka, who is a Pole, an anti-Stalinist, and evidently a legitimate party hero beyond that, was trotted out as a response to this intra-Party restiveness, which in turn traces to popular discontents. He is a people’s choice, once removed. His indispensable characteristic, from the point of view of the other party leaders, is that he can be expected to command the loyalty of the all important Communist cadres and thereby to keep the system running. 4. It is not believable, however, that Gomulka and his nationalist-Communist following will simply be able to carry on a program slightly modified from the past. Everybody seems to agree that the bleak economic situation was the instant cause of popular unrest. And why are living standards so low? Because the Plan requires that they be low. Willy-nilly, the Plan will have to be changed. Pressures within the party will assure that. 5. In other words, the emphasis in Poland will have to shift, noticeably, from heavy industry and military security to welfare. I don’t suggest that this will take place in one great swoop. There will be heavy transitional costs in changing the economic program and this fact, plus inertia plus the Russians, will limit the pace of change. The direction of change, nevertheless, is for practical purposes given by the situation in Poland. I do not see how it can be stopped or reversed, short of the reoccupation of Poland. 6. This is of the most far-reaching significance. For one thing, it will have direct effects throughout the Bloc. Polish coal used to warm Polish houses or to exchange for Swedish consumer goods will not be available for, say, East German industry. All of the Plans will need adjustment, downward, as the Poles change their Plan. More important, the pressures elsewhere to imitate the Poles will be irresistible. We can be sure that Communist officials in the other satellites are similarly susceptible to popular attitudes. They too are going to press for measures to placate the workers and other articulate sections of the population. To keep the domestic Communist parties in control, the shift toward welfare goals will have to be a general one. The alternative will be to make the Soviet armed forces a direct governing instrument in Eastern Europe. 7. It is useful to remember that the Bloc nations, like all full-employment economies, have no margin for maneuver. If they are to have big housing programs, then investment and labor have to be diverted from industry. If agriculture is to get more investment, some other sector has to get less. Even if total output were to continue in these circumstances to grow rapidly—as could happen—its composition would tend to become more like our own or that of Western Europe and less like that of a single-mindedly military state. 8. That is a consummation to be welcomed for itself. One might suspect, moreover, that it will carry with it softening tendencies in the political field as well. The main rationale for the terror has always been to repress a population resentful of the privations imposed on it. If the privations become more bearable, the excuse for terror will diminish. Not that Communist regimes will shortly become liberal democracies with effective Bills of Rights. They may become gradually less repressive, however. 9. I come back to the point that all this will take some considerable time. If we look for the demise of Communism next year we shall be disappointed. If we are patient, and if nothing happens that the Soviets can construe as a new and important threat to their national security, we have good reason to hope for a desirable modification in the internal operations of the European Soviet bloc. 10. We need not be much concerned, it seems to me, if the Poles come back from Moscow next month with a big Soviet loan. This won’t undo what has happened so far as “independence” from the USSR is at issue. And if the Soviets are willing to finance more consumer goods for the Poles—which is what the loan will amount to—there is much to be said, from our point of view, for privately cheering Moscow on. There will have to be a net deduction from Bloc resources, no matter how one views it. (Indeed, though I would not press the point too far, it may be better the Soviets should help to finance the new course than that we do so. For our aid might help, all things equal, to sustain a Polish program emphasizing heavy industry, without reducing total Bloc capabilities at all.) 11. Our policy line in this limited sense is clearly enough marked. We should lie low, seek little, and reap the sure rewards of patience. If the Poles should look to us or to Western Europe for economic help, it would be necessary politically to respond, but even in this we ought to proceed carefully. A process is under way that can be checked only by forceful Russian action. Although there might be many gains for us if we could stir things up to the point of causing direct Soviet intervention, that course would carry very sizable risks. We can make smaller but still substantial gains at virtually no risk. I would suppose it to be prudent foreign policy to take these latter gains. Philip H. TrezisePrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 101. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Elbrick) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/10–2456. Secret. Drafted by Beam and Trivers. Washington, October 24, 1956. SUBJECT Approach to the Polish Government Concerning U.S. Economic Aid Discussion: In his talk last night the President made, albeit in general terms, a very clear offer of aid to Poland.See Document 99. At 10:25 a.m. on October 23, Secretary Dulles informed Allen Dulles that he had “asked for a study re stimulating economic help etc. Yesterday the Poles were all in favor of offers of aid. The Sec. was surprised”. The Director of Central Intelligence replied that “we should do something though he does not know what—no strings though”. The Secretary indicated that “[w]e are not as free as we might be—our proposed amendment was defeated in Congress”. They then discussed the possibility of voluntary agencies, businessmen, and labor unions doing something. (Memorandum of telephone conversation by Bernau; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations) It would be desirable now to bring this offer specifically to the attention of the Polish Government prior to the departure of their delegation to Moscow. The approach to the Polish Government should be done quietly and confidentially, if possible, through diplomatic channels so that the Poles might be fortified by this knowledge in their negotiations with the Soviets, without the embarrassment that might be caused by public disclosure of a formal U.S. Government approach at this time. We do not believe it desirable to have you call in the Polish Ambassador here for the following reasons:On October 24, at 11:30 a.m. Dulles met with Eisenhower to discuss the question of economic assistance to Poland: “We reviewed briefly the Polish situation. I said that we had been studying possibilities of economic aid and felt that there were sufficient possibilities under the law to justify indicating to the Poles that we would be glad to receive any views they might have on this subject. The President agreed that it would be appropriate to initiate this matter with the Polish Ambassador on a quiet basis”. (Memorandum of conversation by Dulles; ibid., Meetings with the President) Following his meeting with the President, Dulles called Under Secretary Hoover at 12:31 p.m. and asked him to handle the matter. Hoover said that he would get Elbrick together with Herbert V. Prochnow, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, to determine what to say. (Ibid., White House Telephone Conversations) 1. If you were to call in the Polish Ambassador, it would cause a strong press reaction which might be detrimental to our interests. We believe it preferable that our Ambassador in WarsawAmbassador Joseph E. Jacobs had been in Munich for medical treatment. He took the train from Berlin to Warsaw on the evening of October 20/21. be instructed to call at the Foreign Office and, referring to the President’s address, inform the Polish Government that the U.S. Government is prepared to discuss with the Polish Government means of implementing the President’s offer of aid. We do not believe that mention should be made of the open door left for general economic and other negotiations by the Polish note of October 20 [2?] declining the invitation of the Polish observers at our election.See footnote 2, Document 92. It would appear better to reserve this opening for other purposes, i.e., general economic negotiations, increase in cultural and other exchanges, etc. While the U.S. offer of foodstuffs to Poland after the Poznan disturbances remains open in the terms of Mr. Hoover’s letter of July 7,For text of this letter, see Department of State Bulletin, July 23, 1956, p. 151. nevertheless we do not believe it desirable to relate our present offer to the previous one in view of the fact that the offer at that time was specifically rejected by the Polish Government. When Ambassador Jacobs makes the offer, he could be instructed to inform the Poles orally that we would be glad to receive a delegation here in Washington for economic aid discussions. If the offer is made discreetly in Warsaw, there is much less likelihood of any widespread publicity. We would inform the Poles at the time that we did not intend to make an announcement concerning Ambassador Jacobs’ approach. Recommendation: That you approve our instructing Ambassador Jacobs to call at the Polish Foreign Office, to make appropriate reference to the President’s address of October 23, and to notify the Polish Government that the U.S. Government was prepared to discuss the granting of U.S. economic aid to Poland and that we would be ready to receive a Polish delegation in Washington for this purpose.Dulles initialed the source text and wrote “OK”; Hoover initialed his concurrence. 102. Memorandum From the Chief of the News Policy Staff of the Office of Policy and Programs of the United States Information Agency (Edman) to the Assistant Program Manager for Policy Application of the United States Information Agency (Zorthian)Source: Department of State, USIA/IOP/C Files: Lot 70 D 398, Poland. Confidential. Drafted by Andrew G. Gabor (USIA/IOP/LN). Also addressed to Eric T. Clarke of the Motion Picture Service (IMS) and to Leo J. Pinkus of the Press Service (IPS) of USIA. Washington, October 24, 1956. News Policy Note 1024–1525 DEVELOPMENTS IN POLAND Treatment: In general, media should concentrate on the cross-reporting of events in Poland and of commentary meeting the criteria stated below to the other Soviet satellites in Eastern Europe. We should try to keep the people of the satellites informed about the events in Poland but we should not attempt to incite them to revolt. In giving full coverage concerning the developments in Poland to the other Soviet satellites, we should call attention to the sections of the Gomulka speechSee Document 95. rejecting the thesis that Poznan and later protests were inspired by the West and deploring the failure of the Soviet system in Polish agriculture and industry. Output should emphasize that we regard the present situation as between Poland and the Soviet Union as a test of Soviet intentions with respect to the promises made by the Soviet leadership at the 20th Party Congress and the discussions last June with President Tito of Yugoslavia to recognize the principle of various roads to socialism. Without speculating on the course of future developments, we should indicate that the outside world will be watching to see whether the Soviet Union will intervene in internal Polish affairs. Caution: In our coverage and commentary we should avoid the following: 1. Any direct identification of U.S. official policy with the present resurgence of Polish nationalism. 2. Any statements which the Poles might resent as outside interference. 3. All stories which discuss recent developments in Poland in terms of the breaking up of the Soviet power bloc. 4. Any speculation that events in Poland spell the future doom of Communism per se. (FYI) The U.S. Position: It is in the interest of the U.S. to break or weaken the monolithic unity of the Soviet-dominated power bloc. We have shown by our policy towards Yugoslavia that we can have better relations with a Communist country when it exercises greater independence from Moscow. It is in our interest to encourage the present developments in Poland towards an increase in Polish self-determination as a step towards weakening the power balance in the Soviet bloc. We believe that this can best be done by avoiding giving the Stalinist forces in the Soviet Union and in Poland any justification for arguing that the present anti-Stalinist developments in Poland are supported by capitalist enemies. In our output we should also avoid inciting unrest in Poland and in other countries of Eastern Europe to such a point as to give the Soviet leaders any pretext for using force to subdue national communism in Poland and the other satellites.News Policy Note 1019–1730, “Current Developments in Poland, Hungary and Other Satellites,” dated October 19, from George W. Edman to the same addressees, also cautioned that the United States should not be identified with or appear to support any one member of the “communist satellite hierarchy.” (Department of State, USIA/IOP/C Files: Lot 70 D 398, Poland) (End FYI) [Here follows background information.] 103. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2456. Confidential; Niact. Budapest, October 24, 1956—3 p.m. Unnumbered. Legation considers earliest and highest level statement by US Government urgently required by present situation Hungary,The Soviet military incursion, which took place at 4:30 a.m., October 24, was reported in telegram 156 from Budapest, October 24. The telegram also reported that Nagy had allegedly requested the assistance of the Soviet troops. (Ibid.) and suggests text along following lines: The United States considers the fight in Hungary as renewed expression intense desire freedom long held by Hungarian people. This fight is new evidence their willingness give their lives this end, as on another famous occasion Hungary’s fight for liberty against Russian troops. The demands reportedly made by students and populace clearly fall within the framework of those human rights to which every free people entitled. US considers intervention Soviet forces and ruthless killing unarmed Hungarians as yet another example of continuing occupation Hungary by alien and enemy forces for their own purposes and employment these troops to shoot down Hungarian people breaks every moral law and demonstrates that Hungary is to Soviet Russia merely a colonial possession, the demand of whose people for democratic liberty warrants the use of naked force. What has happened in Hungary amounts to armed aggression by army of one power against people of another. United States and world await outcome with intense interest. End statement. We also strongly recommend that urgent consideration be given to diplomatic protest to Soviet and Hungarian Governments within matter of day or two on continuing presence Soviet troops. We believe this protest should not be based on legalistic grounds (which we consider weak) but on brazen occupation nature troop stationments both before and after signing Austrian peace treaty and Warsaw Pact. Fact that functions and strength these troops have not changed substantially during past decade, as well as present use, gives ample basis, we believe, for protest. We believe such protest most urgently called for at present moment, when virtually every Hungarian of scores spoken to in past 24 hours have demanded “Give us arms”, “Give us diplomatic assistance”, “What is America going to do for us in this hour?” Message unsigned 104. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) in New York, October 24, 1956, 6:07 p.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Phyllis D. Bernau. Washington, October 24, 1956, 6:07 p.m. TELEPHONE CALL TO AMB. LODGE Re Hungary—apparently the fighting is developing in quite a big way and there is clear evidence of considerable Soviet military activity in the area to try to repress it. We are thinking of the possibility of bringing it to the SC. From a political standpoint the Sec. is worried that it will be said that here are the great moments and when they came and these fellows were ready to stand up and die, we were caught napping and doing nothing. L. mentioned Poland. The Sec. said that was different and there is more excuse to take this to the SC. He wishes L. would think about it and possibly for tomorrow. L. said calling for a cease-fire. The Sec. mentioned asking the British and French to join,Dulles raised the issue of calling the attention of the Security Council to events in Hungary in a conversation at his home with Sir Percy Spender, the Australian Ambassador, on the evening of October 24. Sir Percy replied that he was personally sympathetic and would consult his government. (Memorandum of conversation by Dulles, October 24; ibid., General Memoranda of Conversation) and they agreed they would be reluctant to though the Sec. thinks they would vote with us. L. will go to work on it and wait for word. The Sec. said to keep it close. L. will go into the Article to move on. 105. Telegram From the Director of the Munich Radio Center of the International Broadcasting Service (D’Alessandro) to the Assistant Program Manager for Policy Application of the United States Information Agency (Zorthian)Source: Department of State, USIA/IBS Files: Lot 63 A 190, Materials on Munich Radio Center. Confidential; Priority. Enclosure to a letter from the Director of the International Broadcasting Service of USIA, Robert E. Button, to Aldo D’Alessandro, June 7, 1957. Munich, October 24, 1956. Unnumbered. Reur unnumbered on Hungarian developments.In his telegram to D’Alessandro, October 23, Zorthian requested advice as to what line to take and indicated they were handling developments with “extreme care” and were relying heavily on news coverage and “responsible” editorial reaction. (Ibid.) By this time you will have seen MRC news copy backfile to Washington. In absence of any comment to the contrary am assuming that it squares with present thinking. We are in continuous touch with Delaney/ViennaRobert F. Delaney, information officer at the Embassy in Vienna. and everything he has given us that was usable is contained in our backfile to you. Delaney standing by all night to pick up what he can get from returning travelers, correspondents, etc. and if there is anything new you will get it automatically via our newsroom. MRC programming and engineering staff on alert basis and prepared to open up Munich and Tangier repeats of all originations, should developments warrant. Hungarian breakfast show will not be prefed to Tangier as usual and will instead go live at 1145 AM CET. Tangier alerted and will be given specific requirements via telex, if and when repeats are to be replaced. Consulate coderoom will remain open until we tell them to shut down so don’t hesitate put through any urgent guidances. Believe Ike should make statement within next few hours since people will most certainly be looking for same, especially in view of his remarks on Polish events.See Document 99. Am appending a suggested draft. Otherwise have no particular line to suggest at this time. Agree that our reliance should be on fullest news coverage and pertinent official and editorial reaction. [Our?] position extremely delicate. This story is far from over and entire Iron Curtain population looking to United States for our reaction. We certainly in no position to encourage revolters, especially in view of explicit statement that US would not intervene militarily under any circumstances.In his appearance on the interview program “Face the Nation” on October 21, Dulles excluded the use of force to assist Poland to win its freedom. He urged the necessity of acting prudently to avoid a misstep. See The New York Times, October 22, pp. 1 and 6, and the Washington Post, October 22, p. 1. Conversely unless we can suggest alternatives we are in no position to discourage or describe as futile sacrifices Hungarians are making. Middle course which would yet make clear US identification with just aspirations of Hungarian people and condemnation of intervention, amounting to aggression of Soviet force against civilian population of Hungary, appears only course for VOA to follow. Material to expose fraud of Fascist reaction counter revolutionary verbiage used to describe [garble] Hungarian citizens who have rebelled against communist aggression. Believe that parallels with Poland would serve no useful purpose at this time and should be avoided. Incidentally some of the repeats of Washington originations sound pretty tired because of lack of recent news of Hungarian developments.Telephone and telegraphic contact with the Legation in Budapest was lost on the afternoon of October 23. Throughout October 24 the Department of State depended in large measure on news ticker reports derived from Radio Budapest. Contact was reestablished at 6:30 a.m., October 25, and the first telegram was received at 7:15 a.m. Communications with the Legation were uncertain at critical moments during the crisis. Realize this presently beyond your control but believe way should be studied to correct situation in the future. Herewith suggested draft for Ike statement on Hungarian events: The people of the United States are deeply shocked to learn that the armed forces of the Soviet Union are being used against the civilian population of Hungary, on the eve of what we had hoped would be better days for that unhappy country. Gunfire cannot be a final answer to the legitimate demands of a people for a decent standard of living and the restoration of the basic freedoms which are the birth right of the people of Louis Kossuth. We shall follow with deepest concern the tragic events that are even now continuing in the hope that the aspirations of the Hungarian people for a better life shall not be denied. 106. Telegram From the Director of the Munich Radio Center of the International Broadcasting Service (D’Alessandro) to the Director of the International Broadcasting Service (Button)Source: Department of State, USIA/IBS Files: Lot 63 D 190, Material on Munich Radio Center. Confidential; Priority; Eyes Only. Enclosure to a letter from Button to D’Alessandro dated June 7, 1957. Also addressed to Barry Zorthian. The code room was instructed to deliver copies only to the addressees. Munich, October 25, 1956. Unnumbered. Believe that broadcast of “Americana” to Hungary during people’s rebellion and description of same as “riots” counterproductive and should be immediately reexamined. Staff members here could not understand how VOA Hungarian from Washington last night could tell Hungarians about Globemaster landing on Arctic shelf, activities of Soviet election observers and cancer research while people were dying in the streets. Feel such treatment could only cause dismay and resentment. Effect further aggravated by fact that BBC Hungarian which followed immediately after Washington origination carried two sharp commentaries on the situation, strongly condemning use of Soviet forces to put down uprising and saying that while it was difficult to tell at moment whether intervention due to Nagy or Gero whoever responsible should be removed. Since I know several members of Washington Hungarian Unit to be very able journalists is it possible that overconcern with policy implementation and apprehension over possibility unfavorable reactions from persons within and outside Agency is throwing them off balance and out of touch with audience? I have been getting similar reactions to output of other Washington language desks for some time and if valid to any considerable extent would of course do great damage not only to VOA but to position of U.S. in the eyes of the people behind the Iron Curtain. New Subject: Reur request for guidance suggestions. During current phase when Hungarian uprisings seem still to be continuing would suggest heavy cross-reporting of Hungarian and Polish events plus worldwide expression of solidarity and sympathy for Hungarian people. If and when uprising quelled would proceed to next phase which would give heaviest emphasis to use of Soviet troops, tanks and planes to crush attempts of Hungarian people to free themselves from the yoke of communist tyranny. Also believe we should seek attributed comment highlighting the fact that Soviets stand exposed before the world and that bloody suppression of Hungarian freedom aspirations may well mark the beginning of the end of the Soviet empire. Could you give us some indication of when we can expect revised Soviet orbit guidances to conform to new situation created by events past few days? Realize this is big job since rest of standing directives will probably be affected but make plea for at least interim guidances soonest possible. 107. Notes on the 38th Meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, October 25, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/10–2556. Top Secret. Drafted by Comstock. Washington, October 25, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman Defense—Colonel Oscar R. Schaaf Defense—Mr. Roger Ernst CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell Office of Spec. Asst. to the President—Mr. Oren M. Stephens USIA—Mr. Alfred V. Boemer OCB—Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Edward L. Freers State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Robert O. Blake State—Mr. Frank G. Siscoe CIA—Mr. Arthur M. Cox USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey Mr. Boemer read the President’s statement on Hungary.For text of the President’s statement, issued on October 25, see Department of State Bulletin, November 5, 1956, p. 700. [The following notes are not exact quotations.]All brackets are in the source text. Freers: The statement appears to be laying groundwork for UN action. We’re considering UN action in State. Any resolution or statement now would have to be in the Security Council, probably under Article 30—potential threat to peace.Reference presumably should be to Article 34, which allows for Security Council investigation of any dispute to determine if the dispute is likely to endanger international peace. Later we may go to the Human Rights Committee or the General Assembly. There would have to be first policy consultation with other Security Council members. Boerner: Problems like Cyprus and Algeria could confuse the issue. Freers: There are some hurdles but all factors are under consideration. Campbell: Should we not announce that we are going before the UN in order to let the Hungarian people know? Freers: That is also under consideration. Legation Budapest is very interested in the statements by the President and the Secretary of State, and in UN action. The key point is whether the story about Nagy negotiating troop removal with the Russians can be confirmed.Nagy had indicated such an intent in a broadcast to the Hungarian people on the afternoon of October 25. Earlier in the day, it was announced that János Kádár had replaced Gerö as Party First Secretary. Siscoe: Radio reports from Budapest indicate this. Freers: These reports might be coming from Vienna rather than Budapest. We should try to hold Nagy to this commitment. Line should be: Nagy stands or falls on his ability to get Soviet troops out of Hungary. Boerner: USIA has been reporting events for the people in Hungary but we do not have any definite line. Freers: Can’t have a definite line on Hungary because we don’t know what is going to happen. New subject: Mr. Hoover and OCB have recommended wide exploitation of Gomulka speech.See Document 95. Boerner: USIA has sent it to about 20 posts. Campbell: We will see if we still have the stencils. It is being fully translated. Boerner: USIA sent it out straight without comment. Blake: It is important to have IPS comment, e.g., columns comparing this with past promises. It is a strong break from Russian Communist technique. The Chalmers Roberts article is a good start—though not accurate in all points.Reference is to an article that appeared in the Washington Post on October 24. Boerner: The Gomulka speech is useful, particularly concerning failure of cooperatives. Trivers: Failure of collectives is its strongest point. Blake: It is strong break with the past. Boerner: It lends authenticity to much of our line. It admits in one statement that Communist statistics are fake, production is off, industrial work is required on Sunday, etc. Freers: Useful to report it back to Russia. Revey: It also stresses the cult of the individual. Freers: It will be possible to exploit the speech for a long time. Trivers: Gomulka’s statements regarding ties with Russia are strong and devoutly meant. Cox: We should wait to see how much popular support Gomulka has before we establish our line on him. Blake: Could we get someone with the stature of George Kennan to write a series to appear when hot news tapers off? Schaaf: Jacobs indicated Gomulka got most applause when he promised to get Russian troops out. Freers: Gomulka is popular right now and for some unforeseen period because of his apparent anti-Soviet stand. When time passes he will be subject to question for failure to deliver goods. [Mr. Beam joined the meeting at this point.] Beam: We have been working on circular letter to the Security Council. It will not take any stand on the action of the Hungarian Government itself. It will go after the idea that the Soviets have used their troops. It might even strengthen the hand of the Hungarians against Russia. It should make it possible for anyone to open debate. We are going to ask the support of the French, British, Belgians, and Australians. Planning to circulate it tomorrow. I understand the free Hungarian representatives in New York, the National Council, want to take some action. They want to go to UN. Trivers: They can present a petition to the Secretary General, but he won’t circulate it unless a government sponsors. Siscoe: SundayOctober 28. is post World War I Liberation Day for Czechoslovakia. Campbell: Should there be a day of prayer for Poles and Hungarians? Perhaps the President could mention it. Beam: The Catholic Church, rather than the Government, would be the appropriate organ to take such action. Cox: The Crusade for FreedomThe financial arm of the Committee for a Free Europe, it was later known as the Radio Free Europe Fund. was approached by the Upjohn Company with an offer of medical supplies. Beam: Perhaps something can be worked out through the Red Cross. How are we playing the situation to neutral areas? Blake: We could quote what is being said by socialists and similar groups. Campbell: Also labor groups. Boerner: We are cross reporting. We ought to get out a follow-up guidance next week. Campbell: The Socialist governments in the free world have not made any public statements yet. Blake: We could put out commentary on use of Soviet troops in Hungary and the fact that they were poised in Poland. Trivers: Such commentary could be used together with the Gomulka story. Beam: We should try to get some good pictures for use by our media of the fighting in Hungary and of delivery of U.S. humanitarian assistance. PBCOCB Staff Representative 108. Transcript of a Teletype Conversation Between the Legation in Hungary and the Department of State, October 25, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2556. Official Use Only. Transmitted to Washington in an unnumbered telegram from Budapest, October 25, which is the source text. Budapest, October 25, 1956 This is clear. Communications open temporarily. Am typing on floor. A big battle has just took [taken] place in front of Legation seems to have gone towards Parliament seems all Americans still OK and safe. Street fighting again flaring up with tanks fighting it out at present. Stand by please, chief coming down in Telex room. Roger will do. Here he is: Do you have any questions at present? Here some news: Parliament Square 1045 crowded with people afternoon October 24 continued street fighting many Soviet tanks and troops. Legation skeleton staff returned to homes without incident. Two officers and two Marines remained in Legation. Intermittent shots heard through night. Quieter towards morning. October 25: Crowds moving in streets, center town especially Pest. Danube River bank area full of Soviet tanks and troops. US staff with no difficulty [moving?] about. 1000: heavy movement of tanks reported on Stalin Street. 1030: Large crowd marched north past Legation proceeded farther towards Parliament. Heavy gun fire from Parliament area. Some Legation reports that some Soviet tanks going over to the crowd flying Hungarian flags from tanks with crowds. Budapest radio broadcasts statement that isolated groups firing in town. Advised people stay off streets. Large crowd dispersed before Parliament now; mainly dispersed by Soviet tanks firing over crowds heads. Some tanks in control of crowd withdrew from Parliament area. Heavy firing continues hearing distance of Legation apparently tank guns. Any questions? CWO is contacting Budapest officer here for questions. Mr. Barnes, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Katona, Mr. Clark, Mr. Meeker, Mr. Nyerges, etc., all in Telex room huddling on floor to avoid gunfire. Do you people believe this fighting is going to spread further? Have no way of knowing but seems very possible that it will spread. Believe non-Hungarian stationed Soviet troops pulled into Budapest over night. Prefix on truck numbers is Soviet “F”. Have report that no airplane service to or from Budapest. Train service probably interrupted and no information on conditions Vienna Budapest highway, except some reports of disturbances in Gyor. Also heard reports of disturbances Debrecen and Szeged and Miskolc. Any questions? Have none at present. Strength of Soviet troops which arrived in Budapest initially at 0400 hours local time 24 October estimated to be one mechanized infantry division. Hungarian troops held in background. Soviet doing bulk of fighting. Some Hungarian troops known to have joined the crowd. Situation in front of Legation building now quiet, fighting seems to have left this immediate area. American apartment house Szeichenyi sprayed with Russian machine gun fire due to presence of insurgents firing from roof. All Americans and domestic help safe in basement, however windows broken from shell fire and front of building sprayed with machine gun fire from Russian troops dug in, in and around the building. Some members in crowd before Legation have been shouting for United States assistance. Army and Legation officers have personally observed several instances of Soviet tanks going over to crowds just prior to firing. These were seen flying Hungarian flags. Still on floor, reasons for bad typing. All this information given by Legation officers. Legation wife observed at 1045 local time, 76 Soviet trucks fully loaded with troops field kitchens towing howitzers proceeding from east in direction of Parliament. All trucks bearing numbers beginning with Cyrillic letter “F”. Agriculture Attaché has observed trucks bearing this Cyrillic letter by chance in Rumania. Situation around Legation area quiet. Any questions? None. Mr. McKisson has been notified and is on his way down. Is anyone from military coming down? Military will be informed by Mr. McKisson. Have set the printer back on table. State Department, you still there? This AmLegation Budapest. Yes, still with you. Appears to be rather quiet around the Legation area again. Still there State Department? Yes, will stay with you until you advise. Just so long we don’t get cut off is what I’m worried about. Budapest radio has just announced Gero has been relieved of the party and has been replaced by Kadar who is to speak over radio shortly. Things seem little quieter at moment and one city bus on normal run just passed by. [Here follows a description of events as told to the Legation by John MacCormac of The New York Times. ] While we still have the circuit can inform you that large crowd still in front American Legation shouting for help, etc. Have you any questions? None right now. Do any of the officers there want to talk direct to McKisson? I will find out. Hold on a minute. Yes, believe Mr. Barnes would like to. Is Mr. McKisson there yet? Not yet. Will tell McKisson as soon as we can contact him. Roger. Hang on. Will keep this circuit open as long as possible. Hope you can hold circuit until officers arrive. Hope so too. Appears we have friends in telegraph office. Very unusual. If you speaking of us—sure you have. Roger. Any more running commentary? Seems that crowd has left from in front of Legation and things again seem rather quiet. However, numerous times we thought this whole mess was over but it starts up very suddenly without any warning as you can well imagine. Earlier this morning I had the printer on floor typing from prone position with many more typing errors than appearing on this later transmission. I’m sure you did best you could. I sure hope so. Was rather afraid of bullets coming in the window since this Telex room is facing the crowd and would have more protection on floor. Fortunately no shells or the like came this direction. That’s good. Have man in back of me who was in Bogota in 1948The American Embassy in Bogota had been barricaded when violence flared following the assassination of an opposition political leader on April 9, 1948. so we know what situation you are facing. Yes. Have also been informed that my apartment is all shot up, windows broken and a fire broke out in the empty apartment adjacent from mine. Have not had opportunity to go see the extent of damage but am sure that some of my things are damaged from the numerous rifle and machinegun fire which occurred in that area when the Russians discovered some of the crowd on the roof of the American apartment. Oh well, that’s the life. Am having bits to eat at my side and do not want to leave this machine while we still have contact. Any questions? No questions. Want to hold you on. Don’t jeopardize connection. Roger. Any further official telegrams? Nothing in the immediate future. McKisson is up on 6th floor. We are requesting his presence in our traffic section. Will get Barnes and Rogers and Clark to come in here again. Mr. McKisson is here now. Barnes in snack bar, will be here momentarily. McKisson from Barnes: Believe Legation has reported situation in immediate vicinity as fully as possible. No recent changes nor new information from other Budapest or Hungarian C. [sic] Momentarily quiet Legation area. McKisson from Barnes: Do you have any questions? Barnes from McKisson: What is your estimate of Nagy’s position now? Barnes from McKisson: Is there anything we can do to facilitate your task? McKisson from Barnes: Can think of nothing at moment. Barnes from Freers: We all appreciate the magnificent job you are all doing. Freers from Barnes: Thanks Ed. Things going OK so far. Barnes from Leverich: Sure you will be glad to know Wailes has applied for visas and should be departing within week or ten days. Leverich from Barnes: Good to hear the news. Here answer to question one: McKisson from Barnes: This is a battle situation and we have no idea what is going to happen. Our impression yesterday was that in view of he [him] being blamed for calling in Soviet troops, that he lost a great deal of popularity; where he stands today and how the people would view a further retreat from Kadar to Nagy, we do not know. We presume Nagy is to all intents and purposes Premier. Should the blame for the calling of Soviet troops now be placed on Gero and he made a scapegoat for all this is going on now, and if he made further concessions, he might have a chance. But we do not know enough to say anything very certainly. McKisson from Barnes: As you know, Foreign Minister Horvath and Sik requested visas for attending General Assembly UN. Foreign Minister inquired today about them, after being incommunicado yesterday. Unless you see objection, we will issue them this afternoon or tomorrow, assuming contact with Foreign Office. What can you tell us about Secretary’s statement last night?The reference is unclear as Dulles made no statement on Hungary on October 24. Barnes from McKisson: No objection to issuance of visas to Horvath and Sik. Cases of other officials will be subject of later communication. Here note. We assume you will report to press and close relatives soonest that all Americans on Legation staff are in no imminent danger. Couriers Oliveiras and Vest are OK. Please inform Frankfort. So far as we know there have been no American casualties, but our information is very meager. [Here follows a list of Americans who wished their families in the United States to know they were safe.] The crowd has put up a ladder on the Russian monument in front of Legation and is attempting to knock down Red Star. Otherwise rather quiet in front of Legation at present. In response to crowds which continued to grow before the Legation, demanding assistance, and as what apparently was the only way to prevent this crowd from growing into unmanageable proportions we have just made the following statement and asked them to move away peacefully. They appeared satisfied. “We understand the situation and it has been reported to our government as fully as we are able. You will understand that we ourselves can take no decision; this is a matter for our government and the United Nations. We have been in Hungary for many years and think we understand the situation.” Barnes from Freers and Beam: Answer to previous question statement expected probably today. Secretary has asked us to pass on word to you that he is pleased and gratified by Legation’s performance under these trying circumstances. McKisson from Barnes: In speech just delivered on radio, Imre Nagy has promised, inter alia, that as soon as arms laid down, Soviet troops now fighting will be withdrawn to former position in Hungary and that negotiations will be started to have all Soviet troops withdrawn. Deadline of 1800 hours yesterday for laying down arms cancelled.Nagy’s speech was broadcast over Radio Budapest at 2:25 p.m. [Here follows a reference to the safety of nine Canadians.] Note: We have processed running commentary and notes in telegram form so that proper distribution could be made to interested offices. Do you think you will continue with commentary or shall I end the message now? All parties except duty officers and those who cannot get to apartment are rapidly pulling out as it is getting dark. We will have only one further brief coded message unless something very dramatic takes place. Thousands of Hungarians gathering in front of American Legation again shouting for Russians to leave. They are still gathering. [Here follows a brief reference reporting the safety of additional American citizens.] Mass demonstration carrying Hungarian flags and black flags running over 2,000 have sung Hungarian anthem and appealed for help in front of American Legation. American officers in effort to disperse crowd have repeated essentially message sent earlier today. Some of crowd has dispersed but others are attempting to enter Legation. Nothing really violent. Please time your notes with your local time. What is time there now? Crowd presently singing and demonstrating. McKisson from Rogers, Meeker, Nygeres. Time here 1630 local time. Do you mean 1730 local time? 1630 local time. 1631 local time. McKisson from Rogers. We have just remade statement to crowd quoted earlier. If you have suggestions as to what we can say in future, we would like to have it. McKisson from Rogers, 25/1640 local time. Crowd slowly dispersing. We would like to have any suggestions for statements, however, for future use. For Rogers from Leverich. No suggestions for future statements except you may wish reiterate our sympathy and assure crowds you are keeping your government as fully informed as possible. Rogers from Leverich. Reluctant to keep this circuit tied up much longer. Unless you want to send further message we had better terminate it as soon as we have read your BD10. Leverich from Rogers, 25/1701 local time. Following this last message we have nothing more. No reply BD10 necessary. Many thanks for your support. Follows tactical estimate prepared by Meeker, who has been out today more than anyone else. Leverich from Rogers, 25/1703 local time. Information on tactical situation Budapest proper very unclear. Outline seems to be as follows: Soviet–AVH and other government units have set up down town defense based on east end Margit Bridge and covering Ministry Defense–AVH headquarters and north end Parliament Square. South of Parliament, but unknown to what degree east, anti-government crowds freely moving. Gellert Bridge appears under control of anti-government forces but tanks on Chain Bridge unknown as to allegiance. Soviet setting up heavy guns back in Varosliget Park. If this outline correct heavy trouble may break out. Please note as far as Legation concerned we desire to break the contact and will route through Vienna if possible or if very important will attempt contact Secretary State, DC direct. Rogers from Leverich: OK we will sign off. Thanks for everything. All you guys doing wonderful job. Take care. 109. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/10–2556. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. Warsaw, October 25, 1956—1 p.m. 527. For Under Secretary Hoover from Ambassador Jacobs. Embtel 526.In telegram 526 from Warsaw, October 25, Jacobs indicated that he was going to see Winiewicz because Foreign Minister Adam Rapacki was unavailable. (Ibid.) Telegram 208 to Warsaw, October 24, instructed Jacobs to make such an approach. (Ibid., 611.48/10–2456) Following is text (a’s and the’s omitted) which I shall read to Under Secretary Winiewicz at 3 p.m. this afternoon: Begin verbal text: 1. President Eisenhower in recent addressSee Document 99. said that US as nation has job and mission to do in helping freedom-loving peoples who need and want and can profitably use US aid so that they may advance in their ability for self-support and may add strength to security and peace of world. 2. US authorities have noted statement which Mr. Wladyslaw Gomulka has made in recent addresses and, in particular, those relating to difficulties in Polish economic situation.See Document 95. In view of these statements, US Government has been studying question of how US might be of assistance. It would be glad to have, therefore, any views which Government of Poland may have on this subject, including perhaps possibility of US supplying certain commodities, such as wheat, which it has been supplying to various other European countries. 3. US authorities do not wish to press this matter upon Government of Poland and approach is being made at this time only from point of view of desiring to be helpful if Polish Government is interested. US Government has no fixed ideas as to procedure in event Government of Poland desires to pursue matter further. 4. Under Secretary of State, Herbert Hoover, Jr., has great personal interest in this matter in view of association of his illustrious father, Herbert Hoover, with previous difficult situations in Polish history,As Chairman of the Famine Emergency Committee, Herbert Hoover visited Poland in March 1946. Hoover also served as Food Administrator during World War I. as well as his own great respect for Polish dedication to independence and freedom. Jacobs 110. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/10–2556. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. Received at 4:16 p.m. Warsaw, October 25, 1956—6 p.m. 535. For Under Secretary Hoover From Ambassador Jacobs. Embtels 526 and 527.Regarding telegram 526, see footnote 2 to telegram 527, supra. Saw Winiewicz and handled matter as stated reference telegram. He replied that this “important” approach would be referred his government. Substance his ensuing remarks as follows: Polish economy, as Gomulka fully realizes, requires considerable bolstering. Immediate problem is careful study of “unfinished balances” of six year plan and recalculation requirement needed integrate these balances into new five year plan. This will require search for more efficient methods know-how in industry as well as exploiting normal trade and credit opportunities as may be available. In order accomplish this in best manner to suit Poland’s needs, intent Polish authorities (even before present government changes took place) is to get Poland on equal footing with all powers, including USSR, in matter foreign trade and commerce. Poland has more than enough natural resources, manpower to take care itself economically if only it could trade in usual and customary manner with all nations. He mentioned restrictive “controls” of west which prevent Poland from doing this. While he did not so state, got impression from his repetition of independence in trade that USSR also was in his mind. He said many peoples in west and here either distort or misunderstand present developments. As Gomulka has stated there is no change (A) in Poland’s determination pursue its own road to socialism best suited to realities of needs of Polish people and (B) in continuance ties with USSR, Poland’s ally, as Gomulka has put it, on basis of equality between independent states. Turning from these generalities to specific relations between US and Poland, Winiewicz said, in keeping with above, his government had for some time been hoping for better relations with US and he was sure this would continue be his government’s policy. With this in mind, his government had suggested in note replying our invitation send observers to November elections “a get together” to solve all outstanding problems.See footnote 2, Document 92. Said his government was very sincere in this but there had been no reply. He went on say kind of aid which Poland needs of US is restoration normal trade and commercial relations, as well as cultural and scientific exchanges in “know-how” fields so that each could benefit and prosper therefrom. He mentioned for instance, that nearly all Poland’s textile mills are geared handle short staple cotton for which US was best source—Egyptian cotton, for instance, was no use as mills could not handle it properly. Poland would like buy cotton, not accept as gift, but needs some credit for one, two or three years. Likewise, Poland needs wheat and adequate provision has been made to buy same but, even so, short and long term credit was sometimes needed because of temporary lack adequate foreign exchange. Said Poland’s industry, citing coal mining, could learn much from technical know-how of US. In brief, he thought this sort of “aid”, not gifts, from US, supplemented by long or short term credits through commercial channels (“consortium” mentioned) was solution. At this point digressed to say that word “aid” had come to have unfortunate political connotation which carries with it stigma that donor would or has right interfere in internal affairs of recipient. This connotation, which he termed unfortunate, made it hard, if not impossible, for his government to accept any sort assistance which carried with it any show connotation that internal affairs of Poland were being inhibited or restricted. Type of assistance through mutual trade, commercial, cultural, scientific and technical exchanges, which he spoke of above, would avoid this problem. In conclusion, he said he appreciated our interest in Poland in this matter. My comments on publicity and some observations on whole question follow.See Document 114. The source text bears a notation that it was read by Sutterlin (EE) at 6:45 p.m., October 25. Jacobs 111. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President in New York and the Secretary of State in Washington, October 25, 1956, 5:02 p.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Paper, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Bernau. Washington, October 25, 1956, 5:02 p.m. TELEPHONE CALL TO THE PRESIDENT IN NEW YORK The Pres. returned the call and the Sec. said we are giving thought to circulating a letter to the SC re Hungary etc.Allen Dulles had spoken to the Secretary on the telephone some 25 minutes earlier. In that conversation, the “Sec. explained the practice of sending a letter and it does not go on the agenda and is not a resolution. It might hold it for the time being to see what develops. The Frenchman is Pres. this month.” The need for action resulted from the apprehension that the Hungarian émigrés “might jump the gun—by going to the UN via the Latinos.” When he was asked whether the letter might not be counterproductive, Allen Dulles replied that “it is a close question and he would like to think about it.” He also “mentioned sending message to Nehru—he thinks if he gets consulted and feels he is in things, he would operate differently.” (Memorandum of telephone conversation by Bernau; ibid.) It is a close question re doing it. The Pres. asked if the Sec. talked to the Br. and Fr., and the Sec. said no. We are planning to send cables tonight. He doubts they will be prepared to act quickly and if you don’t do it tomorrow the Sec. doubts it is worth doing at all. Why? It is hot and better understood now. The Pres. said he is not so sure. If you act in deliberate fashion, that may be better. The Pres. does not think we should walk in this alone. He thinks it would look as if we were doing it for internal. . . . Ellipsis in the source text. He thinks we could concert with NATO countries and certainly with the big ones. The Sec. thinks they will be reluctant to come along with us—as they will interpret it as being an election move. The Pres. said some agreement from our allies no matter who puts it in would take the noose off. The Pres. said to tell them we have it seriously in mind and to reply promptly. MondayOctober 29. would not be fatal. The Sec. said the Latin countries would take the initiative—Peru and Cuba are on the SC. It might look as though we were in back of it. The Pres. said if they are friends enough and would do it, he would be happy. He would not do it alone. The Sec. explained just what circulating a letter means. The Pres. said he would like to hear from our allies—even a grudging assent. The Pres. said he will be there first thing in the a.m. so let’s talk then.Dulles did not see the President alone on October 26 until after the NSC meeting at which time, according to Dulles’ Appointment Book in the Eisenhower Library, they discussed a speech the Secretary was soon to give. The Pres. thinks it a good idea but thinks we should explore it. They agreed it is a close decision. The worst thing, said the Pres., would be to be thought of as guilty of spurious interest. 112. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) in New York, October 25, 1956, 5:29 p.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Bernau. New York, October 25, 1956, 5:29 p.m. TELEPHONE CALL TO AMB. LODGE L. returned the call, and the Sec. said they are now thinking of sending to the other signatories of the TreatyFor text of the Peace Treaty with Hungary, which was signed at Paris on February 10, 1947, and which went into effect on September 15, 1947, see 61 Stat. 2065. The parties to the Treaty were Australia, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, India, New Zealand, South Africa, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Yugoslavia. Allen Dulles advised the Secretary of State to add France to the list of the nations to be contacted and the latter agreed. (Memorandum of telephone conversation by Bernau, October 25; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations) omitting the Soviet Union and perhaps Yugoslavia the text of a letter which L. might send to the Pres. of the SC. L. said good. The Sec. said we want to feel out some of these people first. The Pres. does not want us to get out alone. If they are against it, at least we would have a reason for not acting. It will be private in the first instance. If we had to explain I think we would let it be known. We want to know how they feel re the letter and possibly join. L. said make it a resolution and settle for a letter. The Sec. said he thinks he has something there from the standpoint of tactics. L. does not think much of it as a matter of substance but gives you something to give up. The Sec. said the Pres. does not think it has to be done tomorrow. The Sec. had the feeling we should act fairly quickly. L. will be available at all times. The Sec. said we will circulate the letter tonight—then L. said he may put it in Monday.October 29. 113. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2556. Confidential; Priority. Sent also to Canberra, New Delhi, Pretoria, Wellington, Ottawa, Belgrade, and Paris; repeated to USUN. Drafted by Walmsley and approved by Dulles. Washington, October 25, 1956—7:29 p.m. 2981. You are requested to consult immediately with Foreign Office with respect to its attitude as signatory Hungarian Peace Treaty to circulation of letter among members Security Council or introduction of item and resolution on situation produced in Hungary by action of military forces of Soviet Union against Hungarian people. It would be particularly important to know if Foreign Office favors either action and whether it would associate itself with either of the proposed actions. Proposed letter would be addressed to President of Security CouncilBernard Cornut-Gentille. and in general invite attention to situation created in Hungary by employment Soviet forces against Hungarian people to repress demands to enjoy human rights and freedoms affirmed in Charter and secured by Peace Treaty; would urge Council members to keep situation under review to determine whether it is liable endanger peace and security; and if so what constructive steps Council might take. Should sentiment favor resolution rather than letter, it might be based on above and further provide for establishment of Committee to determine facts and to report results of findings to Council. Draft resolution would, of course, be discussed with appropriate representatives in UN. For Belgrade only: Left to your discretion whether and how to approach Yugoslav Government. (See Deptel 313.)Telegram 313 to Belgrade, October 25, requested the Embassy to make known to Yugoslav Foreign Minister Koća Popović or Tito that the United States considered the Soviet use of force in Hungary as the most tragic evidence so far of the extent of Soviet colonialism in Europe. In order to minimize bloodshed and encourage Hungarian authorities to proceed toward democratization, the United States hoped to encourage Yugoslavia to use its influence with the Soviets to advance these ends. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2556) It is recognized Yugoslav Government, in view of its special relationship and particularly in likelihood that issues of this kind may be subject of current discussions between them and Soviets, might find it awkward to join us. On other hand, we feel it might be unwise for us to take initiative to exclude them a priori if to exclude them should result in prejudging their position for them. If on balance you decide to raise subject with Yugoslavs, you are authorized to express our appreciation delicacy this matter. For Paris only: Although France not signatory, its reaction also desired and believe should be invited participate in this action. Dulles 114. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/10–2656. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. Warsaw, October 26, 1956—1 a.m. 537. For Under Secretary Hoover. Reference Embtel 535.Document 110. In view Winiewicz response our aid approach and generally unresolved Soviet satellite relationships, now further aggravated by developments in Hungary, believe that, if we do not give publicity, Polish response will in due course be along lines Winiewicz comment reference telegram. On other hand, if we give publicity, Polish reply likely either be couched in temporizing, ambiguous terms to allay Soviet fears that Poland coming under US influence or downrightly unfavorable similar previous responses to aid offers. In last analysis, question of desirability or undesirability publicity soon depends largely upon Department’s purpose in offering aid at this time. If offer is attempt create further discord between regime and Polish people and between both of these and USSR . . . , then early publicity is desirable as regime in present circumstances will have to decline or temporize and incur ill will Polish people. On other hand, if objective stems from desire extend some form of aid which would benefit Polish people as whole, notwithstanding our unacceptance regime as representing will Polish people and unwillingness enhance its prestige, then early publicity likely, as indicated above, to create situation which would postpone possibility of such aid for longer period than otherwise might be case. While on balance, my preference would be that no publicity be given now or until situation here, complicated by events in Hungary, has become somewhat settled and clarified, realize there may be other considerations that require early publicity. Jacobs 115. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Elbrick) to the Under Secretary of State (Hoover)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/10–2656. Secret. Drafted by Beam and by Trivers and sent to Hoover through Murphy. Washington, October 26, 1956. SUBJECT Approach to Poland on Possible US Aid With reference to Warsaw’s telegrams 535Document 110. and 537Supra. (attached) we feel strongly there should be no publicity respecting the approach we have made. Winiewicz is notably fast on his feet and gave our Ambassador a clever but specious reply. . . . While Winiewicz took the opportunity to discuss several extraneous issues nevertheless it is certain that our approach will be reported higher as Winiewicz himself said in describing it as “important”. It is true that the Polish formal reply may take the same line as Winiewicz’ remarks but the seed has been planted of the idea that recourse to the US is possible. This knowledge, whether or not the Poles communicate it to the Soviets, may fortify them in their forthcoming talks in Moscow. Recommendation: We recommend that no further step be taken for the next few days. If we do not hear within a week, we could instruct Jacobs to take occasion to say that we naturally expect an official reply will be made to our approach.Murphy initialed his approval of the recommendation. 116. Memorandum of Discussion at the 301st Meeting of the National Security Council, Washington, October 26, 1956, 9–10:42 a.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Drafted by Gleason. The time of the meeting is from the Record of the President’s Daily Appointments. (Ibid.) Washington, October 26, 1956, 9–10:42 a.m. [Here follows a paragraph listing the participants at the meeting.] 1. Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. Security [Here follows discussion of unrelated matters.] With respect to Poland, Mr. [Allen] Dulles stated that the reporting in the press had been fairly accurate to date. A dramatic cable had been received yesterday in the clear from our Embassy in Budapest.See Document 108. The writer of the report had been obliged to lie down on the floor as he was writing, in order to avoid being shot at. The following were the main points in the cable. In the first place, Soviet troops had arrived in Budapest at four o’clock in the morning on Wednesday last.October 24. These troops were from the First Mechanized Division. In addition, certain reinforcements had arrived from Soviet forces in Rumania. The cable stated that the native Hungarian troops had thus far been held in the background, with the Soviet forces doing the actual fighting. Some Hungarian troops had already gone over to the rebels. It was also being alleged that certain Soviet tanks had gone over to the Hungarian rebels. Mr. Dulles expressed some skepticism at this report of Soviet military defectors, but indicated that it might possibly be true. In any event, at as late as eleven o’clock on Wednesday morning the Embassy had stated that tanks were fighting tanks in the streets of Budapest. The cable went on to provide other details of the fighting in Budapest, including the large demonstration in front of the U.S. Embassy, in the course of which the demonstrators called for U.S. assistance. As late as yesterday evening many sectors of the city were still in the hands of rebel bands. In addition to the above intelligence, press reports early this morning stated that the situation had quieted somewhat in Budapest itself, and there was a partial lifting of the curfew. On the other hand, there were reports of disorders in at least two other Hungarian cities. Mr. Dulles stated that it was of course too early to reach any firm conclusions on the intelligence summarized above. Nevertheless, he would give to the Council certain thoughts which he was entertaining on what was happening in Poland and in Hungary. In the first place, there was bound to be much soul-searching in Moscow as to whether a Gomulka-type regime could be permitted to function in Poland in view of what has happened in Hungary. Secondly, Soviet intervention in Hungary may have been due to Soviet unwillingness to submit to a second humiliation after Poland. On the other hand, the Hungarian revolt had from the outset exhibited much clearer anti-Soviet and anti-Communist bias than had the Polish disorders. Thirdly, the Hungarian revolt may demonstrate the inability of a moderate national Communist regime to survive in any of the satellites. What has happened would seem to indicate only two alternatives: One, either to return to a hard Stalinist regime, or two, to permit developments in the direction of genuine democracy. It had become evident that the revolt in Budapest had early taken a far more serious turn than that in Warsaw. Indeed, Mr. Dulles believed that the revolt in Hungary constituted the most serious threat yet to be posed to continued Soviet control of the satellites. It confronted Moscow with a very harsh dilemma: Either to revert to a harsh Stalinist policy, or to permit democratization to develop in the satellites to a point which risked the complete loss of Soviet control of the satellites. Mr. Dulles then commented on the effect of these events on neutral nations such as India, and on Yugoslavia. He emphasized that while Marshal Tito had approved of what had happened in Poland, he had remained silent on Hungary. The Marshal may well view what has occurred in Hungary with genuine alarm. Certainly any free election would make abundantly clear that there was no popular support for any kind of Communist regime in Hungary or in Poland. Various members of the Council then commented on the possibility of an ultimate replacement of Soviet influence in the satellites by a Western orientation for these countries. In connection with this discussion Secretary Dulles mentioned a telegram which had come in to the State Department early this morning from our Ambassador in Warsaw.Telegram 540 from Warsaw, October 26, not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/10–2656) The portions of this message read by Secretary Dulles concerned themselves with the Polish economy and Poland’s resources. The Ambassador concluded that the Polish economy could be made viable if the Poles were permitted to trade anywhere they wanted to in normal fashion. Mr. Allen Dulles, reverting again to the impact of these events on third countries, pointed out that while Communist China had welcomed the developments in Poland, it had been silent on what had occurred in Hungary.Circular telegram 319, October 27, addressed the question of Communist Chinese support for the Polish effort to escape Soviet domination. The addressees were instructed to rebut any suggestion that the Chinese were supporting the Poles. (Ibid., 748.00/10–2756) Nevertheless, the Chinese Communists may not be unhappy about Hungarian developments. If so, this could be the beginning of the first rift between Communist China and the Soviet Union. The President inquired whether Mr. Allen Dulles had had any information about the Czech reaction to these events. Mr. Dulles replied that he had very little on this point.Telegrams reporting on Czechoslovakia’s response to developments in Poland and Hungary are ibid., 749.00 and 764.00. In any event, practically all the potential Gomulkas in Czechoslovakia had been pretty well slaughtered. Turning to the immediate future, Mr. Allen Dulles stated his belief that the Soviet leaders in Moscow would try to convey an outward impression of continued unity of belief and action. Bohlen, for example, has reported that Bulganin and Khrushchev had been seen together at a recent reception in Moscow.Reported in telegram 924 from Moscow, October 24. (Ibid., 764.00/10–2456) However, Bohlen said he had never seen them looking so grim. In any event, the current Soviet leadership was certainly on the defensive, and Khrushchev is probably being held responsible for what has happened. Khrushchev’s days may well be numbered. It was quite possible that upon Zhukov would devolve the choice of Khrushchev’s successor. Indeed, it was even possible that Zhukov himself would be Khrushchev’s successor. The President then asked if there were further questions. Admiral Radford inquired if there was any information as to the reaction of the United States Communist Party. Mr. Allen Dulles replied that he had read several editorials in The New York Daily Worker. These editorials had welcomed what had happened in Poland, but had little to say about Hungary. The President referred to the Attorney General’s recent report,Attorney General Herbert Brownell, Jr., sent a memorandum to the President on this subject on October 7. The text was printed in The New York Times on October 8. which had indicated the gradual disintegration of the Communist Party, USA. The President also added that he thought it had been wise of him to issue his statement with respect to Hungary.See footnote 2, Document 107. He had noted many signs of approval in the course of his visit yesterday to New York City. Secretary Dulles then informed the Council that the State Department had just sent out messages to all the friendly co-signatories of the Hungarian Peace Treaty, to ascertain if any of these countries was disposed to take any action in the United Nations with respect to Hungary.See Document 113. In the case of Yugoslavia, which was one of the signatories, it had been left to Ambassador Riddleberger’s discretion whether to put this problem to Marshal Tito.See footnote 3, Document 113. In telegram 549 from Belgrade, October 27, Ambassador Riddleberger reported that the Yugoslav Acting Foreign Secretary had indicated his government’s inclination to doubt the “utility” of approaching the Soviets at that time. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2756) The President, referring to the message on Poland’s economy and resources, stated that the question of trade interested him immensely, in view of his long-held conviction that the United States should trade as widely as possible with the Soviet satellites. On the same point, Secretary Dulles stated that one sentence in the telegram from Warsaw had emphasized the fact that nearly all the Polish textile mills were geared to use U.S. short-staple cotton rather than Egyptian long-staple cotton.See Document 110. This, thought Secretary Dulles, would be of interest to the Secretary of Agriculture. The President agreed that this was worth thinking about. Governor Stassen recalled a talk he had had with Gomulka several years ago, before the latter had been put in prison. On this occasion Gomulka had protested his friendliness toward the United States and had also outlined his desire to follow an independent road to Socialism in Poland. With reference to Governor Stassen’s observation, Mr. Allen Dulles stated that Gomulka’s long speech a few days ago represented the most violent denunciation of the entire Soviet economic system which had ever [been] issued anywhere from any source. He had accordingly sent copies of this speech all over this Government and to many places overseas. At this point, Governor Stassen inquired whether, in view of the great significance of what was taking place in Hungary and Poland, it would not be advisable for the President to call a special meeting of the National Security Council to discuss the whole problem of Hungary and Poland. The President replied that he was not sure that discussion in the National Security Council was the best initial step. He did believe, however, that the responsible departments and agencies should proceed at once to formulate the clearest possible analysis of what had happened in these two countries. Such an analysis could then be presented to the National Security Council. Such a procedure he believed better than to plunge right into a discussion in the Council on these difficult subjects. Governor Stassen pointed out that basic decisions would have to be taken presently by the Soviet Union. They would either have to revert to the old harsh policy of Stalin toward the satellites, or else they would have to let things go on as they were going. The President replied that if the Soviets did revert to the Stalin policies, they would stand bankrupt before the whole world. Pointing out that he had a memorandum on his desk,Not further identified. The Presedent noted in his diary for October 26 that he “warned both the Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff and the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency to be unusually watchful and alert during the crisis occasioned by the Hungarian revolt.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries) the President said that he was concerned about another question which was possibly being posed for the Soviet Union. In view of the serious deterioration of their position in the satellites, might they not be tempted to resort to very extreme measures and even to precipitate global war? This was a situation which must be watched with the utmost care. After all, observed the President, Hitler had known well, from the first of February 1945, that he was licked. Yet he had carried on to the very last and pulled down Europe with him in his defeat. The Soviets might even develop some desperate mood such as this. Governor Stassen wondered if it would not be prudent to try to get some message to Marshal Zhukov indicating that the achievement of freedom in the Soviet satellites should not be considered by the Soviet Union as posing any real threat to the national security of the USSR. We should make clear that this development would not impel the Western powers to make any warlike move against the Soviet Union. The President stated that he did not believe such a move would be worthwhile. He doubted if the Soviet leaders genuinely feared an invasion by the Western powers. He thought that a better procedure would be to ask the NSC Planning Board to provide an analysis of what had happened in Hungary and Poland and to make any suggestions which it could as to what the United States might do in the light of these developments. All of the members of the National Security Council had representatives on the Planning Board and could make their views available. [Here follows discussion of unrelated matters.] The National Security Council:Paragraphs a–b that follow constitute NSC Action No. 1623. (Department of State, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files, Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council) a. Noted and discussed an oral briefing on the subject by the Director of Central Intelligence, with specific reference to Poland, Hungary, and the Middle East. b. Noted the President’s directive that the NSC Planning Board prepare a comprehensive analysis of the developments in Hungary and Poland, and possible courses of action in the light thereof which the United States should consider. [Here follow the remaining agenda items.] S. Everett Gleason 117. Notes on the 39th Meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, October 26, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/10–2656. Top Secret. Drafted by Comstock. Washington, October 26, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman Defense—Colonel Oscar R. Schaaf Defense—Colonel Kenneth K. Hansen CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell Office of Spec. Asst. to the President—Mr. Oren M. Stephens USIA—Mr. Alfred. V. Boerner OCB—-Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Edward L. Freers State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Robert O. Blake State—Mr. Robert M. McKisson State—Mr. Philip Burris CIA—Mr. Arthur M. Cox USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey [The following notes are not exact quotations.]Brackets in the source text. Beam: We are cut off again from Legation Budapest.Contact was lost at noon on October 25 after the teletype conversation; see Document 108. Cox: Radio from rebels indicates refusal to surrender unless all demands are met. Their station is severely jammed. Beam: Who is behind the rebel station? Cox: Unconfirmed radio reports are that it is Bela Kovacs.Kovács, who was at his home in south Hungary, was named Minister of Agriculture by Nagy in a broadcast to the nation on the morning of October 27. Kovaćs did not arrive in Budapest until November 1. He allegedly refused a position in Nagy’s cabinet. The rebels control Northwest Hungary and the highway Vienna–Budapest. Beam: We are meeting with Secretary Dulles on the UN aspect at 4:30.The Secretary’s appointment book shows that such a meeting did take place, but no record of the substance of the discussion has been found in Department of State files. JSAD proposed an emergency meeting of OCB. This meeting is in lieu of a special OCB meeting. The JSAD memo cities reports that U.S. radio is heavily jammed. It goes on to say that special efforts should be made to saturate Hungary and to tell the rebels in one area what those in other areas are doing. It does not address itself to Poland. Hansen: The main idea is to get maximum radio input to Hungary. Campbell–Cox: The memorandum is inaccurate. There is less jamming of U.S. broadcasts. All 29 transmitters of RFE are on full-time basis. Everything we have is in full blast to Hungary. Beam: What are we telling Hungary? Cox: Mostly the facts. Primary stress is put on getting the Soviet Army out, statements by the President and the Secretary of State, Soviet treaty commitments, etc. Boerner: USIA would not think it desirable to disrupt all other programs to concentrate on Hungary. We are increasing time on the frequencies and keeping them full blast over the week end. Cox: We have two frequencies completely unjammed. Boerner: Many Hungarians understand German and listen to Vienna. Revey: USIA is broadcasting about three hours per day to Hungary. Cox: RFE is broadcasting to Hungary around the clock. Unless there is a change in policy, we will continue to cross report fully to Poland. Blake: What is the editorial line to Poland? Cox: Straight. Beam: The Austrians have said they would be lenient on asylum for refugees. Schaaf: Hungarian escapees could bring a lot of things to Austria, but their effort is going for naught. McKisson: We should not conclude it is all for naught. We have to decide carefully how much we would intervene. Cox: There is a policy aspect regarding the flood of refugees, aside from care and welfare. There is the problem of guidance for exiles. Beam: The Austrians will be sympathetic. Trivers: We should approach the Austrians. . . . Revey: Discussions of Nagy with Kovacs were a couple of weeks ago.Not further identified. Cox: CIA thinks Kovacs is not in the capital. Can we help the rebels? Trivers: We should. Blake: But we must first look at the consequences. Campbell: Any arms available would be typical American equipment. Very little German. Schaaf: How about giving the rebels directives by radio? McKisson: We cannot supply leadership from Washington. They have their own leadership. Revey: We could cross report output of rebel radio. Cox: Rebel radio has changed hands a couple of times between the rebels and the Hungarian Government. McKisson: We should avoid implicating the United States. Cox: How about RFE picking up and reporting broadcasts of rebel radio? McKisson: It would be bad if it looks like we’re running the revolt from outside. Schaaf: It would strengthen the hands of the rebels. Beam: Not if such advice turned out to be wrong. Freers: They need material help. Revey: Rebels have done well without much external advice. We ought to leave something up to them. Schaaf: Let’s help them as much as possible. Freers: We do not want to give Soviets real justification to move more troops to Hungary—possibly even to Austria. Cox: How about medical supplies? Beam: Who will deliver them? Cox: They could be taken to the Budapest–Vienna highway. International or American Red Cross could do it. McKisson: Any precedent for League of Red Cross Societies doing this sort of thing? The Hungarians are members. We did get food in last year through the League.Following flooding in East and Central Europe in the summer of 1954, the United States volunteered to provide food relief to the stricken nations via the International Red Cross. The operation took place between November 1954 and February 1955 and Hungary received corn, wheat, beans, and cottonseed oil. Beam: Perhaps we should try to get relief supplies in both through Austria and the League of Red Cross Societies. Perhaps also Yugoslavia. General ClayRetired General Lucius D. Clay. and some other people in New York have proposed one minute of silence. Revey: Who would sponsor it? Beam: Some group in New York. General Clay, I think. We sent out a circular telegram last night to the signatories of the Hungarian Treaty (except the Soviet Union) to get their views about bringing to the UN.Document 113. Freers: It has been suggested that we propose to the Soviets that we would take same position toward Hungary we took toward Austria in the neutrality position. Beam: We have not given Austria a guarantee, of course. Boerner: The AP is emphasizing that the “three Western Powers” are the sponsors rather than signatories of the Hungarian Treaty. Beam: There probably will be no further statements until Monday.October 29. PBCOCB Staff Representative 118. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2656. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Canberra, New Delhi, Pretoria, Wellington, Ottawa, Belgrade, Paris, and USUN. A notation on the source text indicates that it was passed to USUN at 3:30 p.m., October 26. London, October 26, 1956—2 p.m. 2290. Regarding Deptel 2981, October 25.Document 113. Preliminary view Foreign Office subject confirmation highest level is that item concerning Hungary should be inscribed agenda G.A., not S.C. Foreign Office believes request for emergency inscription should be made immediately and with as may nations supporting as possible although debate on subject obviously to be delayed until G.A. convenes. Reasons guiding Foreign Office thinking toward G.A. and not S.C. as follows: 1. Important not encourage Hungarians to needless self-slaughter because we need that type courage alive behind Iron Curtain. 2. Important not encourage Russians to be rougher and tougher than they already are. 3. Appeal to S.C. by United States and United Kingdom inevitably suggests existence international dispute endangering world peace with possibility of S.C. action. It further suggests United States and United Kingdom conniving with revolutionary forces. Obviously there will be no S.C. action but suggestion would be disturbing to British government which has its hands full in Suez and feels shortage of friends. Furthermore it would falsely encourage Hungarian population and might cause Russians to take preventive action in other satellites. 4. Object of U.N. action would be to focus world opinion on Soviet iniquities Hungary and this best done G.A. where many small nations, perhaps including Bandung powers,The 29 nations who attended the Afro-Asian Conference at Bandung, Indonesia in April 1955. who unlike United States and United Kingdom not in forefront of cold war, would feel impelled to speak up. 5. Delay in staging G.A. debate until November would show Russians no foreign intervention intended in actual situation and would have same meaning for Hungarian patriots which is kindest message West can give at this time. However, immediate request for inscription on G.A. agenda, signed if possible by 40 or more powers, might have useful moral effect on Russians and Hungarian patriots alike. 6. Independent of Deptel 2981 Foreign Office has been stimulated to think about reference to United Nations by recommendation from British Minister BudapestLeslie Fry. who thinks scales are momentarily tipped there in favor revolutionary forces and that appeal to United Nations at this fleeting moment might have decisive effect. Also groups Central European refugees have appealed to Council of Europe, Strasbourg,The Statute for the Council of Europe was signed on May 5, 1949, by representatives from Denmark, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Belgium, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, France, and Luxembourg. The Consultative Assembly of the Council at Strasbourg was a deliberative organ which could only consider matters referred to it by the Council of Ministers to which body it made recommendations. to bring matter to attention S.C. Kirkpatrick dislikes reference to S.C. but his subordinates think he would be attracted by reference to G.A. if U.K. were one of many nations requesting this item be inscribed. 8. If Department approves reference to G.A. would appreciate receipt immediate instructions press this suggestion with Foreign Office. Information that other countries similarly disposed would have favorable effect on British thinking. Aldrich 119. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of Foreign Operations (Stassen), Washington, October 26, 1956, 4:10 p.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Memoranda of Conversation. Secret; Personal and Private. Transcribed by Bernau on October 28. Washington, October 26, 1956, 4:10 p.m. Governor Stassen said he wished to develop the idea which he had expressed at the NSC Meeting,See Document 116. namely, that we should let the Russians know that we would accept for the satellites some neutralized status like that of Austria. He suggested this might be done through diplomatic channels or through Tito. I expressed doubt that it was desirable to use any such channels as the Russians could publicize what was happening and give the revolutionary elements the impression that we were working secretly with the Russians behind their backs. I said that I would give thought to some possibility of getting the idea across otherwise, although I doubted that we should go so far as to seem to commit these countries to an Austria-type neutralization. JFDMacomber initialed for Dulles. 120. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, October 26, 1956, 5:50 p.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Mildred Asbjornson. October 26, 1956, 5:50 p.m. TELEPHONE CALL FROM THE PRESIDENT The President said he had been turning over in his mind what Stassen had said in the meeting this morning.See Document 116. Stassen also addressed a letter to the President on this date in which he wrote: “The Soviet Union may calculate that if they lose control of Hungary, that country would be taken into NATO by the United States, and this would be a great threat in Soviet eyes to their own security. May it not be wise for the United States in some manner to make it clear that we are willing to have Hungary be established on the Austrian basis—and not affiliated with NATO?” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Administration Series, Stassen, Harold E. 1956 (1)) As far as the border states were concerned, they need have no fear that we might make an effort to incorporate them into NATO or make them part of our alliances. We want to see them have a free choice. We have no access to any of these states except through Austria. All we hope is that they have the same likes as Austria. The President said he brought this up because the Secretary was giving a speech and he thought he could put something like this in the speech.On the letter from Stassen cited in footnote 2 above, the President indicated he had talked to Dulles who would speak in Dallas; see Document 128. The Secretary said it was extremely difficult to know how to handle this thing. He had seen Stassen a while agoSee supra. and he was presently engaged in a meeting on the subject in his office.See footnote 5, Document 117. We have given quite a lot of thought to the problem. The Secretary said he did not think we should get into talks with the Russians about it unless through the Security Council. We could have some backstage talks going on during the time the Council was in session, which would be more or less legitimate.The White House transcription of this call has Dulles stating that he did “not want to get into anything that looked as though ‘backstage talks’ were going on.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries) The Secretary said it appeared that the British favored taking the matter to the GA two or three weeks hence. The President mentioned calling in the Ambassador and the Secretary said he planned on sending a message to Selwyn Lloyd.See Document 122. 121. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, October 26, 1956, 7:06 p.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Bernau. October 26, 1956, 7:06 p.m. TELEPHONE CALL TO THE PRESIDENT The Sec. said he was thinking over the Pres’s thoughtSee footnote 3, supra. and wondered if he approved the Sec’s saying something to the effect—all we want is their genuine independence and that if they once had it that would alter the whole aspect of the European scene and the whole problem of European security would be altered. The Pres. said yes—the whole European and world security would seem to be on the road to achievement. The Sec. mentioned his trying to imply you might not need to build up NATO so much or something to that effect. The Pres. said if they could have some kind of existence, choose their own government and what they want, then we are satisfied and this would really solve one of the greatest problems in the world that is standing in the way of world peace. Then something that [like] this would be of far greater effect than any alliance. The Pres. said the evening paper looks as if it is spreading. The Sec. said we are sending a cable to LloydInfra. that it should get before the SC in order to focus attention on it so the Russians will not commit vast reprisals and give us a chance to talk privately with them there. The Pres. said to say to Lloyd it is so terrible we would be remiss if we did not do something. 122. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2656. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. The time of transmission is not legible on the source text. Drafted by Dulles. Repeated to Paris. Washington, October 26, 1956. 3008. For Ambassador from Secretary. Please advise Selwyn Lloyd personally from me that developments in Hungary up to moment increasingly suggest desirability of inscription of matter on Security Council agenda. The revolt is assuming proportions which may in turn bring Red counter-action of major proportions. Emotional reaction to this would be very serious certainly in this country. It seems to me of great importance we should promptly focus UN attention on this situation and at same time obtain opportunity of informal talk with Soviet Permanent Representative which might lead to an alleviation of situation which is beginning to assume major dangerous implications. Would appreciate if possible reply by 10:00 a.m our time EDST SaturdayOctober 27. as I am meeting with President on this matter at 11:00.See Document 124. Dulles 123. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2756. Confidential; Niact. Received at 9:09 a.m. Repeated to Paris. London, October 27, 1956—noon. 2316. For the Secretary. Paris for Ambassador. Reference: Deptel 3008.Supra. Lloyd with Eden’s approval agrees to joint US–UK inscription Hungary on Security Council agenda under Article 34. Also concurs action should be taken at once today. Immediate instructions being sent to Dixon New York to collaborate with us. Broad discretion being given him as to language in which item to be inscribed. British request joint announcement inscription as soon as action taken. Please confirm. Lloyd said felt essential French be given chance to join US–UK in this inscription although action should be taken today in any event without awaiting French reaction if not forthcoming in time.Dulles called Lodge at 10:05 a.m. and advised him to contact Dixon. He further stated that it was all right for him to consult with the French afterwards. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations) Telegram 2002 from Paris, October 27, received at 10:39 a.m., reported that the French were prepared to join with the United States and the United Kingdom in presenting a resolution on Hungary to the U.N. Security Council. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2756) At 1 p.m. on October 27, Ambassadors Lodge, Dixon, and Cornut-Gentille addressed a letter to the President of the Security Council requesting inclusion of an item entitled “The Situation in Hungary” on the Security Council agenda. (U.N. doc. S/3690) Ambassador Bohlen in Moscow acknowledged the psychological and political difficulties for the Soviet Union from a Western appeal to the Security Council. But he warned that if Nagy were anxious to follow the Polish and Yugoslav examples then such an appeal might drive him closer to the Soviets. However, if Nagy were considered a prisoner of the Soviets then the move in the United Nations could only be an advantage. (Telegram 969 from Moscow, October 27; Department of State, Central Files, 660.61/10–2756) Foreign Office urgently informing French Ambassador. Lloyd and Kirkpatrick who was with him did not seem to have any specific thoughts on course Security Council consideration might take nor clear view as to optimum presentation. However both felt ample justification for bringing case under Article 34 particularly with reference to possible request Security Council “investigate”. Clearly believed Soviets could be put on spot by this and at minimum forced to take positions which could be used against them subsequently. At same time noted obvious Soviet defense on grounds Soviet action at request Hungarian government which if not a lawful and representative government at least recognized internationally. Aldrich 124. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, October 27, 1956, 11 a.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster. Washington, October 27, 1956, 11 a.m. OTHER PRESENT Secretary Dulles Under Secretary Hoover Deputy Assistant Secretary William Rountree Colonel Goodpaster Secretary Dulles first reviewed the Hungarian situation. It is beginning to take shape as regards UN action. The British and French, together with the Canadians and Australians, all support inscribing the matter today on the Security Council agenda. Although there was earlier thought of simply sending a letter, as long as the others want to go as far as inscription, we should too, he thought. The President indicated agreement. Many U.S. churches and synagogues will hold a minute of silent prayer this week end for the Hungarians. Deep feelings on this matter are being manifested. The President said he would be unable to participate directly, because of his medical exam,He left for Walter Reed Hospital at 2:10 p.m., where he remained overnight. but would call Dr. ElsonEdward L.R. Elson, Minister at the National Presbyterian Church in Washington. and request that he consider doing this at his church. Within Hungary itself, the revolt has become widespread, the Secretary reported. Large sections of the Hungarian armed forces have gone over to the dissidents, and throughout the countryside there are large areas in opposition to the regime. Also, signs of condemnation of the Communists are arising all over Europe. In Italy, Spain and France there are strong demonstrations for the Hungarians. (Mr. Rountree joined the meeting at this point.) The Nagy government in Hungary includes a number of “bad” people, associated with the Molotov school, and will have difficulty in attracting support.Ferenc Münnich, István Kossa, Arpád Kiss, Lajos Bebrits (who resigned 2 days later), Imre Horváth, Erik Molnár, and Lieutenant General Károly Janza were viewed as Rákosi partisans. (Memorandum from Armstrong to Hoover, October 27; Department of State, INR Files: Lot 58 D 766, Hungary) Our Government has been in touch with the American Red Cross,Murphy contacted Ellsworth Bunker, the President of the American Red Cross, on October 26 regarding Hungary’s need for food and medicine and Bunker agreed to raise the matter with the International Red Cross. (Memorandum from Murphy to the Bureau of European Affairs, October 26; ibid., Central Files, 764.00/10–2656) and they with the International Red Cross, who are working on means for relief, medical care, etc. A great many refugees are crossing the Austrian border. They are being given aid there, and medicine is being sent from Austria and Hungary. Secretary Dulles was inclined to think there is not much more that we can or should do at this point. Mr. Hoover commented that we may, later, be able to get food in. The President questioned whether there had been much notice of his statement in New York on the Hungarian situation;See footnote 2, Document 107. the Secretary said there had been, and that USIA had given it a heavy and effective play. The President said he was happy that the statement had been issued. Mr. Dulles concluded this discussion with a reference to a passage in his Dallas speech tonight on this matter.See Document 128. [Here follows discussion of the Middle East; for text, see volume XVI, page 793.] GColonel CE, US Army 125. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2756. Secret; Niact. Received at 10:09 p.m., October 29. McKisson was informed of receipt of the telegram at 1:10 a.m., October 30. Budapest, October 27, 1956—11 a.m. 168. What follows contains much speculation but even if errors made as regards certain facts Legation believes end results of Hungarian peoples fight for freedom now lie within narrow range possibilities, all evil to some degree. Latest western radio reports indicate uprisings in Hungary widespread, including in addition Budapest insurgent action in Szeged, Pecs, Miskolc, Debrecen, Komarom, Magyarovar, Gyor and some indication that much of Trans-Danubia has risen. Legation was contacted yesterday by a man who claims to speak for organization representing the insurgents.Telegrams 161, 163, and 166, from Budapest, October 26, reported such contacts with the insurgents on the evening of October 25 and the afternoon of October 26. In one instance a message to the United Nations was passed on and subsequently advice was sought from the Legation concerning the course the new government should follow and on how to bring an international forum into Hungary. The Legation accepted the information, but declined to offer advice or give the impression that negotiations were in process. (Ibid., 764.00/10–2656) Whether he does or not is rather immaterial. What is important is dilemma with which he claims the “new provisional revolutionary government and civil defense committee” is faced. Representatives of “provisional government” begged Legation for advice as to what they should do, for he claimed they had been in contact with Nagy who stated he will do anything in order to keep present government’s system in Hungary and that (further quoting Nagy) unless opposition ceases horrible consequences will follow. This dilemma faces all insurgent forces whether under “control” of “new government” or acting in isolation. It can be summed up in proposition that Soviets under legal cover of Hungarian Communist Government will engage in ruthless suppression if insurgents don’t surrender; and insurgents have complete lack of confidence in government carrying out promised concessions if they do capitulate. Insurgents thus faced with following narrow range of alternatives. (A) Fight to end and die and in process see many of unarmed population also suffer; (B) fight and die in hope hold out long enough for some outside intervention or pressure to modify regime and Soviet intention and/or capability of ruthless suppression; (C) accept government’s acting in good faith in promised concessions, and surrender. One decision already made by insurgent forces against this last option, as deadline hour of acceptance was approached at 2200 hours FridayOctober 26. and insurgents broadcast they will keep fighting till demands met. Evil choices facing insurgents seem to pose most critical political and moral problem for US Government. US cannot by complete inaction condone Soviet exercises of their military capabilities in suppressing this struggle. This leads logically to question of what US Government can do to increase chances of second alternative becoming realization. Legation does not pretend to know all international legal merits of case. However it is understood from western broadcasts that France, UK, and US are associating themselves in bringing situation before UN.See footnote 3, Document 123. Also Legation’s impression that France had taken initiative in this move. Legation strongly believes, both from practical standpoint of maintaining stature and influence among captive peoples and because of moral responsibility to stand behind past official statements implying support for captive peoples, that US Government should lead and vigorously press Hungarian case in UN and use all its influence to mobilize world opinion against ruthless suppression of Hungarian insurgents by Soviet power. Legation fully realizes heavy responsibility of decision to support, and risks involved in overtly supporting, Hungarian people against Soviets by material means. Legation does not have clear view of possible alternatives open to US Government between extremes of “legalistic” case before UN and material support of insurgents. But alternatives between extremes must exist, and for some alternatives risk attached might not be too great. Legation believes it to be in US interest, in view of widespread and violent reaction against Communist rule by Hungarian people, that careful consideration be given to means for supporting insurgent population and that some risk is warranted by emergence of this tremendous revulsion against Soviet domination. In considering possible alternatives, following seems plausible: 1. Soviet Government, if has agreed that Nagy should “negotiate” removal of Soviet troops, has made considerable concession.In telegram 984 from Moscow, October 26, the Embassy reported: “It appears more likely Soviet Government has decided to cut its losses in forlorn hope that Nagy by placing himself at head of popular revolution may be able to prevent complete collapse of regime. They can hardly have much confidence in this possibility, but in circumstances they may well have come to conclusion that it preferable to total military occupation Hungary.” (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2656) 2. By all logic Soviets and certainly insurgents must be searching for some solution. If this is true, satisfactory proposal made from UN or even from US might have some chance of acceptability. 3. Most important requirements at present seem following: A. Military armistice; B. Withdrawal of Soviet troops, at least to garrisons; C. Establishment of police control to prevent looting and anarchy. D. Establishment of political control acceptable all parties. 4. We believe something like following seems reasonable median proposal which admits greatest chance of success: A. Immediate armistice; B. Withdrawal of Soviet troops to garrisons; C. Surrender of insurgents to Hungarian army and establishment of police control by army; D. Acceptance of Nagy Government as interim political power, which would operate with advice of UN commission; E. Negotiation with Soviets on troop removal with advice of UN commission. 5. We see no other course which appears offer as good chance acceptance from all parties. 6. We presume Department has heard from British Government that situation here rapidly becoming more critical, and that matter of very few hours may see Soviet Union much more deeply involved. We therefore urgently suggest that immediate and highest level consideration be given to proposing settlement along above lines. Would seem proposition should be publicly supported by President, whether formally proposed by UN, tripartite powers, or US alone. Barnes 126. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 27, 1956, NoonSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2756. Secret. Drafted by Bennett. Washington, October 27, 1956, Noon SUBJECT Situation in Hungary PARTICIPANTS Mr. Tibor Zador, First Secretary, Hungarian Legation Mr. Murphy, G Mr. Beam, EUR Mr. Bennett, G Mr. Zador came in at the request of Mr. Murphy, explaining that the MinisterDr. Péter Kós. was also permanent representative of Hungary at the United Nations and had had to remain in New York in connection with his duties there. Mr. Murphy emphasized to Mr. Zador that the Department was completely out of touch with our Legation in Budapest. The Legation had been unable to transmit or receive messages for two days now,There was no communication with the Legation between 5 a.m. on October 25 and 2 p.m. on October 27 when a message was transmitted in the clear from Budapest over the facilities of the Hungarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. and we accordingly were without any firm information on the situation in Hungary. We would appreciate any news which Mr. Zador could supply on conditions there. After remarking that there seemed to be a great deal of reports on events in Hungary in the American press, Mr. Zador said that his Legation has been in constant touch with Budapest through the Hungarian Legation in London which is in radio contact with the Government in Budapest. Mr. Zador declared that everything has been quiet in Budapest since last night. He said that the “riot” in the capital had been terminated on the evening of October 26; a few scattered groups were “holding out” in several sectors of the city but mopping up operations are now in process. When Mr. Murphy asked about reports of uprisings and fighting in other parts of Hungary, Mr. Zador replied that he had no information of any disturbances other than in Budapest and continued to talk of the “riot” in the capital. Pressed by Mr. Murphy for an explanation of events, Mr. Zador asserted that trouble had started after demonstrations by students demanding certain changes in Hungary. He stated that their demands were justified and in response to a question admitted that the students had been joined by trade union groups. Mr. Zador would not accept Mr. Murphy’s suggestion that there was widespread support for the demonstrators, insisting that the students had been taken advantage of and exploited by “extreme right wing” and “fascist” elements, who took over the demonstrations and caused the disorders. When Mr. Murphy expressed the view that a movement as widespread as the one reported from Hungary must have leaders, Mr. Zador said that he did not know who the leaders were, that there was no genuine opposition to the Hungarian government. He then went into a rather rambling harangue of Hungary’s sufferings under the fight against “fascist” leadership during the period 1919–1945. He reminded that many of the “fascist” leaders had been executed in 1945 and that others had fled the country. Therefore, there were no real leaders in the group rioting against the government. In response to an inquiry from Mr. Murphy, he was unable to offer a definition for the word “fascist” which he had used so frequently. Mr. Murphy asked about reports of Soviet troops being engaged in putting down the demonstrations and asked whether the Hungarian people might not be resenting military action against them on the part of foreign troops. Mr. Zador said that he was sure the Soviet troops had not opened fire until they were attacked by the demonstrators. He sought to minimize the extent of Soviet intervention and said that he believed the Soviets had only three divisions in Hungary. Most of the action was being undertaken by the Hungarian army and police. Anyway, he said, the Soviet troops were acting at the request of the Hungarian government under the provisions of the Warsaw Pact, and their participation in the fighting was entirely legal. Despite persistent questioning on the part of Mr. Murphy, Mr. Zador could not be brought to acknowledge any personal feeling over the shooting down of Hungarian subjects by Soviet troops. Mr. Murphy emphasized that both the American government and people had every sympathy for the Hungarian people and that there was much concern in this country over reports of bloodshed. He stressed the desire of the American government and people to send aid in the form of medical supplies and other relief materials and said that the American Red Cross had been in touch with the International Red Cross at Geneva on this matter. He said that our information as of today indicated that 15 national Red Cross societies had been in touch with Geneva, and the International Red Cross had so far not been able to reach the Hungarian Red Cross either by telephone, telegraph or radio, and we were thus unable to determine whether the Hungarian Red Cross needed assistance or was willing to accept it. It was our understanding that the Soviet Red Cross had not made any offer of assistance as yet, although there would be a meeting in Geneva soon with Soviet participation, and we would hope to find out their attitude at that time. In closing the conversation, Mr. Murphy stated that he wanted to protest on behalf of the United States government the lack of communications facilities in Budapest. We were unable to confirm many of the conflicting reports coming out of Hungary or to ascertain with any degree of accuracy the situation with respect to American citizens in Hungary. He wanted the Hungarian government to understand that the United States government protested this situation. Mr. Zador took note of the protest and made his departure. 127. Telegram From the Mission at the United Nations to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2756. Confidential; Priority. New York, October 27, 1956—8 p.m. 421. Re Hungary in SC. We met with UK and French at 6:00 p.m. to discuss tactics tomorrow’s meeting. In response to question re timing and content of resolution, Lodge said we definitely felt we should not introduce anything for tomorrow. We believed we should try to begin drafting resolution Monday.October 29. Cornut-Gentille had initially wanted the Security Council to begin deliberations on this matter on October 27, but Dixon, supported by Lodge, favored Sunday afternoon, October 28. Thus the 746th meeting of the Security Council, which was concerned with developments in Hungary, met between 4 and 9:50 p.m. on October 28. (Telegram 417 from USUN, October 27; ibid., 764.00/10–2756) Tone should not prevent favorable development of present situation. Both Dixon and Cornut-Gentille agreed. They likewise agreed any move for cease-fire should be avoided in order not allow Russians and Hungarian Communist regime consolidate positions. Dixon said his speech would present narrative of recent events based on factual information in cables from Budapest. Thereafter he would make point that any attempt justify present Russian troop action under Warsaw Pact completely contrary terms of Article 8 of that treaty.This specified “respect for each other’s independence and sovereignty” and “nonintervention in each other’s domestic affairs.” He said material used by Sir Hartley ShawcrossBritish jurist and Labour Member of Parliament; Chief Prosecutor at the Nuremberg War Trials. in Mindszenty case would also be drawn upon. Both French and UK indicated objection to any commission of inquiry, fearing precedent this might set in their own problems. We also agreed 3 would not initiate invitation to Hungarian UN representative in order avoid impression SC action aimed at Hungarians. If he should request participate in discussions, however, agreed it difficult oppose normal invitation. Cornut-Gentille had just spoken on phone to Sobolev (USSR) prior our meeting. From conversation it appears Soviet line will be there no necessity for meeting; no situation exists upon which base this item. It is anticipated Sobolev may move adjournment and will certainly oppose inclusion of item. On adjournment motion, it was agreed immediately vote this down. If objection to adoption agenda made by Sobolev, SC President will thereafter immediately put to vote question inclusion this item.The Hungarian question was placed on the agenda of the Security Council on October 28 by a vote of 9 to 1 (the Soviet Union), with Yugoslavia abstaining. Of other SC members contacted, all had given favorable comments except Yugoslavia, which was non-committal. Belgium not yet contacted.Circular telegram 321, October 27, instructed the Mission at the United Nations to solicit the support of the Delegations of Cuba, Peru, Australia, Iran, China, and Belgium for the U.S.–U.K.–French initiative. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2756) Lodge 128. Address by the Secretary of State Before the Dallas Council on World Affairs, October 27, 1956Source: Department of State Bulletin, November 5, 1956, pp. 697–698. The President had reviewed the speech the previous day and given his approval. October 27, 1956 [Here follows discussion of other subjects.] Captive Nations Another intensive concern of our foreign policy is in relation to the captive nations of the world. We had looked upon World War II as a war of liberation. The Atlantic Charter and the United Nations Declaration committed all the Allies to restore sovereign rights and self-government to those who had been forcibly deprived of them and to recognize the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they would live. Unhappily, those pledges have been violated, and in Eastern Europe one form of conquest was merely replaced by another. But the spirit of patriotism, and the longing of individuals for freedom of thought and of conscience and the right to mold their own lives, are forces which erode and finally break the iron bonds of servitude. Today we see dramatic evidence of this truth. The Polish people now loosen the Soviet grip upon the land they love. And the heroic people of Hungary challenge the murderous fire of Red Army tanks. These patriots value liberty more than life itself. And all who peacefully enjoy liberty have a solemn duty to seek, by all truly helpful means, that those who now die for freedom will not have died in vain. It is in this spirit that the United States and others have today acted to bring the situation in Hungary to the United Nations Security Council. The weakness of Soviet imperialism is being made manifest. Its weakness is not military weakness nor lack of material power. It is weak because it seeks to sustain an unnatural tyranny by suppressing human aspirations which cannot indefinitely be suppressed and by concealing truths which cannot indefinitely be hidden. Imperialist dictatorships often present a formidable exterior. For a time they may seem to be hard, glittering, and irresistible. But in reality they turn out to be “like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men’s bones, and of all uncleanness.” They have vulnerabilities not easily seen. Our Nation has from its beginning stimulated political independence and human liberty throughout the world. Lincoln said of our Declaration of Independence that it gave “liberty not alone to the people of this country, but hope to all the world, for all future time.” During the period when our Nation was founded, the tides of despotism were running high. But our free society and its good fruits became known throughout the world and helped to inspire the subject peoples of that day to demand, and to get, the opportunity to mold their own destinies. Today our Nation continues its historic role. The captive peoples should never have reason to doubt that they have in us a sincere and dedicated friend who share their aspirations. They must know that they can draw upon our abundance to tide themselves over the period of economic adjustment which is inevitable as they rededicate their productive efforts to the service of their own people, rather than of exploiting masters. Nor do we condition economic ties between us upon the adoption by these countries of any particular form of society. And let me make this clear, beyond a possiblity of doubt: The United States has no ulterior purpose in desiring the independence of the satellite countries. Our unadulterated wish is that these peoples, from whom so much of our own national life derives, should have sovereignty restored to them and that they should have governments of their own free choosing. We do not look upon these nations as potential military allies. We see them as friends and as part of a new and friendly and no longer divided Europe. We are confident that their independence, if promptly accorded, will contribute immensely to stabilize peace throughout all of Europe, West and East. Peoples of U.S.S.R. Let me add a word about future relations with the peoples who compose the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. They, too, can have hope. The spread of education and industrial development create growing demands for greater intellectual and spiritual freedom, for greater personal security through the protection of law, and for greater enjoyment of the good things of life. And there has been some response to those demands. There is ground to believe that that trend will prove to be an irreversible trend. It may bring the day when the people of the United States can have, with the people of Russia, the relations of fellowship which they would like and when the Governments of our countries can deal with each other as friends. [Here follows discussion of other subjects.] 129. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2856. Confidential. Vienna, October 28, 1956—1 p.m. 916. We are encountering among our Austrian friends a strong tendency to blame the U.S. for the present predicament of the Hungarian patriots. Reference is frequently made to RFE and our balloon operations as having incited the Hungarians to action and our failure to do anything effective for them now that they have risen against their Communist oppressors. When asked what we could do they have nothing to suggest. Thompson 130. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2856. Confidential; Niact. Received at 7 p.m., October 29. Budapest, October 28, 1956—2 p.m. 171. Legation telegrams 168Document 125. and 169Telegram 169 from Budapest, October 27, reported that the Legation had been contacted by the wives of two leaders of the insurgent writers who requested U.S. assistance in arranging a 12-hour armistice on humanitarian grounds and the help of the Legation in negotiating peace terms. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2756) Absence of communication facilities has placed upon the Legation operational decisions which would normally be referred to Washington for final determination. Legation telegram 169 gives circumstances of one contact between State’s representatives, insurgent forces and American personnel. In brief, insurgents were trying to contact Legation to urge that Legation act as mediator between various insurgent groups and government. In view of analysis underlying recommendations in Legation telegram 168, was felt that some action, even if only exploratory and of course unofficial, should be taken to indicate probability that Legation would do whatever practical to facilitate cessation of bloodshed through compromise between insurgents and government, both for humanitarian reasons and also because it appeared to support US government interests. An aide-mémoire was drafted along such lines to be held in reserve and telephone connections finally made with Deputy Foreign Minister. Following request for assistance in communicating with Washington, which granted only to extent of accepting one clear message over phone (down due to “technical difficulties” and dangers of being on streets), remark was made along lines that: bloodshed regrettable, ceasefire seemed desirable, and speaking purely unofficially we would assume that any Foreign Legation, including this one, would be glad do whatever practical to assist in ending carnage. Response that thought appreciated but hardly likely anything could be done since “gangs” being wiped up, made it clear that Communist new government (or at least this representative thereof) had no thoughts at moment of any deal with insurgents. It now appears certain Soviets moving in troops based in other satellite areas perhaps Soviet Union itself. Thus likely they can by progressive use of force maintain control of Pest, get control of Buda, and clear up provinces. However mounting wave of pro-Hungarian felling in west makes it possible Soviets also might be willing extricate themselves from present situation through an armistice followed by negotiations. Legation heard this morning that Nanaa newspaperman Leslie Bain proceeded to Vienna this morning with promise Hungarian Government he can have re-entry visa Wednesday.Bain went to Austria on October 28 and returned on Tuesday, October 30, after having filed his despatches at Radio Austria. See Bain, Reluctant Satellites, pp. 118–121. Bain has in recent days revealed himself to Legation as strong Nagy supporter and Twentieth Congress line exponent. Possible his Vienna mission (judging from conversations) to brand Hungarian uprising as Fascist sparked. This would be definite indication of growing concern over western feelings. If factor of western opinion weighs strongly enough with Soviets that they deterred from all-out action, Legation feels any approaches from insurgents, handled delicately, perhaps best kept alive so that better chance may exist for Hungarian Government have someone to negotiate with. For these reasons Legation reporting facts at this length. Legation requests advice soonest.Elbrick sent a memorandum to Secretary Dulles on October 31 wherein he recommended that the Legation be informed that specific action in response to the approaches outlined in telegrams 161, 168, 169, and 171 from Budapest was unnecessary. The memorandum bears no indication of approval or disapproval. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2856) Barnes 131. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, October 29, 1956, 8 a.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Prepared in the Office of the President. Washington, October 29, 1956, 8 a.m. 8:00 A.M. Secretary Dulles called the President. [Here follows a reference to developments in the Middle East.] The President said at least things on both fronts—Hungary and Israel—seemed a little better this morning than last evening. Dulles replied that at least “we have gained 24 hours.” Dulles said he was wondering if it would be desirable to try to find occasion for Bohlen to bring to the attention of the Soviet Government at as high a level as possible, the statement he made in his Dallas speech,See Document 128. saying that he had made it with full approval of the President. President agreed, and said it might be a good thing to try to draw Nehru into it—cited letter that he had dictated to Dulles just a few minutes beforeIt reads, in part, as follows: “For some days I have been wondering whether the present situations in Eastern Europe and in the Mid East might not be creating in Nehru the feeling that he might, very wisely, begin to strengthen his ties with the West and separate himself more distinctly from the Communists. If he has any such feeling, of course, we would want to nurture and promote it. Incidentally, we should be anxious, also, to find him some face-saving device. “It just might be possible that by writing to him a very serious letter speaking of our deep regret that so many innocent people had to suffer at the hands of Russian imperialism and so forth, and without asking him to do anything except to counsel with us, we might make some advances in this direction.” (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers) —that Nehru must have some feelings that perhaps he ought to strengthen his ties with the West, if some face-saving device could be found by which he could do so. Dulles had been thinking along same lines, and had dictated on plane coming back from Dallas something (directed toward the Soviets) of the same nature. The President said that they might be willing to talk sense now more than at any time since Administration has been in power. Said approach might be that things are not going the way any of us want, better have a meeting that recognizes these points. At this point President questioned Shepilov, but Dulles said he was pretty far down in the Soviet hierarchy. Dulles said that undoubtedly there was a battle on in the Presidium—some of the people probably would want to go back to the old Stalinistic policies—but Dulles said, that was now too late. He said they were “up against a tough problem.” The President agreed, and said we had to take advantage of that. Now is the time to talk (more) about reducing tensions in the world. Dulles agreed, but said we would have to be very careful not to do anything that would look to the satellite world as though we were selling them out. The President of course agreed, said nothing could be done until present thing had settled down, but went back to Nehru and said that he might now be thinking about Soviet colonialism and imperialism in slightly different terms. The President was leaving on political trip to Miami, Jacksonville and Richmond, and said that the Secretary could reach him within a matter of minutes at any time. [Here follows reference to two other telephone calls.] 132. Notes on the 40th Meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, October 29, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/10–2956. Top Secret. Drafted by Comstock. Washington, October 29, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman Defense—Colonel Oscar R. Schaaf Defense—Mr. Roger Ernst CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell Office of Spec. Asst. to the President—Mr. Oren M. Stephens OCB—Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Edward L. Freers State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Robert O. Blake State—Mr. Robert M. McKisson State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. John E. Horner State—Mr. Ralph S. Collins CIA—Mr. Arthur M. Cox USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey USIA—Mr. Henry Arnold [The following notes are not exact quotations.]Brackets in the source text. Beam: State has been on the telecon with Budapest today. Freers: All members of the Legation are safe. We are considering authority to evacuate dependents. The Legation thinks the Nagy promise to get Soviet troops out and disband security policeNagy promised to do this on October 28 in a speech broadcast over the government radio station. See Zinner, National Communism, pp. 428–432. is a move to divide the rebels between rightist communist and anti-communists. Budapest is under Nagy’s control. Question arises as to how genuine pledge is. Beam: Troops are apparently coming in from Rumania and the USSR itself. The Legation has no idea of the make-up of various groups. We have asked. An Assistant Military Attaché arrived in Vienna todayCaptain Thomas R. Gleason and Second Secretary J. Thomas Rogers reached the Embassy in Vienna from Budapest on the morning of October 29. Rogers reported that everyone at the Legation was well and that morale was high. He brought a number of messages with him because of the difficulty of maintaining communication with Washington from Budapest. (Memorandum from Henry P. Leverich to Murphy, October 29; Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2956) The meeting in State on the UN action went fairly well. We are getting up a resolution calling for condemnation and for setting up a committee to investigate the situation. It is to be introduced by the U.S., the U.K. and France. Question has been raised as to whether we should call upon the Soviets to recall their troops from Hungary. Freers: The Hungarian delegate has not taken a position but he has objected to UN interferenceKós had opposed Security Council consideration of the Hungarian question. When the issue was placed on the agenda, he was invited to participate in the discussion. He expressed regret that the Council chose to take up the issue despite the fact it was an internal Hungarian concern. In the absence of further instructions, he reserved the right to speak at another time. (U.N. doc. S/PV.746, p. 34) The Security Council adjourned without reaching any specific decision and no definite date was set for a resumption of the discussion. For the next 3 days, the Security Council was exclusively preoccupied with the Suez crisis. Cox: If the Hungarian delegate took Nagy’s position, would not the Soviets be the only government with their position? Beam: We might be able to isolate the Yugoslavs and Hungarians from the Soviet position. Campbell: University students in Washington have sent a telegram to Secretary Dulles stating that they intend to demonstrate for Hungarian independence. Beam: Columbia students too. Arrangements have been made to pass to VOA. Revey: Some recent Hungarian refugees express resentment against the free world for not helping. Campbell: Thompson has cable in from Vienna on thatSee Document 129. McKisson: We should not make the present government an object of attack. That would give Russians an excuse. We do not know enough. The Government may meet some of the demands. Soviet responsibility is obvious. The Hungarian Government may even be changed within a day or two. Beam: Our media could point out the trouble faced by the Government in view of Russian troops that keep coming in. We could alert the people that the Government may be overwhelmed by Soviet forces and be unable to make good on its promises even if sincere. Cox: Should we tell the rebels not to demobilize? Beam: The people should be aware that the Government may not be able to carry out its promises. McKisson: We should try to get across the idea that the Government is not a free agent. Cox: Could we go a step beyond and say that, until we report the Soviet army to be moving out, they should not lay down their arms? McKisson: We should report that there is no evidence that the Soviets are moving out, but we should not be in the position of telling the insurgents what to do. Schaaf: What is our objective? Beam: Our first objective is to get the Soviets out. McKisson: Then the prospects of people’s demands would be good. They are not good under Soviet occupation. McKisson: . . . The Government still makes promises. The Szabad Nep article contradicting Russian allegations of Western subversion is good.On October 29, the paper denied Pravda’s assertion that British and U.S. imperialists had instigated the revolt. See Zinner, National Communism, pp. 449–451. McKisson: Bela Kovacs says a coalition government is needed. That may be the next position to which the Nagy Government is prepared to move. Freers: We don’t know the relative strength of rightist communists and anti-communists. Schaaf: Hasn’t the present Government conceded that the rebels have won? McKisson: Yes, but Soviets are coming in, making such concession rather questionable. Schaaf: Should we encourage the people to make a deal to get Soviet troops out? Revey: The leadership has been removed in certain areas, leaving local anarchy. McKisson: The fighting has apparently tapered off in Budapest but the insurgents control much territory elsewhere. They are in a strong position if they only have to deal with the Government. Ernst: What do we say to the insurgents? Beam: We keep them informed. That is about as far as you can go. McKisson: We are reporting our resort to the UN. Our prime concern is to get the Soviets out. We cannot undertake to direct the insurgents. Cox: The rebel radio in GyorOne of a number of “free” provincial radio stations, which commenced operations during the rebellion. has been critical of outside radio attacking Nagy. McKisson: The people fighting are of different political principles. They are all anti-Russian and have called for reforms. We would alienate them if we tried to give directives. Campbell: They are also calling for anti-tank weapons. Beam: Austrians doing well to encourage them despite neutrality. The decision was taken higher up not to give arms. Ernst: Someone should go in and find out who the different groups are. Schaaf: It looks like cross reporting is about all we are doing. Beam: The UN action is important. Campbell: Does it rule out a bilateral U.S.-USSR approach? Beam: No, we have that in mind as a possibility. Cox: We are considering organizing American contributions to the Hungarian people. McKisson: The Red Cross seems to be the best agency. Beam: We are getting a radio transmitter to Legation Budapest for emergency use. The UK Legation is using its transmitter. McKisson: Legation Budapest voluntarily closed its transmitter down in 1950 when the Hungarians tried to set one up here. Beam: They might be useful later in Hungary, if there is a violent repression. Cox: The Bulgarian line is straight Stalinist. Beam: The German CounselorRolf F. Pauls. has expressed the hope that violence will not spread to East Germany. (Mr. Freers summarized draft NSC policy paper on Poland and Hungary)Reference is to a draft of NSC 5616, “U.S. Policy Toward Developments in Poland and Hungary,” dated October 31. (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 5616 Series) Campbell: Should we dramatize the Red Cross assistance by airlift? Burris: A plane did take off from Idlewild yesterday. McKisson: To whom will the aid be turned over? Beam: Apparently the Hungarian Red Cross. Austria is sending relief supplies over the border to whoever is in control. Beam: The Committee should meet again tomorrow briefly at 3:00 P.M.The Committee took up the matters of exchange of broadcasters with the Soviet Union, means of getting the Hungarian Government to live up to its promises, the need for some further U.S. official statement on developments in Hungary, and publicity for U.S. relief aid. (Notes of the 41st Meeting, October 30; ibid., Central Files, 100.4–OCB/10–3056) PBCOCB Staff Representative 133. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–2956. Confidential. Drafted by Horace G. Torbert, Jr., Officer in Charge of Italian and Austrian Affairs. Washington, October 29, 1956. SUBJECT Call of the Austrian Ambassador regarding handling of Hungarian refugees in Austria Ambassador Gruber called on me this morning under instructions from his Government to request the urgent attention of the American Government to a potential problem regarding the handling of refugees which may cross from Hungary.Murphy met with Ambassador Karl Gruber the day before to inform him of the steps the United States was contemplating concerning U.N. action. Gruber raised the refugee situation on that occasion. (Memorandum of conversation by Bennett, October 28; ibid., 764.00/10–2856) He said that the policy of his Government was to give asylum to anyone entering Austria from Hungary providing they surrender their arms. This applies whether they come over individually or in large units. At the present time the flow of refugees is not significant but may quickly become so in the event of a decisive development. While Austria is concerned with the economic burden of this policy, they are even more concerned with the potential political difficulties. They therefore are appealing to us to give immediate consideration, presumably in concert with other Western Nations, to the possibilities of moving Hungarian refugees out of Austria to some other location at an early date if the flow becomes significant. Otherwise Austria will be placed in a most difficult position as a neutral country in its relations with the East. In answer to my inquiry as to what precise form of activity he had in mind, whether for instance UN action was contemplated, he said this was not clearly formulated in the Austrian mind and possibly it would be an action that could be taken by NATO. They visualized that possibly a group of Western countries would each agree to take a fixed percentage of new refugees. He pointed out that these people had shown the independence and aggressiveness to take part in the uprising. They would constitute a particularly desirable group for any country to take. Besides relieving Austria of the problem it would be most important psychologically to the West that this group not remain couped up under unsatisfactory conditions in Austria for a long period of time. This would provide an additional discouragement to anyone to make a future show of independence. I inquired how the Austrians planned to handle the people they took in. Ambassador Gruber said he would advise his Government not to place them in concentration camps, but to give them as much liberty as possible. However, he did not know whether it would be possible to do this. This was a problem that would have to be worked out. There was also a brief discussion about the advisability of accepting any Communists that might come over as a result of developments and we both agreed that the policy would be to take anyone that came over. I assured the Ambassador that this would be brought to your attention and that it would receive our urgent consideration. 134. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.00/10–2956. Top Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted and approved by Dulles. The Secretary cleared this message orally with the President over the telephone at 8 a.m., October 29. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations) Washington, October 29, 1956—2:53 p.m. 510. Personal for Ambassador from Secretary. I call your attention to following language from my Saturday night speech at Dallas:See Document 128. “The US has no ulterior purpose in desiring the independence of the satellite countries. Our unadulterated wish is that these peoples, from whom so much of our own national life derives, should have sovereignty restored to them, and that they should have governments of their own free choosing. We do not look upon these nations as potential military allies. We see them as friends and as part of a new and friendly and no longer divided Europe. We are confident that their independence, if promptly accorded, will contribute immensely to stabilize peace throughout all of Europe, West and East.” This paragraph resulted from intensive consideration here at highest level.The original draft stated “including that of President himself” instead of “at highest level.” We would like this to come to attention of highest Soviet authorities, including Zhukov, and to know that they appreciate it is a high level policy statement. Please use your discretion as to when and how to bring this about.At this point in the original draft, Dulles had written the following: “You may, at your discretion, use orally the President’s name.” You might also at same time recall proposal for a “treaty of assurance” which was proposed by Western Powers and Federal Republic in connection with German reunification and indicate that so far as US is concerned such proposal still stands. It is of course highly important that nothing done under this authorization should emerge publicly as a démarche attributable to Washington. Dulles 135. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 661.64/10–2956. Secret; Niact. Budapest, October 29, 1956—8 p.m. 177. Current situation completely abnormal if factual situation correctly understood. This is as follows: Soviets have Budapest under control with three Soviet mechanized divisions, although there are a few hard core resistance centers still in city proper. Soviet units at moment sitting in concentrations various key areas and blocking bridges. Appear in defensive posture. Still, Soviet troops estimated in country present moment sufficient to put down nationalists if their policy decided upon. Major question lies in what now acts as restraining influence from exercise this option. One guess might be evenly divided influence at moment between Soviet political thinkers who favor iron fist action and those for moderate course. If this is good guess and west reaction weak-kneed in this crisis would appear scale would tip in favor iron fist school. Legation would recommend pressure on Soviets to be heavy and in any possible form that appears compatible with Washington assessment of risks.Barnes suggested one hour later in telegram 180 that the statements of the Nagy government concerning the withdrawal of Soviet troops needed to be weighed most carefully. The Legation further advised that the nationalists required some high-level Western assistance for their cause to survive. To enhance their bargaining position and fighting potential, they required negotiating assistance and military matériel. (Ibid., 764.00/10–2956) Barnes 136. Editorial Note On October 29, Israel invaded the Sinai with the announced intention of destroying Egyptian “Fedayeen” bases. Paratroopers were dropped at the Mitla Pass some 20 miles east of Suez. This provided justification for France and the United Kingdom, who had colluded with Israel in this matter, to issue an ultimatum on October 30 to both Israel and Egypt to withdraw their forces 10 miles from the Suez Canal and to agree to temporary Anglo-French occupation of the Canal sites. Israel, as predetermined, promised compliance, but Egypt refused to accede. This led to the British bombing of the Egyptian Air Force on October 31 followed on November 6 by the Anglo-French invasion of Port Said. Great Britain and France also used their veto power in the Security Council to defeat United States-sponsored resolutions critical of Israel. The Suez crisis and the involvement of Great Britain and France quickly overshadowed the Hungarian rebellion and became the principal area of concern for United States leaders. Extensive documentation on the Suez crisis is in volume XVI. 137. Special National Intelligence EstimateSource: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Secret. Regarding National Intelligence Estimates, see footnote 1, Document 11. Washington, October 30, 1956. SNIE 12–2–56 PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN EAST EUROPE AND IMPLICATIONS FOR SOVIET POLICYAccording to a note on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. “Concurred in by the Intelligence Advisory Committee on 30 October 1956. Concurring were the Special Assistant, Intelligence, Department of State; the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Director of Naval Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, USAF; and the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff. The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the IAC, and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.” I. Probable Developments in the Satellites 1. Events in Poland and Hungary have demonstrated the strengh and vitality of anti-Soviet sentiments in these Satellites. Particularly in Hungary, there have been manifestations of strong anti-Communist sentiment as well. The Soviet strategic position in Eastern Europe has been weakened. Soviet policy is now confronted with serious dilemmas: (a) the need to make some accommodation with the increasing pressures of nationalism in the Satellites without losing the essential minimum of control over them; (b) the difficulty of using Soviet armed might to put down nationalist and anti-Communist revolt in the face of world opinion. Poland 2. A new Communist regime, considerably more independent of Moscow than the previous one, has been established in Poland, with reluctant Soviet acquiescence. This regime is pledged to maintain the alliance with the USSR, including the retention of Soviet forces in Poland as long as NATO forces remain in Germany, but reserving the right to choose whether or not Soviet specialists and military advisors will remain in the Polish army. It is also pledged to introduce certain democratic procedures (presumably compatible with party control), to stop coercive collectivization, and to raise standards of living. 3. The stability of the Gomulka regime rests on its ability to strike a balance between popular Polish aspirations for independence and economic improvement, on the one hand, and the minimum requirements of the USSR with respect both to the maintenance of the Communist system and to Soviet military security, on the other. Developments in Hungary may make a middle road course difficult for Gomulka. Hungary 4. In Hungary concessions were made so slowly and reluctantly as to intensify rather than satisfy the pressures for change. The regime of the Communist Imre Nagy, once purged from the party for deviationism and only recently restored to party membership, took over with the outbreak of open revolt and the employment of Soviet forces. Nagy promised drastic reforms and announced a government which included non-Communists. The Hungarian army does not appear to have been employed on a large scale, and its allegiance in the struggle is unclear. There have been widespread desertions to the rebels, particularly in the west, and the rebels are in possession of some tanks in other areas; but at least elements of two Hungarian divisions are known to have participated in the repression at the outset. 5. It is unlikely that any Hungarian government will be able to reach a compromise between Soviet security requirements and Hungarian nationalist sentiment. Certain rebel groups appear willing to accept Nagy temporarily and it seems possible that he can gradually establish control if he can reach an accommodation with the rebels with respect to their principal demands: abolition of the secret police, complete withdrawal of Soviet troops from the country, and changes in the composition of the government. If the rebels refuse to make an accommodation with Nagy, the Soviet Union will be faced with the alternatives of risking the development of a non-Communist and independent Hungary or of intervening with large scale military forces to take over the country by force. Other Satellites 6. Signs of nationalistic ferment were seen during the spring in Czechoslovakia. Beginning late last year, a number of non-Communist politicians were released from prison in Czechoslovakia, Rumania, and Bulgaria; in the spring a number of prominent Stalin purge victims in Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia were cleared of Titoist charges;The Second Congress of the Union of Czechoslovak Writers, meeting on April 23, demanded the release of writers who had been unjustly arrested and protested against Party pressure to adhere to the official line. Agitation by Czech students reached its climax in a mass demonstration on May 20, during which the secondary and higher education systems were criticized, a reliable press was called for, the free importation of books and newspapers was advocated, and the trial of those who had extorted false confessions was insisted upon. A Special Committee on Socialist Legality had already been established within the Party Central Committee to investigate the 1952–1954 trials. This culminated in the exoneration of Vilém Nový, Artur London, Laco Novomeský, and Evžen Löbel who had been jailed as alleged “Titoists”. Alexei ČepiČka, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defense and the person whom the Party leadership chose to identify as being most responsible for the purges, was himself forced out of power. Meanwhile, in Bulgaria, Prime Minister Vulko Chervenkov was compelled to resign in April 1956 and accept a lesser position while executed Party leader, Traicho Kostov, was posthumously rehabilitated and those of his associates who were still in jail were released. and conciliatory personnel changes were made, particularly in the Czech defense ministry and the Rumanian police apparatus. But there have been no challenges to Soviet influence by the governments of those Satellites, and few indications of sharp divisions within the local parties. However, in the absence of a Soviet return to a policy of repression, a more autonomous and nationally-oriented regime will probably be evolved for Czechoslovakia and possibly Rumania and Bulgaria. This likelihood would be increased if the Hungarian rebels win most of their demands. Albania, on the other hand, is less likely to press vigorously for independence. 7. East Germany is a special case. Regardless of East German desires, the USSR will almost certainly not tolerate any substantial weakening of controls or the introduction of effective nationalist influence into the government. The USSR regards East Germany as vitally important to Soviet security and maintains a garrison of 22 line divisions there. Moreover, fear among the Poles and Czechs of a reunified Germany with irredentist claims is a factor serving to persuade them of the need to cooperate with the USSR and to prevent them from supporting an East German independence movement. Economic Considerations 8. Longstanding economic grievances continue to be an important factor behind unrest in the Satellites. Reduced use of repressive measures and an increased candor in discussing economic problems have recently encouraged more overt expression of discontent. In an effort to alleviate the situation, the USSR has recently negotiated modest aid agreements with Poland, Hungary, East Germany, and Bulgaria. 9. The Polish and Hungarian governments will almost certainly attempt to lessen their economic dependence on the USSR, by increasing trade with the West, and probably also by seeking economic assistance, especially in the form of credits. 10. The most serious immediate problem for East Europe may be the fuel shortage which will probably result from underfulfillments in the Polish, Czech, and Hungarian coal industries. A severe winter would increase fuel demands and might freeze up East German open pit operations, causing serious shortages which the USSR, with its own coal difficulties, might not be able to alleviate. The bumper Soviet harvest could compensate for the poor Satellite crop of this fall and assure food supplies. II. Implications for Soviet Policy 11. We believe that the Hungarian rebellion came as a surprise to the Soviet leadership. On the basis of the evidence presently available, Soviet policy through the Polish and Hungarian crises appears to have been vacillating. It is too early to be confident on this matter, but we believe that Soviet leadership may be in a state of confusion, and until basic decisions are made, may be unable to conduct policy with sureness of touch. A crisis in Western relationships over the Middle East might make Soviet leaders feel that they had greater freedom of action in the Satellite area. 12. There has for some time been difference of opinion among Soviet leaders about the post-Stalin policy of seeking to reduce apathy at home, disaffection in the Satellites, and distrust in the non-Communist world. Soviet confidence in this policy, generated by gains in morale at home and an improved position in international relations, must now have been shaken by the need to make concessions in Poland and especially by the events in Hungary. It is possible that the Hungarian rebellion will precipitate changes in the composition or structure of the Soviet leadership. If the Hungarian rebels are able to achieve a substantial political victory, pressures for policy changes will almost certainly make the position of the Khrushchev leadership increasingly difficult. The position of advocates of a harder line may be strengthened. Changes in the leadership would be even more likely if the professional military under Zhukov insist that basic Soviet security is being jeopardized by current policies. Domestic and Foreign Policy 13. Irrespective of any action which Soviet leaders may feel forced to take in Hungary, it is unlikely that they will wish drastically to reverse the course of domestic relaxation which was undertaken largely for pressing internal considerations and has significantly improved party and popular morale. It is also unlikely that Soviet leaders will abandon the effort to woo the uncommitted areas of the world and to weaken Western alliances. Soviet armed action in the Hungarian crisis will have an adverse effect on the credibility of the USSR’s propaganda exploitation of anticolonial movements, but the ultimate effect in this area, as well as on the attitudes of the Yugoslav and Chinese Communist promoters of Satellite autonomy, will be determined more by future Soviet policy than by the present emergency action. Policy Toward the Satellites 14. Evidence at present does not permit an estimate of whether or not the USSR will occupy Hungary with additional military force sufficient to quell the rebellion, in the event that present measures to establish control are unsuccessful. Unless it does so, however, we believe it unlikely that the USSR would find it feasible to impose for any long period a Stalinist system of rigid police and ideological controls over the Satellites. For the present, the USSR will probably endeavor to prevent further outbreaks in the Satellites by insisting on precautionary police measures and the suppression of anti-Soviet ferment. These closer controls will probably be accompanied by ameliorating measures such as Soviet help in meeting food shortages, moratoria on collectivization, and relief from some other economic pressures. East Germany will be watched with particular vigilance. 15. If confronted by strong nationalist pressures in the other Satellites, the USSR will probably attempt to establish Communist regimes which possess a larger measure of internal autonomy but which maintain military and foreign policy solidarity with the USSR. Military Implications 16. We believe the Soviet leaders estimate that the minimum military requirements for their national security include the maintenance of effective early warning capabilities on the Satellite borders, of powerful Soviet forces in East Germany, and of secure lines of communication from the USSR to East Germany. The developments in Poland and Hungary will probably result in a substantial downward revision in the Soviet estimate of the reliability of most of the Satellite armed forces.See Annex. [Footnote in the source text. The annex is not printed.] We believe these circumstances will dictate a keen Soviet desire to retain its own military forces in the other Satellites in which they are now stationed, especially in Poland. For the immediate future, the possibility of new Satellite rebellions will reinforce this desire. Therefore, the Soviet leaders will almost certainly retain the Warsaw Pact organization in order to preserve the rights which they enjoy under it. 17. It seems unlikely that US action short of overt military intervention or obvious preparation for such intervention would lead the USSR deliberately to take steps which it believed would materially increase the risk of general war. The Soviet leaders probably recognize that the US nuclear-air capability remains superior to that of the USSR, and have probably concluded that at present the USSR, even if it launched a surprise attack, would receive unacceptable damage in a nuclear exchange with the US. 18. Soviet suspicions of US policy and present circumstances which involve Soviet troop movements and alerts probably increase the likelihood of a series of actions and counteractions leading inadvertently to war. Such a series of actions could most readily originate with respect to East Germany. 138. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 761.13/10–3056. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Paris. Moscow, October 30, 1956—1 p.m. 992. At two receptions yesterday afternoon, Turkish national holiday and Afghanistan Embassy reception for visiting Prime Minister, Khrushchev, Bulganin, Molotov, Shepilov were at both, plus Zhukov at Turks. Despite efforts British Ambassador and myself avoid more than normal courtesies, Bulganin and Khrushchev at both receptions made dead set for both Hayter and me and seemed anxious to be seen in conversation with us. Soviet leadership in general appeared considerably better spirits than on past two occasions.In telgram 949 from Moscow, October 26, Bohlen described the spirits of the Soviet leaders at a reception for the Belgians. (Ibid., 033.5561/10–2656) It is probable that there was full meeting Presidium yesterday, since British Ambassador saw many Zils going into Kremlin, and Soviet Government presumably has reached decision on handling Hungarian matter. Certain points of interest on other subjects which emerged these conversations will be reported separately, but only extended conversation I had on subject Hungary was with Marshal Zhukov who also sought me out at Turks. Zhukov stuck straight to party line and as will be seen from observations made to me on Hungarian situation was indulging in mixture untruths, half-truths and possibly some elements of real fact. I asked Zhukov whether Nagy broadcast of the night before which stated Soviet troops would be leaving Budapest immediately and that negotiations for the total withdrawal from Hungary would be undertakenSee footnote 3, Document 132. had been made in agreement with Soviet Government, and if this represented Soviet intention in regard to troop withdrawal. Zhukov replied Nagy broadcast had not referred to immediate withdrawal from Budapest and that Soviet troops having gone there at request Hungarian Government would remain until that government requested withdrawal or until “order had been restored”. On general withdrawal he said this was matter consideration members Warsaw Pact, repeating to me privately what he said earlier to press. Zhukov then made following statements to me in regard to situation: 1. No Soviet reinforcements had been sent to Hungary “recently” since there were sufficient Soviet troops for purpose without this. I challenged this statement by pointing out there was information to contrary on this point and that Soviet Representative UN had not so far as I was aware issued any specific denial to statement British Representative that reinforcements had come in from Rumania.U.N. doc. S/PV.746, p. 14. Zhukov said he had not read SC debates but reaffirmed his statement. 2. He said Soviet troops had only opened fire when some of their officers had been killed by insurgents, and that in last forty-eight hours there had been no firing by Soviet troops. I again told him I had information to the contrary which he stated was false. (BBC this morning spoke of Soviet artillery fire Budapest against army barracks.) 3. He stated that Soviet troops Budapest were not under his command, but under that Hungarian Minister of Defense. 4. Soviet troops had only been in action Budapest and had not taken action against any “new” local authorities in many places Hungary. 5. He volunteered statement that contrary foreign news reports there had been no single incident defection any Soviet soldier to rebels. Zhukov attempted to take “soldier’s” attitude in defense Soviet troops, stating that he was not a politician and that function of army [soldier] was to carry out orders given to him. In addition he attempted along standard lines to present Hungarian action as counter-revolutionary putsch and when help was asked for by government member Warsaw Pact, Soviets could not refuse. He inquired what would happen under any alliance in similar circumstances to which I replied NATO contained no provision for use foreign troops for intervention internal matters, to which he replied Warsaw Pact was for support Socialist camp and, therefore, for protection Socialist governments from any threat. In answer to my comment that I knew nothing in text Warsaw Pact which would justify internal intervention, Zhukov said such action was “envisaged” in pact. He attempted, though somewhat mildly, to stress “foreign connection” of insurgents mentioning that they have captured large quantities of American rifles, as well as German cannon. He did not, however, assert that these alleged American arms had been sent by US but said they were probably World War II supplies smuggled into Hungary from Austria. He said he regretted action three Western powers bringing matter before Security Council since it was internal affair Hungary. I immediately challenged him on this and said he could hardly expect otherwise since intervention Soviet troops gave it strong international aspect. He made no answer. In course conversation I asked him if it was not simple fact that when a government was forced to appeal foreign troops for help this was clearest evidence that government did not enjoy support people. Zhukov in feeble reply spoke of exploitation legitimate discontent for past policies by unscrupulous and criminal elements, which is standard Soviet line. With reference to future Soviet policy, Zhukov did not go beyond statement that troops would be withdrawn from Budapest immediately when Hungarian Government so requested or when cease fire became operative. (Shepilov meantime had been telling press roughly same thing only one report on BBC this morning has him going farther in stating that troops would remain Budapest until rebels had laid down their arms.) Zhukov made number interesting observations in regard to Polish situation in discussing Hungarian events. He cited as proof Soviet unwillingness intervene internal affairs fact no troops were used Poland, although he said there was more than ample force in East Germany, White Russia and Poland itself for this purpose. He became quite vehement at this point and said “they” could have crushed them like flies. When I asked him who “they” were he made no direct reply, saying that Soviets had shown great restraint in Poland. He said in fact in order to ensure that troops in East Germany did not move Poland he had purposely sent Konev there to make sure forces remained on spot. This is confirmation of what was suspected before that actual use of force in Poland was most seriously considered by Soviet Government and may indicate army had urged action in Poland. I have no way of judging truth Zhukov’s remarks that Soviet troops have confined action to Budapest and had by-passed towns, other areas Hungary where nationalists were in control. However, from general tenor his remarks, as well as statements to press by Shepilov and him, it looks as though Soviet decision was to support Nagy government to end, although possibly primarily in Budapest leaving provinces and other towns for subsequent mopping up if resistance can be broken in capital, thereby hoping to avoid total military occupation Hungary by Soviet forces. In this light it would appear Nagy’s statements on night of 28th regarding Soviet troop withdrawal from Budapest was nothing more than trick, with Soviet connivance, to cause insurgents to cease fire. Since in all probability I will see Zhukov this evening Kremlin reception, would appreciate urgently any reliable information in regard to specific points he made to me concerning Soviet troops activities, particularly re reinforcements and limitation action to Budapest. (For London: British Ambassador, whom I gave brief account talk with Zhukov, had asked if it were possible for this report to be made available to Foreign Office. Suggest, therefore, substance containing Zhukov’s statements, but without my comments, should be given to Foreign Office.) Bohlen 139. Telegram From the Department of State to the Legation in RomaniaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.6641/10–2456. Confidential; Niact. Washington, October 30, 1956—1:22 p.m. 164. LazareanuAlexandru Lazareanu led the Romanian delegation in talks aimed at improving U.S.-Romanian relations. Robert H. Thayer led the U.S. negotiating team in the meetings which took place October 15–November 3. Among the subjects discussed were cultural relations, consular and diplomatic problems, trade, claims and assets, and modes of settlement of these. Documentation on this subject is ibid., 611.66 and 611.6641. assurances re performance consular functions gratifying as possible indication new attitude on Rumanian part but scarcely constitute satisfactory settlement consular problem within meaning US note August 29 (Legtel 197).Telegram 197 from Bucharest, August 30, indicated that on the previous day the U.S. note expressing willingness to enter into negotiations with the Romanian Government on matters outstanding between the United States and Romania had been delivered to the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. (Ibid., 121.662/8–3056) We appreciate Rumanian desire open consulates New York and Detroit but in light Rumanian past record and reputation US we believe it would contribute more to establishment solid foundation for improved relations if Rumanians would first seek develop record favorable performance on existing obligations. You may note in passing US has no present intention open consulates Cluj, Timisoara, Ploesti or Constanta for example (presumably acceptable Rumania under Art 1)Article 1 of the Consular Convention of 1881 (23 Stat. 711) specified the right of Romania to open consular offices in New York and Detroit and gave the United States access to Constanta and Bucharest. and would be satisfied have full consular rights Bucharest. Similarly assume Rumanian Government would be pleased enjoy appropriate consular rights and privileges Washington which US prepared grant. Meanwhile however while not refusing consider Rumanian requests re New York and Detroit we believe Rumanians will appreciate reasonableness present US position and will not press demands for consulates outside capital at this time. Re new consular convention US prepared consider formal proposal for renegotiation but believes this best accomplished in light Rumanian performance on existing obligations (Deptel 142).Telegram 142 to Bucharest, October 18, stated that the Consular Convention of 1881 had to be made operative as part of any normalization of consular activities. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.6641/10–1656) Meanwhile text presumably submitted preliminary formal proposal (Legtel 199)Telegram 199 from Bucharest, October 24, contained the draft text of the Romanian proposals. (Ibid., 611.6641/10–2456) will receive appropriate study within Department. In further discussion this topic you should avoid any implication US agrees to renegotiate (we merely agree consider proposal renegotiate) or any suggestion decision imminent (such as reference next session Senate). US objective is implementation present Convention. If Rumanians refuse, this becomes further evidence lack good faith. Department position on consulates governed largely by policy rather than legal considerations. Even before current disturbances in Soviet bloc it was determined this is not time for increasing prestige present Rumanian regime and permitting enlargement its activity US. As you aware we did not enter talks as suppliant. Meetings were proposed by Rumanians and we merely enlarged scope to permit discussion some topics of interest US. Accordingly we are under no obligation make concessions and under no pressure reach agreements. We merely accept or reject Rumanian proposals or suggest means by which for example improved relations (cited by Rumanians as primary objective) can be approached (better treatment US nationals, observance treaty obligations, permission open US reading room, etc). In latter respect US position of course not wholly negative and we are in fact prepared offer some inducements in return for Rumanian cooperation. These however limited. Offer commercial representation NY for example only in return US reading room Bucharest, not as substitute consulates NY and Detroit on which decision deferred (FYI albeit perhaps indefinitely) pending improvement Rumanian performance. Department gratified news Placa release. Assume you continuing press for Nabokoff and Samuelli.The United States wanted the release from prison of former employees Sylvia Placa, Catherine Nabokov, and Nora Samuelli. Dulles 140. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–3056. Secret; Niact. Budapest, October 30, 1956—2 p.m. 188. Politically, Hungarian situation now seems be in stalemate. Nationalists, bulk of whom anti-commie and anti-Soviet, have by their past week’s resistance managed to achieve political strength at least equal to that built up here during past decade by hard core communists and Soviets. But military situation so unequal or potentially unequal that over-all result can best be described as highly unstable stalemate which could very well result in application iron fist by Soviets. Legation believes situation warrants action recommended Legtel 180See footnote 2, Document 135. re offer international commission to negotiate guaranteed settlement. Main elements for bargaining are free elections and international guarantee withdrawal Soviet troops. As Legation sees it, nationalists would likely be willing waive demand free elections in return for international guarantee of withdrawal Soviet troops in some stipulated period of time. Soviets conceivably, altho admittedly much less likely, might be willing consent to international guarantee of troop withdrawal if relieved of bogey of free elections and satisfied incumbent government neither “bourgeois” nor anti-Soviet. New Hungarian Government would have to give Soviets and communists some assurance that they have chance for survival here. This problem most ticklish, for it is obvious Hungary currently has few political men of leadership capacity, not to speak of specialized types, who might be acceptable both sides. If such leaders found, country would be in situation similar to that experienced prior World War I, when population split between those loyal to revolutionary principles of 1848 and to compromise principles of 1867, but worked together peacefully nonetheless. Despite fact that as matters now stand Nagy’s chance of forming rallying point for Hungarians and bridge for Soviets seem be decreasing daily, an international agreement on Soviet troop withdrawal might again restore Nagy’s rallying capacity and also allow him remain acceptable to Soviets. Outside Nagy there appears be possibility of top leader in: 1) Bela Kovacs, who already implicated to at least slight extent with commies by his acceptance post Minister Agriculture, something which, from point of view of compromise, now in his favor; 2) Zoltan Tildy, former president and exponent of 20th Congress line since his recent release from house arrest;Zoltán Tildy was formerly President of the Hungarian Republic and Secretary General of the Smallholder Party. For nearly 8 years he had been under detention until freed in May 1956. On October 27, Nagy chose him as a member of his cabinet. 3) Dark horse possibility among those who were active in recent events leading up to revolt; 4) Various possibilities among intellectuals who used or were used by 20th Congress line. In summary, Legation thinks Western action should be concentrated on securing an international guarantee for withdrawal Soviet troops from Hungary. In absence such agreement Legation foresees ruthless suppression of revolution, application iron fist. If it turns out impossible for Soviets-commies on one hand and nationalists on other to find common meeting ground, even with aid mediation of international commission, Legation believes Western powers should seek ways of aiding nationalists if it becomes evident they ready for long haul fight against Soviets. Legation believes eventually no course may be left open to Hungarians and other East European peoples but to make it sound comfortable [so uncomfortable] for Soviets that, as in case of relations with Finns, they will be willing let well enough alone. Barnes 141. Editorial Note At 2:28 p.m. on October 30, Nagy announced to the Hungarian people the abolition of one-party rule and the restoration of those parties which had participated in the democratic coalition of 1945. These included the Smallholder Party, the Social Democrats, and the National Peasant Party in addition to the Communists. An inner Cabinet was created, consisting of Nagy, Kádár, and Géza Losonczy of the Communists, Tildy and Kovács of the Smallholders, and Ferenc Erdei of the National Peasant Party, with one place reserved for the Social Democrats. This last position went to Anna Kéthly. Nagy indicated that he hoped shortly to begin negotiations for the withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Hungary and he appealed to the Soviets to initiate the removal of their military forces from Budapest. The text of this address is printed in Zinner, National Communism, pages 453–454. It appeared that Deputy Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers Anastas Ivanovich Mikoyan, and the Secretary of the Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party, Mikhail Andreyevich Suslov, who returned to Budapest on October 30 to assess the situation and to confer with Hungarian Party leaders, concurred in these moves as necessary to maintain Communist control of the situation. The Soviet Central Committee seemed to endorse the basic premise of National Communism in a “Declaration on the Basis of the Development and Further Strengthening of Friendship and Cooperation Between the Soviet Union and Other Socialist States,” passed on October 30 and published in Pravda the next day. It stated that “the countries of the great commonwealth of socialist nations can build their relations only on the principle of full equality, respect of territorial integrity, state independence and sovereignty, and noninterference in one another’s domestic affairs.” The statement admitted past “difficulties, unsolved problems, and out-and-out mistakes, including some in the relations between socialist states—violations and mistakes which infringed the principles of equality in relations between socialist states.” In respect to Hungary, the Declaration reads: “The Soviet Government and all the Soviet people deeply regret that the development of events in Hungary has led to bloodshed. On the request of the Hungarian People’s Government the Soviet Government consented to the entry into Budapest of the Soviet Army units to assist the Hungarian People’s Army and the Hungarian authorities to establish order in the town. Believing that the further presence of Soviet Army units in Hungary can serve as a cause for even greater deterioration of the situation, the Soviet Government has given instructions to its military command to withdraw the Soviet Army units from Budapest as soon as this is recognized as necessary by the Hungarian Government. “At the same time, the Soviet Government is ready to enter into relevant negotiations with the Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic and other participants of the Warsaw Treaty on the question of the presence of Soviet troops on the territory of Hungary. “The defense of socialist achievements by the people’s democracy of Hungary is at the present moment the chief and sacred duty of workers, peasants, and intelligentsia, and of all the Hungarian working people.” For full text, see Department of State Bulletin, November 12, 1956, pages 745–746. 142. Telegram From the Consulate General at Munich to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 511.604/10–3056. Secret; Priority. Received at 2:59 p.m. Munich, October 30, 1956—1 p.m. 205. Eyes only Higgs, Operations Coordinator. Peripheral. Entire RadioLib Staff, both Amer and émigré demoralized and bitterly unhappy over AmComLib/NY order of Oct. 24A memorandum from McCardle to Streibert, October 26, which was not sent, called attention to the October 24 Department guidance for USIA which requested that no commentary or interpretive material be originated by U.S. Government sources. (Ibid.,, P/PG Files; Lot 60 D 605, Comments to Berding on IPS Materials—1956) limiting broadcasts to pure news output and “second hand” press commentary. Lib staff, like those of other stations here, has been working round clock since beginning Polish crises 10 days ago; nevertheless, morale obviously at nadir. Staff unanimously feels station has become a “neutral information bureau” at the very time when Iron Curtain events provide first real opportunity justify its raison d’être. This raison d’être, Lib staff feels, demands now more than ever before that station 1) interpolate and comment on news, 2) express its moral support and solidarity with Hungs or others openly opposing Commie rule, 3) condemn Sov armed intervention—call on Sov forces desist killing oppressed who have risen, and 4) urge Sov listeners to express their sympathy with satellite peoples in their efforts achieve real freedom. RadioLib instructions received from AmComLib/NY Oct. 28 did, in fact, belatedly provide framework for broadcast commentary on satellite events. However, all such commentary originated in Munich must be filed to AmComLib/NY and approved there prior to use. In view of fast-moving satellite events, such requirement stultified RadioLib output, in opinion station’s staff, and leaves none of the flexibility so essential in present situation. Furthermore, Lib staff points out, such flexibility is a must if satellite revolt shows signs of spreading. For instance, RadioLib anticipates request from FedRep that it broadcast appeals to Sov troops in GDR not to shoot down Germans there. Station’s hands tied in such an eventuality until AmComLib/NY consulted. The frustration of RadioLib staff is further exacerbated by knowledge that both RFE and MRC allowed use locally-originated commentary and are generally permitted wide local discretion in dealing with events as they occur. RadioLib staff feels strongly that continued muzzle will seriously disillusion station’s audience, could do serious harm to best interests of US as well as Commie dominated peoples. Though RadioLib obviously chafing at the bit, we believe that staff’s frustration confined to ban on broadcasts on lines 4 points enumerated second paragraph above and not thwarted desire air inflammatory broadcasts designed, or capable of interpretation, as provocation open revolution in USSR. Able Amer staff of Lib can certainly keep lid on even if best judgment of émigré staff goes off beam.The source text bears the handwritten notation, “Operation Outlook,” and another handwritten notation in a different hand, “11/1/56—reply sent through other channels.” Page 143. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic MissionsSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–3056. Secret. Drafted by Beam and Freers. Washington, October 30, 1956—4:04 p.m. 332. Following is Department’s assessment of recent events in Hungary at present time. Owing to lack of communications with Legation Budapest past few days it has been difficult to follow swift-moving events. Picture at present seems to be that Nagy Government has control of situation in Budapest but that there, as in rest of country, particularly western portion, insurgents occupy number of important points. Rebels consist of two main orientations—National Communists fighting Soviet troops and opposing government as long as it uses them, and anti-Communists with more sweeping aims in direction of democracy. There is some indication they are drawing closer together on anti-Soviet issues, on coordinating fighting activities, and on demanding broadening of Nagy Government. Leaders not known and countrywide violent reaction appears spontaneous outburst. Dominant issue is use of Soviet troops for brutal repression Hungarian people. After cooperating in inviting them to help restore order and after stressing their presence in Hungary legal under Warsaw Pact, Nagy has reversed position and has promised to have them withdrawn from Budapest, on condition fighting stops, and negotiate their final departure from Hungary. Soviets are justifying use of their troops on grounds that rebellion in Hungary incited by US and stess invitation of Hungarian Government in this regard. Official organ of Hungarian Workers (Communist) Party has categorically rejected this interpretation and attributes uprisings to past policies Hungarian regime.Reference is to an October 29 article in Szabad Nep denying Pravda’s assertion that British and U.S. imperialists had instigated the revolt. See Zinner, National Communism, pp. 449–451. Poland and Yugoslavia appear to follow same line, while other Eastern European Communist regimes are supporting Soviet version—thus creating major ideological split on issue in Communist world. Question whether Soviets willing to allow stabilization under Nagy Government committed to withdrawal their troops (with all that implies for other satellite countries) or whether they must proceed to reestablish complete control over country in role of alien occupier (which implies huge military burden for future and nullifies present world posture). US objective at this stage is primarily to encourage cessation of use of Soviet troops against Hungarian people and establish conditions for their eventual withdrawal from Hungary. Security Council action directed toward these ends. Meanwhile, in view delicate balance with regard Nagy regime and its pledge to rid country of Soviet troops, US is refraining at this point from adopting stand on Nagy. Some evidence however regime attempting deception break resistance. US will aim to hold it to promises. Efforts to render emergency assistance to Hungarians in way of drugs and foodstuffs are being encouraged. Consideration being given also to relief assistance in form of other commodities. Dulles 144. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, October 30, 1956, 4:54 p.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Bernau. Washington, October 30, 1956, 4:54 p.m. TELEPHONE CALL FROM THE PRESIDENT The Pres. read his answer to Eden.For text of Eisenhower’s draft message to Eden, see vol. XVI, p. 874. The message was not sent. The Sec. said what a great tragedy it is just when the whole Soviet policy is collapsing the Br and Fr are doing the same thing in the Arab world. The Pres. referred to what he said in the letter re there being no colonialism. He may add he certainly hopes we don’t get in the position the Soviets are in in Hungary. The Pres. will send it over. 145. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 761.13/10–3056. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Paris. Moscow, October 30, 1956—10 p.m. 1003. Tonight at Kremlin reception Zhukov told me flatly Soviet troops had been ordered withdrawn from Budapest. In view importance his statement I give his exact words, “the order has already been given for Soviet forces to leave the city.” He then added with gesture of impatience as if to say let them deal with it themselves. This statement arose from my query to Zhukov concerning his assertion yesterday (Embtel 992)Document 138. that there had been no firing by Soviet troops for last forty-eight hours, mentioning that on every Western radio broadcast there was story Soviet artillery fire in city. Zhukov denied this completely and then added statement given above concerning withdrawal troops from city. He did not mention anything about withdrawal from country, which yesterday he said privately to me and publicly, was matter for Warsaw Pact consideration. Before I could question him as to whether his statement meant that there was sufficient calm in city for Nagy to take over or whether Soviets were acting in accordance with Nagy’s request despite situation there, Molotov came up and intervened in conversation with question concerning Middle East, which will be reported in subsequent message.Telegram 1004 from Moscow, October 30, reported Molotov’s conviction that the United States had been in “cahoots” with England and France and could have prevented the Israeli attack on Egypt. (Department of State, Central Files, 684A. 86/10–3056) Only events will show accuracy Zhukov’s statement, but I can only report it was absolutely without qualification and in contradiction to his statement yesterday on subject reported reftel. Soviet leaders including Khrushchev, Bulganin, Molotov, Kaganovich were noticeably more glum than yesterday and it is possible Zhukov’s statement represented an overnight shift in position based on some events in Hungary unknown to us here. Bohlen 146. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611 00/10–3056. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. On the copy in the Eisenhower Library, Goodpaster wrote “Pres has seen.” (Whitman File, Dulles–Herter Series) Moscow, October 30, 1956—10 p.m. 1005. Personal for the Secretary from Ambassador Bohlen. Embtel 993.In telegram 993 from Moscow October 30, Bohlen indicated that he intended to approach the Soviet leaders at the 6 p.m. Kremlin reception for the visiting Afghan Prime Minister in order to call their attention to the Secretary’s Dallas speech. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.00/10–3056) I had occasion to act on instructions contained Deptel 510Document 134. with Zhukov and Molotov. I did not have opportunity to do so with Bulganin or Khrushchev, although both were present reception, since it would have required special effort on my part which I thought undesirable under watchful eyes correspondents and Dip Corps in view last paragraph. I told Zhukov and Molotov I wanted to direct their attention to your Dallas speech and paragraph in it concerning our policy in regard to Eastern European countries and gave them from memory translation text paragraph. Molotov listened and made no particular comment, but said he would look up speech in question which he felt sure they had from press reports. Zhukov, however, said that he found difficult to reconcile this statement with President’s encouragement “rebels” in Hungary which he thought represented interference Hungarian internal affairs. I said President’s statement was general and reflected feelings American people and in any case words were less of intervention than bullets, to which Zhukov made no reply. Bohlen 147. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–3156. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Paris. Moscow, October 31, 1956—1 p.m. 1006. Embtel 1003.Document 145. Soviet declaration troop withdrawal BudapestSee Document 141. corresponds with what Zhukov told me last night with addition qualification which he did not give concerning request by Hungarian government. However, since according radio last night and this morning Nagy has made such request there would seem to be no essential difference between two statements. Soviet press despatches this morning from Budapest nonetheless contain no reference to any request from Hungarian government, and situation as to actual Soviet actions in this respect remains confused. As previously observed from here (Embtel 969)See footnote 3, Document 123. Soviet policy is reacting to fast developing events outside its borders and depending on these events can and indeed does shift accordingly. It is thus more than possible Soviet policy on withdrawal troops Budapest made to me last night about 7 o’clock by Zhukov and repeated in declaration may be subject to change. For example, if Nagy government has completely lost control and what is termed in declaration “black reaction and counter-revolution” has taken over, this position on troop withdrawal may well be reversed. However, general line declaration which will be further analyzed subsequent messageIn telegram 1016 from Moscow, October 31, Bohlen concluded that the declaration indicated Soviet acceptance of the “basic concepts of national Communism.” He maintained that the Soviets apparently hoped to forestall a repetition of the Hungarian situation in Poland and Romania. He viewed the Soviet withdrawal of forces from all of Hungary as the first test of the Declaration. (Department of State, Central Files, 660.61/10–3156) certainly at time its issuance would indicate Soviet Union preparing cut losses Hungary and accept high degree if not complete independence satellites in general. (Incidentally, due error words Embtel 1003 “as if to say” should not be included, since Zhukov actually said “let them deal with it themselves.”) While subsequent events may change this policy, and in any event Soviets might attempt to dilute in actual implementation, document is important Soviet policy statement in further expansion 20th Party Congress decisions.In telegram 523 to Moscow, October 31, the Department of State summarized the state of affairs in Hungary as follows: “Dept inclined feel Soviets willing depart Hungary if Nagy or a communist government can retain power. Pending such development indications are that Soviet troops may remain at quiescent state at installations outside Budapest in hope that pressure, while not provoking additional disorders, will strengthen hand ‘socialist’ elements.” (Ibid., 764.00/10–3056) Bohlen 148. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–3156. Confidential; Niact. Sent also to Vienna for Edward T. Wailes who was then on his way to Hungary to assume his post. Budapest, October 31, 1956—1 p.m. 200. Legtel 198.Telegram 198 from Budapest, October 31, reported that the Soviets had withdrawn from Budapest except for some key locations. (Ibid.) In dramatic overnight change, it became virtually certain in Budapest this morning that this Hungarian revolution now fact of history. Personal observations, newspaper stories, and radio content tend to confirm complete Soviet troop withdrawal from city, apparently under Hungarian protection. TASS report that Soviets would begin negotiations on removing troops from Hungary confirmed Nagy’s statement (Legtel 176Telegram 176 from Budapest, October 29, summarized Nagy’s October 28 speech. (Ibid., 764.00/10–2956)) which population obviously mistrusted completely at first. Crucial point, however, in our belief, was actual beginning of withdrawal of troops from Budapest. During events of past week, Legation was doubtful that what has happened could be achieved without strongest Western support. That it is taking place is additional evidence of tremendous strength of popular movement, which undoubtedly having profound effect on Soviet policy. Appears logical premise that Soviets, having unilaterally decided to abandon military position in city without guarantee of ultimate nature of government that springs up behind, must be seriously considering departure from Hungary within relatively short period. In view attitude Hungarian army, Legation believes public order will be reasonably maintained. Partisan ferreting out of AVH units already beginning this morning, however, with some sporadic shooting audible, and will probably go on for some time. Virtually no looting has occurred, as far as Legation is aware, nor has any evidence of anti-Semitic outbursts become known to Legation. Question of political future, of course, much more cloudy. Legation informed that Social Democrats now meeting to choose members coalition group. Also informed by partisan that nothing less than American-type western democracy would satisfy population. Present coalition, in any event, appears as transitional government pending emergence of more permanent political parties. Speed and nature of this process by no means clear as yet. Future US role in Hungary also not clear, but seems certain to be very different from past. Hungarian radio phoned this a.m. for foreign news bulletin and Legation attempting obtain same by Telex from Vienna. Our initial view this morning, which may only be highly preliminary, is that would be desirable for President to make statement in very near future. This might indicate US willingness to initiate some type of immediate economic aid, to be followed by broader political and economic discussions. Suggestions for statement follow.Telegram 201 from Budapest, October 31, suggested the following statement: “Entire world has been watching dramatic events in Hungary, as Hungarian people, as on many other occasions, have given their lives for independence from foreign masters. It appears today that new Hungary is emerging before world: A Hungary which we hope from our hearts will reap full benefits of nationhood. To witness this historic moment of national re-emergence of great people is emotionally rewarding experience. “The US has already joined with many other countries in sending medical assistance to Hungary’s wounded. We shall give immediate consideration to economic assistance, and hopeful within short time for increased contacts with Hungary in all fields.” (Ibid., 764.00/10–3156) Barnes 149. Editorial Note In a radio and television address to the American people on “Developments in Eastern Europe and the Middle East” delivered at 7 p.m. on October 31, the President expressed his views on recent events. According to Presidential speech writer Emmet John Hughes, a draft prepared by Secretary Dulles had to be discarded and references “to ‘irresistible’ forces of ‘liberation’ unleashed in Eastern Europe” toned down. See The Ordeal of Power, pages 219–222. A portion of the President’s speech reads: “A few days ago, the people of Poland with their proud and deathless devotion to freedom moved to secure a peaceful transition to a new government. And this government, it seems, will strive genuinely to serve the Polish people. “And all the world has been watching dramatic events in Hungary where this brave people, as so often in the past, have offered their very lives for independence from foreign masters. Today, it appears, a new Hungary is rising from this struggle, a Hungary which we hope from our hearts will know full and free nationhood. “We have rejoiced in these historic events. “Only yesterday the Soviet Union issued an important statement on its relations with all the countries of Eastern Europe. This statement recognized the need for review of Soviet policies, and the amendment of these policies to meet the demands of the people for greater national independence and personal freedom. The Soviet Union declared its readiness to consider the withdrawal of Soviet ‘advisers,’ who have been the effective ruling force in Soviet-occupied countries, and also to consider withdrawal of Soviet troops from such countries as Poland and Hungary. “We cannot yet know if these avowed purposes will be truly carried out. “But two things are clear. “First, the fervor and the sacrifice of the peoples of these countries, in the name of freedom, have themselves brought real promise that the light of liberty soon will shine again in this darkness. “Ana second, if the Soviet Union indeed faithfully acts upon its announced intention, the world will witness the greatest forward stride toward justice, trust, and understanding among nations in our generation. “These are the facts. How has your Government responded to them? “The United States has made clear its readiness to assist economically the new and independent governments of these countries. We have already—some days since—been in contact with the new Government of Poland on this matter. We have also publicly declared that we do not demand of these governments their adoption of any particular form of society as a condition upon our economic assistance. Our one concern is that they be free—for their sake, and for freedom’s sake. “We have also, with respect to the Soviet Union, sought clearly to remove any false fears that we would look upon new governments in these Eastern European countries as potential military allies. We have no such ulterior purpose. We see these peoples as friends, and we wish simply that they be Mends who are free.” For full text, see Department of State Bulletin, November 12, 1956, pages 743–745. 150. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–3156. Secret. Repeated to Budapest and Moscow. Vienna, October 31, 1956—9 p.m. 1022. Since appears this office temporarily may be closer touch situation western Hungary than Legation Budapest following report based on talks Austrian officials and travelers may be helpful: Strength uprising appears be its popular nature. Although US criticized for failure supply any plan or leadership to rebels, this very fact has both weakened Soviet case for intervention and deprived them any specific center which either they or Communist government could capture in effort suppress revolt. Lack of political leadership of patriots however having effect consolidate power of Budapest Government as only effective organization in existence. Many reports here that Communists making great effort infiltrate western liberation committees. West Hungarian patriots appear go further in their demands for full freedom than citizens of capital doubtless because less exposed to Soviet force. KreiskyBruno Kreisky, the Austrian Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. told me convinced many Hungarians deeply concerned at effect revolutionary action will have on Hungarian economy and hence their ability survive coming winter particularly if eventual government not fully acceptable to US. Suggested statement by US that regardless what happened heroic Hungarian people would not be allowed to starve would have salutary effect. For example refusal of miners and others return to work until satisfactory government would be easier maintain if they did not fear eventual effect on food supplies. He also thought west should give direction to political developments possibly through UN. Pointed out assurance eventual withdrawal Soviet troops from Hungary would have little value unless made to western powers or UN, and warned that once revolution lost its momentum would be difficult if not impossible revive it (for this reason I strongly question advisability sending UN Commission to Hungary which I believe my British colleagueSir Geoffrey A. Wallinger. has suggested to British Foreign Office since this would in itself relax pressure without assurance compensating advantage. Observers here seem agreed in distrusting Nagy who clearly not even a Gomulka, and in considering Tildy hopelessly weak and compromised and Kovacs and Anna Kethly most reliable characters on the scene. Following are my tentative personal views admittedly based on incomplete information of rapidly changing situation. Key points with patriots appear be withdrawal Soviet troops and promise free elections. While both highly important, appears danger patriots will overplay their hand and seems unrealistic expect Soviets commit themselves both to withdrawal and elections which would certainly result in anti-Communist government. If opportunity arises suggest therefore we should concentrate on first objective since if achieved, Hungarians could likely insure evolution to democratic government once Soviet troops removed. On other hand if Soviet troops remain even free elections would provide no permanent security Hungarian freedom. Principal cards western hands appear to be potential influence on patriots to restore order and accept interim government, alternative of threat break relations Nagy government, possible willingness our part accept Hungarian neutrality, and possible willingness give economic aid. Presume Department aware risk Wailes presentation credentials to Nagy government may be exploited as endorsement by US of present government. Reports here indicate western Hungarians intend propose Hungary adopt policy neutrality. Believe Austrians would welcome such decision. If negotiations for commitment to west powers or UN by Soviets agree withdraw troops should develop, suggest we could agree in advance recognize Hungarian neutrality if this should be decided upon by a freely elected Hungarian Government. In this connection recall that Austrian willingness declare neutrality was key point in their negotiations Moscow. Realize Soviets will doubtless insist deal Hungarian situation directly. Seen from here their immediate objective is take steam out of revolution and establish government with greatest degree Communist control possible. While clear that Soviets could by force easily and quickly wipe out present opposition in west Hungary our information indicates that any stooge government would find it difficult if not impossible operate and Soviets may face choice of full military occupation or withdrawal. Thompson 151. Draft Statement of Policy by the Planning Board of the National Security CouncilSource: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 5616 Series. Secret. Enclosed with a memorandum from Lay to the NSC dated October 31. Prepared pursuant to NSC Action No. 1623–b, October 26, and transmitted to the NSC for consideration at its November 1 meeting; see infra. An initial draft by the Department of State prepared on October 29 was revised by the Board Assistants on October 30, and then further revised by the Planning Board. Annex A containing public statements by the President and the Secretary of State on this subject has not been printed. Also excluded was Annex B, which was prepared by the International Cooperation Administration to summarize the limitations on assistance to Hungary and Poland. (Ibid.) Washington, October 31, 1956. NSC 5616 U.S. POLICY ON DEVELOPMENTS IN POLAND AND HUNGARY General Considerations 1. Events of great magnitude in Poland and Hungary necessitate an appraisal of the situation and consideration of current U.S. policies, objectives, and courses of action toward those countries. Our initial objective toward the Eastern European satellite area has been to encourage, as a first step toward eventual full national independence and freedom, the emergence of “national” communist governments. While these governments might continue to be in close political and military alliance with the Soviet Union, they would be able to exercise to a much greater degree than in the past independent authority and control in the direction of their own affairs, primarily confined in the first stage to their internal affairs. Poland 2. Developments in Poland appear favorable to the early attainment of this objective. The Gomulka Government has proclaimed its “national independence and equality” and has asserted its right to pursue its own internal road to “socialism”. At the same time it has declared continued loyalty to its alliance with the USSR and, though requesting the retirement of Soviet armed forces to their usual stations, has declared Soviet troops must remain in Poland and East Germany. 3. In Poland, as in Hungary, recent developments have revealed the strong anti-Russian and anti-communist sentiments of the population. Unlike Hungary, the existence of strong leadership in Poland at a critical moment, fear of a reunified Germany with irredentist claims, and the timely promise of reforms, together with an assertion of “national independence” linked with a closely calculated defiance of Russian pressure, evidently has served to enable a reconstituted Polish communist government to set forth on its new course with the acquiescence, if not support, of the majority of Poles. 4. The United States has already indicated directly to the new Government that a Polish request for economic assistance, particularly for wheat or other surplus commodities, would be given sympathetic study. Severe legal and administrative limits are imposed on such assistance.See Annex B. [Footnote in the source text.] On the other hand, opportunities exist for materially aiding Poland (and possibly Hungary) in the general area of trade with the free world. Hungary 5. Developments in Hungary have differed significantly from those in Poland. In Hungary, a nationalist movement, similar to that in Poland, was triggered into national revolt by the intervention of Soviet troops called in by the Hungarian Government in the first hours of its difficulty. The demands of the people on the government have since gone far beyond those originally sought and are now anti-communist as well as anti-Soviet. 6. The situation in Hungary is still fluid and the outcome is difficult to foresee. The Nagy Government, already compromised by the fact of Soviet intervention, is seeking to restore its authority over the country by appearing to accede to many of the demands made upon it. Soviet forces are still in Hungary and the Soviet press has asserted that they are legally there under the terms of the Warsaw Pact. At the request of France, the United Kingdom and the United States, the Hungarian situation has been brought before the UN Security Council under Article 34. Policy Conclusions 8. In the present situation, the Basic Objectives of NSC 5608/1 of July 18, 1956Document 80. remain valid. However, in the light of developments in Poland and Hungary, certain tentative conclusions may now be drawn and certain courses of action can be taken to advance U.S. policies and objectives toward the satellite area. 9. The participation of Soviet troops at the “invitation” of the Hungarian Government in fighting the Hungarian population, and the near intervention of Soviet forces in Poland, illustrate that, at least in those countries where Soviet troops are stationed, the Soviet Union is willing to use its armed forces to prevent the coming into power of a non-communist government, or to prevent a communist government from altering a policy of close military and political alliance with the USSR. 10. Moscow is apparently willing to accept, however reluctantly, a communist government, which, while remaining loyal to its military and political alliance with the USSR, asserts its “national independence” and its right to pursue its own internal road to communism. 11. It seems unlikely that U.S. action short of overt military intervention or obvious preparation for such intervention would lead the USSR deliberately to take steps which it believed would materially increase the risk of general war. Soviet suspicions of U.S. policy and present circumstances which involve Soviet troop movements and alerts probably increase the likelihood of a series of actions and counter-actions leading inadvertently to war. Courses of Action Poland 14. Provided that the outcome of the forthcoming Soviet-Polish talks does not fundamentally alter the situation: a. Make an early approach to the Polish Government in response to its note of October 8 indicating our willingness to discuss with it all problems affecting U.S.-Polish relations. 15. In the development of economic relations with Poland encourage the Poles to devote their energies to the satisfaction of consumer demands and peaceful trade. 16. While avoiding specific endorsement of the Gomulka Government, use whatever capabilities we may possess to influence the new Polish leaders to adhere to and fulfill its commitments for reform made to the Polish people which will advance U.S. objectives.See SNIE 12–2–56. [Footnote in the source text.] 17. Increase contacts and exchanges between Poland and the United States on economic, scientific and cultural bases in the context of NSC 5607. Hungary 18. In pursuing our immediate objectives of discouraging and, if possible, preventing further Soviet armed intervention in Hungary as well as harsh measures of repression or retaliation, mobilize all appropriate pressures, including UN action, on the USSR against such measures [, while reassuring the USSR we do not look upon Hungary or the other Satellites as potential military allies].Defense–JCS propose deletion. [Footnote and brackets in the source text. The JCS contended that the “assurances as proposed would tend to undermine such influence as the United States may have on the government which is established in Hungary, and could in the future operate to our military disadvantage.” Bowie, however, advised the Secretary that this objection “opposes a sound diplomatic move already made by the President.” (Memorandum from the JCS to Secretary of Defense Wilson, October 31, transmitted to the NSC by Lay on November 6, and memorandum from Bowie to Dulles, November 6; both in Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 5616 Series)] 19. In line with this approach, consider whether it is advisable to make in the UN or elsewhere a proposal of Hungarian neutrality on the Austrian model. 25. Encourage the Austrians to maintain their announced policy of granting asylum to Hungarians who may seek it. Aid the Austrians to meet the problem of an increased number of Hungarian refugees by financial and other material assistance from U.S. resources; and encourage other friendly governments to assist. Should a considerable number of Hungarians seek refuge in Austria, urgent consideration will have to be given by the United States and other friendly governments to their immediate care and swift resettlement. General 26. As a matter of high priority, exploit fully throughout the world propaganda opportunities afforded by recent events in Poland and Hungary. 27. The Planning Board should urgently undertake a study of policies and actions which will encourage or bring about withdrawal of Soviet forces from Eastern Germany and Eastern Europe. 28. As soon as developments in the area can be adequately assessed, review “U.S. Policy Toward the Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe” (NSC 5608/1). 29. As a matter of urgency, under currently organized governmental mechanisms, undertake a study of the situation in other European satellites to determine U.S. courses of action in the event of future revolutionary actions or uprisings in those countries which indicate a movement away from control by the USSR. 152. Memorandum of Discussion at the 302d Meeting of the National Security Council, Washington, November 1, 1956, 9–10:55 a.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Drafted by Gleason. The time of the meeting is from the Record of the President’s Daily Appointments. (Ibid.) Washington, November 1, 1956, 9–10:55 a.m [Here follows a paragraph listing the participants at the meeting.] Upon entering the Cabinet Room from his office, the President informed the members of the Council that, except in so far as it was the subject of the DCI’s intelligence briefing, he did not wish the Council to take up the situation in the Soviet satellites. Instead, he wished to concentrate on the Middle East.At 8:40 a.m., Dulles called the President and described the subject of U.S. policy for the Soviet satellites, scheduled to be the major item of discussion at this meeting, as academic since the situation had largely resolved itself. The President expressed the view that it would be good to have a general discussion of Middle Eastern affairs. (Memorandum of telephone conversation, November 1; ibid., Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations) 1. Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. Security The Director of Central Intelligence said that he had a few remarks to make on the situation in Hungary. In a sense, what had occurred there was a miracle. Events had belied all our past views that a popular revolt in the face of modern weapons was an utter impossibility. Nevertheless, the impossible had happened, and because of the power of public opinion, armed force could not effectively be used. Approximately 80% of the Hungarian Army had defected to the rebels and provided the rebels with arms. Soviet troops themselves had had no stomach for shooting down Hungarians, except in Budapest. Mr. Dulles then commented that the Soviet statement of October 30, on Soviet relations with the satellite states, was one of the most important statements to come out of the USSR in the last decade.See Document 141. After summarizing the contents of this statement, Mr. Dulles declared that the main problem facing us today in Hungary was the lack of a strong guiding authority to bring the rebels together. Nagy was failing to unite the rebels, and they were demanding that he quit. Somehow a rallying point must be found in order to prevent chaos inside of Hungary even if the Soviets took their leave. In such a heavily Catholic nation as Hungary, Cardinal MindszentyOn the evening of October 30, Cardinal Mindszenty was released from house arrest. might prove to be such a leader and unifying force. In Poland as well as in Hungary, Mr. Dulles described the economic problem as acute. [Here follow a discussion of the Middle East and agenda item 2; for text, see volume XVI, page 902.] 3. U.S. Policy Toward Developments In Poland And Hungary (NSC Action No. 1623;See footnoote 14, Document 116. SNIE 12–2–56;Document 137. NSC 5616Supra.) The National Security Council:The sentence that follows constitutes NSC Action No. 1628. (Department of State, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council) Deferred action on NSC 5616 until a subsequent meeting. S. Everett Gleason 153. Notes on the 42d Meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, November 1, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/11–156. Top Secret. Drafted by Comstock. Washington, November 1, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman Defense—Colonel Oscar R. Schaaf Defense—Mr. Roger Ernst CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell Office of Spec. Asst. to the President—Mr. Oren M. Stephens USIA—Mr. Alfred V. Boerner OCB—Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Edward L. Freers State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Robert O. Blake State—Mr. Robert M. McKisson State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. Boris H. Klosson State—Mr. John E. Horner State—Mr. Arthur Compton CIA—Mr. Arthur M. Cox USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey [The following notes are not exact quotations.]All brackets are in the source text. Freers: (Read the FBIS reports that the Russian troops had started to reoccupy Budapest, and a rumor from Vienna that Nagy had been removed from office.) Boerner: USIA is playing heavily on the reentry of Soviet troops to Budapest. Ernst: Should we not develop some courses of action under the draft NSC action on Poland and Hungary that the Council did not get to this morning?See the memorandum of discussion, supra. (The general consensus was that this point might be discussed at a later meeting.) Freers: The big question is what is developing in the other satellites. Beam: We have just talked with the Secretary, prior to his departure for New York.The Secretary left Washington at 3 p.m. The thinking in State is that a UN Security Council meeting should be called with the view of asking the Soviets the meaning of the latest reports. McKisson: What steps should be taken in the U.S. Government? Beam: Right now we should concentrate on the discussion and action in the Security Council. It seems we cannot get the subject into the General Assembly at the moment because this Special Session was called to consider only the fighting in the Near East. The thinking in State is that it would be better not to have our Hungarian resolution vetoed in the Security Council; however, the regular General Assembly meeting is still twelve days off.On November 1, Nagy cabled U.N. Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld to protest the entry of more Soviet troops into Hungary and to declare Hungary’s neutrality. He requested the “help of the four great powers in defending the country’s neutrality.” He also requested that the question of Hungarian neutrality be put on the agenda of the forthcoming session of the General Assembly. (U.N. doc. A/3251) At 7 p.m., November 1, Barnes was called to the Hungarian Foreign Office and handed a note verbale informing him of Nagy’s request. (Telegram 213 from Budapest, November 2; Department of State, Central Files, 661.64/11–256) Shortly thereafter, Nagy broadcast the declaration of neutrality to the Hungarian people; for text, see Zinner, National Communism, pp. 463–464. Blake: Should we not discuss measures to develop support of other nations? Beam: We don’t have time for that. Ambassador Lodge will have to handle the operational problem. Freers: It is reported that the Hungarian representatives have been withdrawn.Nagy took over as acting Foreign Minister on November 1. In a second cable to the United Nations, he noted that János Szabó would represent Hungary at the special session of the General Assembly. Cox: The Hungarian Government has asked the Soviet troops to get out. Why not let the Soviets veto our resolution in the Security Council and then take it to the General Assembly? Freers: It may not be possible to get it before a special session of the General Assembly. Beam: We better be sure of where we are going before we put up a firm resolution. [At this point Mr. Beam was called out of the meeting.] Schaaf: How is this situation different from Egypt? Freers: There are many fundamental similarities. Schaaf: It would have a good effect to bring the Hungarian situation to the General Assembly as soon as possible. Freers: We agree, but it would probably have just as good an effect if brought before the Assembly tomorrow. Ernst: About the most you can hope for is to enlist world opinion. Schaaf: We should certainly do no less to the communists than we have done to our allies. Why do we not try to get it before the General Assembly this afternoon? Freers: All of the top people in the General Assembly are concerned with the Suez situation. Schaaf: It would be very dramatic to put up a resolution to the Security Council this afternoon. Blake: Even if it were vetoed, it might be possible to introduce a similar resolution tomorrow in the Security Council to be vetoed again, and then it might be possible to get it into a special session of the General Assembly. Is there any way to get the Yugoslavs to support the insurgents? Campbell: The Yugoslavs would probably help the Hungarian Government which is not a definite U.S. policy as yet. Blake: Would Austrian neutrality prevent the Austrians from helping implement a UN resolution? Compton: They would probably cooperate if there is a firm UN decision. In the absence of UN action, they are strongly friendly to the Hungarians and they will do what is possible within the limits of their neutrality. Freers: There are some indications that the Italians would like to help. Blake: We need a military estimate. Schaaf: We do not know how well the Hungarian armed forces are organized at this time. Cox: If there is a UN resolution, would it be possible to use an airdrop to supply the Hungarians? Freers: If a UN resolution calls for assisting the Hungarian Government to repel invasion, presumably assistance would be granted. But a resolution of this kind raises a lot of big questions. Freers: We are discussing UN action with Mr. Murphy. Boerner: The Soviets must have brought enough troops to put down the revolt. The UN provides the means to mobilize world opinion. Freers: We have a question as to whether we give material aid or restrict ourselves to psychological methods through the UN and elsewhere. If a decision is given to render assistance, do we give enough to save the situation or just enough to hold the Russians off for a while? It would seem desirable to be drafting a resolution for the General Assembly which would provide the basis for assistance if such a decision is made. What is done right now depends upon the countries in the immediate area, unless their air space is violated. Schaaf: It might not be possible to assist them by air drop without getting the Soviet air force committed against us. Ernst: Since it appears almost certain that we will not be assisting the rebels, we should make an offer of asylum and a major effort to evacuate as many of the rebels as possible as refugees. Compton: The Austrians will grant asylum as they have promised, but we will have to do more to help the refugees out than we are now doing. Freers: We could offer all necessary economic assistance to the Hungarian people to carry on the struggle. Blake: That would take time. Psychological measures are about the only ones open to us at the moment. Campbell: We cannot offer economic aid to existing government in the present situation unless a policy decision is taken. Revey: It would appear that we cannot take any concrete action within the next 24 hours which is a pretty unfortunate fact. Boerner: As a psychological measure, we might consider assembling all of the Hungarian émigré leaders on the Austrian border. If they do not wish to form a government-in-exile they might serve as a rallying point. . . . Stephens: Are we sending propaganda to the Soviet troops in Hungary? Campbell: Radio Free Europe is urging them not to shoot the Hungarians. These programs are in Russian and beamed to the Soviet troops. Boerner: It would appear desirable to slow down on our East-West exchange note negotiations with the USSR. Blake: That is pretty clear. There are a lot of little things that we will have to watch. PBCOCB Staff Representative 154. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 661.68/11–156. Confidential; Niact. Sent also to Moscow and Vienna. Budapest, November 1, 1956—9 p.m. 209. Legation comment Legtel 208.Telegram 208 from Budapest, November 1, summarized telegram 213, cited in footnote 5, supra. (Department of State, Central Files, 661.64/11–156) Following possibilities suggest themselves: 1. Soviets have decided to rattle a few words in order suppress increasing demands from right, and Nagy proved stronger than anticipated, thus placing Soviets in present box. 2. Soviets have decided that recent developments here have meant that strongly anti-Soviet Government will eventually be installed, and in view Middle East developments and prestige losses already suffered in Hungary, have decided their best interests dictate maintenance of position here at all costs. 3. This is trick agreed to by Soviets to strengthen Nagy’s hand against ever-increasing demands from right. To us, (1) and (2) seem more likely than (3), but this a matter of global policy and impossible gauge from here. At moment, we have no stronger suggestion than immediate and strongest protest to Moscow. This protest might, however, also accept Hungarian proposal of neutral status supported by four powers. Would suggest Legation pass copy immediately to Hungarian Government. Barnes 155. Editorial Note At the Acting Secretary’s Staff Meeting at 9:15 a.m. on November 2, the following topics were discussed: “Intelligence Failure—Mr. Murphy said that it should not go unremarked that in the three separate crises of Poland, Hungary and the Middle East there had been no notice whatsoever from intelligence sources and that there seemed to be a complete lack of any intelligence which could have permitted an anticipation of the events. . . . ” Discussion on Hungary followed: “Hungary—Mr. Hoover felt that the Hungary situation was being lost and that we should have very promptly a review of what actually has gone on and particularly what we have done so that adequate publicity attention could be kept on the situation. Mr. Beam stated that we still are not sure what we can do until we know more of the government with which we would deal. Mr. Hoover wanted included in the round-up of activity a good analysis of the aid and in so doing he asked Mr. Murphy to move ahead on the disaster relief under PL–480 of up to $30 million worth.” (Department of State, Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75) The President issued a statement on November 2 authorizing “an initial allocation of $20 million from the funds appropriated by the Congress for emergency use, to be employed for food and other urgent relief necessary for the alleviation of their [the Hungarian people’s] sufferings.” For full text, see Department of State Bulletin, November 12, 1956, page 764. 156. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) in New York, November 2, 1956, 4:11 p.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Bernau. November 2, 1956, 4:11 p.m. TELEPHONE CALL TO AMB. LODGE L. said he has the Br and Fr next door in a very emotional condition—they say there will be a bad impression at home if we are in a hurry to get them on the dockIn the early hours of November 2, the U.N. General Assembly passed Resolution 997 (ES–I), introduced by the United States and opposed by the United Kingdom, France, and Israel. It called for an immediate cease-fire, withdrawal of forces behind armistice lines, and following a cease-fire, the reopening of the Suez Canal. (U.N. doc. A/3256). and drag in Russia. L. told them that was unjustified. The Sec. said they want the limelight off them and have the 3 of us go together. The Sec. thinks it is a mockery for them to come in with bombs falling over Egypt and denounce the SU for perhaps doing something that is not quite as bad. L. agrees. The Sec. wants no part of it. L. is glad to hear that. The Sec. said no res this p.m.—discuss the situation and suggest it be useful to get a representative of the new Hungarian govt as quickly as possible and one is more or less en route and we should watch it carefully and have this fellow get here fast. L. does not think it possible for us to agree on a res. The Sec. said we don’t have any hard info as to what is going on in Hungary—no doubt re Egypt. Keep it on the agenda. L. will say we will be glad to attend the meeting—trying to get the rep here to get facts but impossible to take a stand on a res.Telegram 236 to USUN, November 2, confirmed the substance of this conversation in respect to the procedure to be adhered to at the Security Council meeting on Hungary. Every effort was to be made to dissuade the French from tabling a substantive motion and, failing success in that, steps were to be taken to defer a vote. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–256) [Here follows discussion of the Middle East. For text, see volume XVI, page 938.] 157. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic MissionsSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–256. Confidential. Drafted by Blake (EUR/EE) and cleared in draft with Freers, McKisson, and Trivers. Sent to London, Paris, Vienna, Rome, Bonn, New Delhi, Tokyo, Belgrade, Bucharest, Prague, Warsaw, Ankara, Athens, Teheran, Rio de Janeiro, Moscow, Berlin, Frankfort, Munich, Buenos Aires, Mexico City, and Stockholm. Washington, November 2, 1956—10:16 p.m. 349. Following is Department’s tentative appraisal present situation: Sov Oct. 30 declaration on withdrawalSee Document 141. appears reflect basic Sov decision it must now change nature its relationship with its Eastern European satellites by withdrawing advisers, altering its one-sided economic relationships, and giving appearance willingness discuss withdrawal Sov troops where and when such steps necessary appease national feelings these countries and support national Communist regimes there. Declaration, which is logical further development of 20th Party Congress CPSU endorsement “various roads to socialism”, promised (1) discuss “measures insure further development economic ties”; (2) “examine together with other states question whether further stay Sov advisers (in satellites) is expedient”; (3) “examine with other socialist countries which are participants in Warsaw Treaty questions of Sov troops stationed in those countries.” Sovs appear feel nationalist and anti-Sov feeling has reached danger point where losses must be cut by accepting high degree independence satellites, but within “socialist” framework. Sovs probably hope maintain their influence through (1) national communist leaders’ ideological identification with Sovs and their need for ultimate support against anti-communism; (2) growing degree economic integration, even though trade will be on terms more favorable to satellites and Sovs will have to give some economic aid; (3) and, at least in Poland and Czechoslovakia, fear of German resurgence. Hungary may prove test case this policy. Here Sov influence has deteriorated to point where apparently growing number national communists are for moment taking open anti-Sov line in supporting Hungarian Government’s (1) demand for early withdrawal Sov troops, (2) proclamation Hungary’s neutrality and withdrawal from Warsaw Pact, and (3) intention allow major modification collectivized agriculture and holding new general elections. At present not clear whether Sovs feel Hungarian developments threaten commie control Eastern Europe to point Hungarian rebellion must be crushed. Sov troops continue control access to Budapest plus commanding military positions throughout country from which could crush Hungarian rebellion. Sovs probably desire continue avoid battle with Hungarian Government; may feel Hungarian estimate hopelessness their position will force that Government take actions reverse major anti-communist decisions. In using pressure to this end, Soviet Union will have support of Czechoslovakia and Rumania. Poland and Yugoslavia, while both insisting on withdrawal foreign troops, give signs using influence maintain at least communist-dominated Hungarian Government. Nagy if possible. Possibility Sov involvement in Middle East plus situation in other satellites are factors still unknown magnitude which may tend influence Sovs postponeThe word “final” was written on the source text above “postpone.” decision. Sovs give every indication continuing accommodate self to Poland’s drive for autonomy on internal matters, on basis Poland’s apparent determination maintain communist-dominated government and “socialist” internal order plus close alliance with Soviet Union. Close identification of Sov-Polish interests in maintaining Sov control in East Germany (and for Poles’ need for long-term support in retaining western territories) probably presage continuing Polish-Sov military cooperation, though on new basis. For number reasons (such as national character of peoples, varying degrees of economic distress, and lack of strong living national communist leaders), Governments of Czechoslovakia, Rumania, Bulgaria, and Albania are in hands of leaders closely identified with “Stalinist” policies in Eastern Europe. Troop issue only present in Rumania, and declaration Sov willingness negotiate for their withdrawal takes off pressure at this point for immediate future. Sovs must now find ways strengthen hand leaders these countries as most pro-Sov leaders they could hope find. East Germany is separate problem. Here every indication is that Sovs will stand on present positions of maintaining in power “Stalinist”-East German regime by 400,000 man Sov occupation force. Sovs appear continue regard their ability block German reunification as their trump card, and they are apparently willing defend with force their East German position. Absence national communist leaders of stature, “wait and see” attitude East German people, and increased GDR internal security measures are factors tending stabilize conditions there for present. Appears likely Sovs recognize magnitude seriousness pressures created by recent developments in Hungary and particularly Poland will have on their East German position. Dulles 158. Telegram From the Mission at the United Nations to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–256. Confidential; Priority. New York, November 2, 1956—11 p.m. 475. Re Hungarian situation. In conversations with Dixon (UK) and de GuiringaudLouis de Guiringaud, Alternate French Representative at the Security Council. (France) prior SC session this afternoonThe 752d Security Council meeting took place between 5 and 8:50 p.m. (U.N. doc. S/PV.752) I found them determined to proceed with meeting today and to press substantive resolution to vote.Telegrams 474 and 476 from USUN, November 2, provided the text of the British and French draft resolutions, respectively. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–256) French Delegation said had instructions call meeting and present substantive resolution today alone if necessary. UK and France confident they could get 8 votes for French substantive resolution tonight without US. They wanted to move into emergency GA as fast as possible after veto. Claimed could get over 53 votes in GA. Ensuing discussion was strained and difficult. Dixon justified immediate drive for SC veto by Soviets on ground that situation changed since they proposed two-staged SC operation in tripartite meeting October 29.Telegram 434 from USUN, October 29, spelled out this strategy. Dixon proposed that the first stage consist of speeches against the Soviets and the introduction of a procedural resolution to suspend Council deliberations for 48 hours to allow time for the conclusion of negotiations for the withdrawal of all Soviet forces from Hungary. The second stage was to involve a substantive resolution, the full nature of which had not yet been determined. The likelihood of the substantive resolution was to be made known, but not the possibility of the procedural maneuver. (Ibid., 764.00/10–2956) He has heard reports new Soviet troops entering and taking control Hungary.Nagy wrote to Hammarskjöld on November 2 reporting that new Soviet military units had entered Hungary. He requested the Secretary-General to call upon the “Great Powers” to recognize Hungarian neutrality. (U.N. doc. S/3726) Further charged US has lost interest in Hungary and now only wants increase pressure on UK and France under GA Suez resolution.See footnote 2, Document 156. He said he believed US working on false assumption that UK advocating drastic action on Hungary in order to counteract effect of GA resolution. I explained US has not lost interest in Hungary but considers situation there too confused to permit our pressing substantive resolution to final vote.Lodge’s address of November 2 is in U.N. doc. S/PV.752, pp. 9–10. Dixon said he now understood our view more clearly but strongly requested that we ask Department to call on British Chargé, Washington and also have Embassy London tell UK FonOff of reasons our stand. Otherwise he feared official UK reaction to our refusal seek final action against USSR will be highly critical. OrdonneauPierre Ordonneau, Adviser for Security Council Affairs. (France) made same request re French. Strongly recommend this be done earliest. RamsbothamPeter E. Ramsbotham, First Secretary and Head of the British Chancery. (UK) individually approached two USUN officers to say UK not at all worried by pressure from GA resolution. They motivated only by sincere anxiety over Hungarian developments. We finally agreed on following course of action: 1. UK and France would not put in substantive resolution tonight and I would not put in procedural one. 2. I would make early speech tonight. 3. Cuba or another member would be requested after round speeches suggest no further action possible tonight. 4. There would be another SC meeting tomorrow afternoon. 5. We would consult tomorrow morning on both substantive and procedural resolutions. Dixon requested agreement that three powers would “work towards” agreed substantive resolution. I agreed to consult about one, and said they could inform governments they were “making progress”. Request authority introduce substantive as well as procedural resolution tomorrow with priority for ours. Substantive resolution should include paragraph for appointment committee with names states left blank if Department wants delay vote to avoid veto although delay entails risk that UK and France will get priority. We can thus keep resolution pending until we are ready to vote on it. Cannot be sure however that we can persuade both UK and France to agree not press for SC condemnation and Soviet veto. During our meeting they several times pointed out they could force our hand by introducing such resolution on their own. We believe resolutions should be introduced by US and not be tripartite.At 11:10 a.m. on November 3, President Eisenhower met with Acting Secretary Hoover and Legal Adviser Herman Phleger to discuss the approach to take on the Hungarian question in the Security Council. “Mr. Hoover said he is confronted with two problems at the moment. The first relates to the Hungarian resolution. The Security Council is meeting at 3 P.M. today to take up this matter. The Hungarians are asking for UN help, and the British and French want us to join them in a resolution on the matter. Mr. Phleger said Secretary Dulles did not want to join the British and French, and the President said that such a thought was almost absurd.” (Memorandum of conversation; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President) Please instruct urgently. Lodge 159. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–556. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London and Paris. Moscow, November 3, 1956—noon. 1048. Embtel 1044.Telegram 1044 from Moscow, November 2, stated that Bulganin informed Bohlen that a mixed Soviet/Hungarian Commission would be created to take up the questions of the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Hungary and Hungarian ties to the Warsaw Pact. (Ibid., 764.00/11–256) The next evening Khrushchev indicated to the Ambassador that negotiations were continuing and that it would be straightened out. When asked whether the Soviets were still introducing troops into Hungary, Khrushchev replied that they had enough there but would add more if necessary. (Telegram 1057 from Moscow, November 3; ibid., 764.00/11–356) Soviet press today contains no reference to any mixed commission. BBC last night, however, in Budapest report listed reactivation mixed commission concerning Soviet troops in Hungary as one of requests Hungarian government in note to Soviets. From tone of press, however, this morning, and particularly domestic broadcast Moscow radio yesterday evening, it seems clear, as mentioned reftel, mixed commission is little more than device to gain time for preparations armed action in Hungary. If BBC information correct, it is not creation of new or high level commission that is involved, but at best merely meeting of already existing, presumably low-level, body which hardly represents any serious intention Soviet government to negotiate with Hungarian government. It is also possible that commission gambit will be used by Soviets in SC debate in hopes forestalling SC action and to confuse issue. From my conversations with Zhukov (Embtels 992 and 1003)Documents 138 and 145. Hungarian situation, I received, as already reported, distinct impression Soviet military had been in favor strong action both in Poland and Hungary, and yesterday at Syrian reception both Zhukov and SokolovskyMarshal Vasili Danilovich Sokolovsky, chief of the Soviet General Staff, Deputy Minister of Defense, and a member of the Party Central Committee. had air of satisfaction and even triumph in contrast to Zhukov’s state frustration in previous talks. Soviet press and radio treatment, which will be covered in separate message,Telegram 1061 from Moscow, November 3, summarized press reports. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–356) seem to be moving direction depicting Hungarian Government as “counter-revolutionary” thus removing it from application declaration on relations with “Socialist” countries. Exact effect of Anglo/French action against Egypt in Hungarian matters cannot be determined, but it is possible that diversion world opinion Hungarian situation has led Soviets to believe they have freer hand in this regard. On other hand, armed action against Hungarian people will be difficult even for Soviet propaganda to reconcile with posture defense independent small nations Middle East question and should blunt edge Soviet propaganda campaign. In addition tone Soviet press strongest indication probability impending Soviet action is of course reinforcements being sent into Hungary, and I should have mentioned in reftel that among other reasons for placing no credence Bulganin’s statement was he used classic Soviet cover-up phrase that reports of reinforcements “do not correspond to reality”. Throughout Hungarian problem, as we have frequently reported from here, Soviets confronted simple choice as events have developed either to cut their losses and remove troops under best face-saving cover that could be devised, or else return to open use of force and in effect military occupation Hungary. There has undoubtedly been considerable discussion in Soviet leadership on this point with careful thought consequences either course of action. Indications, although never conclusive until event, seem to point to basic decision to use of force if necessary to keep Hungary in Soviet camp. Soviets may not proceed immediately to use of force but, depending upon attitude Hungarian government, may seek through mixed commission or other device to soften up Nagy and Hungarian Communists with “promises” concerning troop withdrawal in order to induce rebels to surrender arms. If, however, Nagy stands firm it looks at this moment as though Soviet troops would go into action. Apart from UN action in SC I presume Department has given consideration to some approach here, which, although of doubtful effect if Soviets have made basic decision, might have some value for the record. If any such approach were made it would have to be, I believe, direct to Bulganin in name of President. Bohlen 160. Editorial Note At 3 p.m. on November 3, the Security Council once again took up the question of Hungary. After summarizing developments over the past few days, Ambassador Lodge asked Hungarian Representative Szabó whether he had any current information on Nagy’s November 2 letter. He also queried Sobolev about reports from Hungary which contradicted his earlier assurance that Soviet troops had not been reinforced. He asked both of them to comment on the status of the Hungarian-Soviet Mixed Commission negotiations. Then he discussed the key elements of a draft resolution (S/3730), which the United States intended to propose. It called for the end of Soviet intervention in the internal affairs of Hungary and for the withdrawal of all Soviet forces without delay. The Secretary-General was to be requested urgently to examine and to report on the relief needs of the Hungarian people. Szabó replied that all he knew personally was the text of Nagy’s communications to the Secretary-General. He did state, however, that Soviet-Hungarian military negotiations had taken place and would resume at 10 p.m. that night. This led to a Yugoslav motion for adjournment so as not to impede ongoing negotiations. The French and British Representatives were not so sanguine and thus Dixon advocated adoption of the draft United States resolution. In respect to this matter, Ambassador Lodge then stated: “We are still disturbed by the wide differences between Soviet Union words about troop withdrawals and Soviet Union actions, as evidenced in news reports. We believe, accordingly, that adjournment for a day or two would give a real opportunity to the Hungarian Government to carry out its announced desire to arrange for an orderly and immediate evacuation of all Soviet troops. But, clearly, the Security Council must keep this matter under urgent consideration. It may well be necessary for the Council to meet tomorrow, as the representative of Cuba suggests, if events do not bear out the reports which we have heard today. In this spirit I should be willing, as I said, to adjourn until tomorrow or the next day, but I should wish to hear the Soviet Union representative, if it is agreeable to him, before we adjourn today—and, of course, any other representative who may wish to speak.” Ambassador Sobolev in a brief comment confirmed that Soviet negotiations with Hungary were continuing. The fact that the General Assembly was scheduled to resume its consideration of the Middle Eastern situation at 8 p.m. led the President of the Council, Nasrollah Entezam of Iran, to push for a decision as to when to continue the discussion of Hungarian developments. Australia favored 5 p.m., on November 4. Since only six nations supported this time—which was opposed by the Soviet Union while the United States abstained—the Australian proposal failed to carry. The Council President then suggested that the next meeting be held at 10:30 a.m. on November 5 and his view was adopted. (U.N. doc. S/PV.753) At that hour in Washington, Murphy told the French Ambassador, Hervé Alphand, that the United States did not wish to take “precipitate action in the Security Council which would look foolish a few hours later nor on the other hand would we wish to take steps which might be used by the Soviets as a provocation for strong action. Ambassador Alphand then urged that the United States make clear publicly and officially its reasons for going along with a delay regarding Soviet intervention in Hungary at the same time that it is pressing ahead at full speed with respect to the British and French action in the Middle East.” (Memorandum of conversation by Bennett, November 3; Department of State, Central Files, 320.5780/11–356) 161. Telegram From the Department of State to the Legation in HungarySource: Department of State, Central Files, 123–Wailes, Edward T. Secret; Priority. Drafted by McKisson and cleared by him and by Freers. Repeated to Vienna. Washington, November 3, 1956—6:50 p.m. 199. Department believes you should act at once present credentials (Vienna’s 1071Telegram 1071 from Vienna, November 2, reported Kriesky’s opinion that Wailes should present his credentials soon in order to help Nagy establish his authority. (Ibid.) and 1022;Document 150. Deptel 1259Telegram 1259 to Vienna, November 2, instructed Wailes not to arrange the presentation of his credentials pending clearance and specific directives from the Department of State. If he was pressed upon his arrival, he was to reply that he was awaiting official instructions and report the matter to the Department along with his recommendations. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–3156) repeated Budapest 181) and seek establish official contact highest levels Hungarian Government on urgent, close and continuing basis. Factors dictating this action include: (1) Implications current Soviet military movements; (2) Hungarian Government’s apparent acceptance and identification itself with popular demands and people’s struggle freedom and independence; (3) Hungarian Government’s forthright appeal US and UN for assistance in critical situation attended by its forceful protest against entrance new Soviet troops, its repudiation Warsaw Pact, its demand withdrawal all Soviet forces, and its proclamation neutrality. (4) Desirability that you enjoy proper formal access Hungarian authorities for prompt interchanges between Governments. Accordingly request Foreign Office arrange earliest possible audience with President of Presidential Council or other appropriate Hungarian authorities for this purpose. You should state US Government attaches importance and high priority this matter. Following is revised text remarks for your use occasion: Begin. Mr. President: In presenting the Letter accrediting me as Minister of the United States of America to the Government of Hungary, and the Letter recalling my predecessor, I express to Your Excellency, on behalf of the Government and people of the United States, warmest greetings to the people of Hungary. In this momentous hour of their national life, the Hungarian people have shown highest courage, integrity of purpose, and unfaltering spirit. Their just struggle for freedom and independence commands the sympathy and the admiration of the entire world. My Government understands and supports these aspirations of the people of Hungary. Deeply moved by the anguish and the heroic sacrifices which the Hungarian people have endured, and honoring the traditional friendship which exists between the Hungarian and the American peoples, my Government is acting urgently at this time to espouse the cause of Hungarian freedom and independence before the United Nations and to contribute all possible assistance for the alleviation of human suffering in Hungary. In accordance with the clear purposes of my Government, I assure Your Excellency that I shall devote myself earnestly and unceasingly to the promotion of good will and friendly understanding between Hungary and the United States and to the advancement of those ideals and principles which inspire our two peoples, give rise to mutual interests, and ensure the welfare of both countries. It is my sincere hope that my efforts in this regard will engage the full cooperation of the Hungarian Government. I now present to Your Excellency my Letter of Credence as Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to the Government of Hungary and the Letter of Recall of my predecessor, Mr. Christian M. Ravndal. End. Department proposes release press text remarks promptly upon receipt your telegraphic notification presentation credentials has taken place. Dulles Suppression of the Hungarian Rebellion by the Soviet Union, November 4–13, 1956: Fall of the Nagy Government and the Rise to Power of Kádár; Discussion of the Hungarian Question in the U.N. General Assembly 162. Transcript of a Teletype Conversation Between the Legation in Hungary and the Department of State, November 3–4, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 661.64/11–456. Official Use Only. Transmitted in an unnumbered telegram from Budapest, which is the source text. The telegram indicates the telex connection began at 11:45 p.m., November 3, and ended at 5:15 a.m., November 4. This corresponds to 5:45 a.m. to 11:15 a.m. on November 4, Budapest time, although specific times mentioned in the source text indicate the conversation began at least as early as 5:25 a.m. Budapest time. November 3–4, 1956 The Minister is out at present. Have someone out looking for him but in meantime in the event this circuit goes out Bruegl would like to inform you that it appears the Russian artillery and mortar has begun falling on outskirts of Budapest at 0500 local time. Min pls. Hope that Minister can be located soon. From Wailes, note 040525 local time. Interesting to note that firing in suburbs started at exactly 0500 local time. Guns are heavy caliber and to date firing appears to be going out from city rather than [garble]. Local broadcasts are reporting it. Either Nagy or Tildy have advised people to take to cellars as the city is being occupied. That’s all for now however we would like to hold the CKT for while yet. Pls get this to watch officer immediately. Watch officer here, also Fisher Howe, if Mr. Wailes has anything special for Secretariat. From Wailes 040530. Unconfirmed reports convoy across border. Have you any info to this report? Wailes from Howe. Did United States dependents get out to Vienna today on second try? Hope you are aware of our immediate protest to Russian Ambassador here on word that they had been turned back. From Wailes 040533. We do not know if they are out. But someone has reported that VOA has reported that they were out. We are checking now to see if any last minute dope on that. From Wailes 040535 local time. Tildy secretary has just phoned to say Russians attacking in all Hungary. He requested [reported?] us that the Hungarian Govt is asking for US for our aid. From Wailes 040540 local time. Broadcast at 0545 reputedly Nagy stated Russians advancing on city and presently engaged with Hungarian Army.At 5:20 a.m. Nagy reported to the Hungarian people that Soviet troops had attacked Budapest. For text, see Zinner, National Communism, p. 472. Prior to the intervention, Soviet leaders consulted from November 1 to 3 with their counterparts in Poland, Bulgaria, Romania, Czechoslovakia, the People’s Republic of China, and Yugoslavia. Mićunović describes the nature of the conversation between Khrushchev and Tito at Brioni, which lasted from 7 p.m., November 2, to 5 a.m., November 3: Khrushchev described developments in Hungary as a counterrevolution in which Communists were being murdered and gave forewarning of the Soviet intention to crush the revolt. Mićunović credits Tito with being able to persuade Khrushchev to consider putting Kádár at the head of the new regime instead of Münnich. The Yugoslavs, who accepted the need for the intervention, also encouraged a confession of past errors in Hungary. (Moscow Diary, pp. 132–141) For another version of the same conversation, see Khrushchev Remembers, pp. 420–422. From Wailes 040544. We think there is enough in these reports that we have started priority material destruction. AmLegation Budapest. This State Washington. Is this the Legation Budapest? Yes we were cut off. Do you have any further word on the American dependents that tried to enter Austria yesterday? The answer is we have not but we are trying to find out. Suggest you present your credentials. You may act on this immediately if feasible. And if desirable in your view. The above from Beam. Did you get that? Yes, recd it fine. Minister is out of Telex at moment. Will try to locate him and give msg to him immediately. From Wailes to Beam 040642 local time. Things have been quiet for approx ten minutes. Don’t yet know what this means. Streets patrolled and Parliament Square well filled with Hungarian troops. Re presenting credentials doubt at the moment if could find the gentleman on whom I should call even if I could navigate streets. Will therefore wait temporarily to see what present lull means. State Minister has just rung our doorbell. Will sign off for minute to see what he has on his mind. OK we stand by here. Think you would like to know we are getting in touch with Lodge who is asking for a Council meeting immediately.Ambassador E. Ronald Walker of Australia interrupted the 563d meeting of the General Assembly, which was discussing the Suez crisis, to make known news reports of the Soviet intervention and his own intention of seeking Security Council consideration of that matter. Some 20 minutes later, Ambassador Lodge announced the Legation was under bombardment. He advised the members that he had asked for a meeting of the Security Council and he was pleased that one would soon take place. (U.N. doc. A/PV.563, pp. 69 and 71) The Assembly adjourned at 3:05 a.m. on November 4, the 754th meeting of the Security Council having begun 5 minutes earlier. See Document 164. No other news for the moment except good luck. We still standing by. OK Tnx. Will pass note on to Min. We will pass on to you immediately any news that comes in from New York. That would be highly appreciated here. We also have call in to Vienna and will give you any news we can develop on the convoy. That also would be appreciated as some of the husbands are quite worried about the safety their wives and children. The sooner you can supply info believe the better in order that they will know one way or other. Please assure all concerned that we are highly sympathetic and doing all possible to get the dope. Roger. Will deliver last note to Minister if I can find him. Will be back. OK we standing by. Beam from Wailes 040655 local time. Have examined credentials State Minister and find he is one of the ones appointed yesterday. Will give you his name in few mins. He tells me Nagy has gone to Soviet Embassy and has not returned. The Minister downstairs says he is therefore one of the two Cabinet members now acting. He has a message which he wishes transmitted to President. We are now translating it. He says it is most urgent. Note received OK. Min stand by. Beam from Wailes 040658 local time. Translation proceeding as rapidly as possible, in meantime Minister says Soviet tanks at second bridge. In fact report is that they have two main bridges each about half mile from Legation. We also hear that Ministry Defense completely surrounded. From Wailes 040718 local time. The translation is now coming along. The note was delivered by BiboIstván B. Bibo had been named to the Cabinet by Nagy on November 3. Later he was sentenced to life in prison. State Minister member of the Peasant now Petofi Party. Tildy is the other State Minister on the job. Here is message:Bracketed corrections in the source text have been made from the copy of the message found in Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles–Herter Series. “Hungary in its present exceptionally difficult situation turns with particular confidence to the love of peace, the wisdom, and the bravery which the President up to now has so often firmly shown. Although the people of Hungary are determined to resist with desperation the attack upon them, there is no doubt that in this unequal struggle it will be defeated if it does not receive help. In this moment [the] most necessary kind of help is political not military. It is clear that the new phase of the USSR’s intentions is related to the British intervention in Egypt. The subjugation of Hungary, however, would not only signify renewal of oppression in this country but it would also stop the liberation trend[s] which have started so hopefully in the other East European countries; it would also bankrupt the ten year old American liberation policy which was pursued with so much firmness and wisdom. It would create a crisis in the confidence of all the East European people in the USA and [the other lands]. On the other hand in view of the adverse effects of the Egyptian intervention—it would bring to the fore [new] isolationist currents, which as testified to by experiences gained up to now, would be the most certain road to the [inception] of World War two [three]. This is the historical moment to which both President Eisenhower and Secretary [of] State Dulles referred in earlier speeches when they said that only by risking a world war can a sure way be found to avert the outbreak of a new world war. Without attempting in any way to give advice, we cannot forego bringing to the attention of the President the possibility that taking into account the most difficult consequences he can on [the] one hand bring the Western powers to end the Egyptian intervention by acting as intermediary in an armistice and on the other hand he can call on the Soviet Union to quickly withdraw its troops from Hungary. We know that the moral significance of the simultaneous execution of the two measures is as great [a] practical difficulty as carrying them out.” That is all that has been translated up to now. Min. Beam to Wailes. Believe Lodge will speak very shortly at the General Assembly. Meeting of the Security Council will probably be held early today, Sunday. A few jets overhead but no immediate street fighting. Still no news from convoy and Soviet Embassy says they do not know what is going on here in town. Rest of message from Cabinet Minister states in brief fate of world depends on President. From Wailes 040737. Just made phone contact convoy (Min). Will tell you in minute which side of border they are on. Min pls. From Wailes 040740. Sorry was not convoy. Lots of action here but nothing new to give you for the moment. May have something in moment. For your info Mr. Beam, Freers, McKisson, Lincoln White, Leverich, et al here at my side. OK Min. Wailes reading over shoulder as this comes in. He got that fine. Just having coffee at present—sure is good. We hope that soon we will have info on dependents. All husbands standing by for any info when you get it pls relay to Budapest soonest. We will certainly forward to you immediately anything we develop. In the meantime can you give us the rest of the text of the message to the President? From Wailes 040750. Here rest message except for an eight line sentence which we cannot make out. “We are not in the position to further pursue these suggestions but we strongly emphasize that in this moment the fate of Eastern Europe and the entire world depends on the action of the President; the next few critical days will determine whether we enter on a path of peace and liberation or whether we shall increase the appetite of aggression and proceed to a certain world catastrophe.” Note the Security Council is meeting within a few mins. From Wailes. We are delighted and hope to get you today for Lodge as accurate information on Soviet build up as possible. We Americans have actually seen numbers of tanks bearing markings. The Cardinal is now at the door and we are now taking him in.See the editorial note, infra. I’ll speak with him and be right back. OK standing by. Minister Wailes has gone down stairs. Will return shortly. From Wailes 040758. Cardinal accompanied by his secretary, can we also take him in? Min will have answer moment. OK fine. Am still here. Will have the reply soon as they come in—any second now. We still waiting here. Minister Wailes sitting here awaiting Department’s answer. Here is reply—let the secretary in! From Wailes 040800. Henceforth will admit only Americans unless instructions from you. Can you get statement from Cardinal Mindszenty? From Wailes. Am now asking him. In meantime so far as we know there are only about eight Americans other than Legation here in city. They are journalists and we will take them in if they come. Who are they please? Moment will see if we can get the list. Is GarstRoswell Garst. party still there? Moment. From Wailes 040808. They (Garst party) left their hotel last ThursdayNovember 1. and we have checked but we assume they are safely out of Hungary. OK. Stand by. Any progress on Mindszenty statement? Am checking. Pls hold on. Minister Wailes has gone down on ground floor to see what has developed along those lines he should be back shortly. We hope to have something for you soon in few mins. OK. Have you names of journalists? We are also checking. There is a list in the Legation someplace and someone has gone up to third floor to see if it still around. Anything else we can do for you? What is situation outside of Legation now? Am here alone now. Have blinds down and some safes against window. Cannot see a thing from here but it appears to me to be rather quiet. However as I say it is pretty noisy and this room is rather sealed off for over a week we put the safes by window to stop any bullets from entering this room and reduce the possibility of damage the Telex equipment and personnel working this section of Legation. From Wailes 040818. Here translation of Cardinal’s statement: “Under the pretense of serious negotiations the assembling Soviet troops at dawn occupied the Hungarian capital and the entire country. I protest against this aggression and I ask for forceful and speedy defense of my country from the USA and other powers.” End Statement. Did you get that OK? Yes. OK. Note from Wailes 040820. Several American newspapermen in group and believed to be all that are here have phoned from Duna Hotel. They have tentatively decided not to take refuge in Legation unless permitted to bring a few German and other non Hungarian assistants with them. What about it? End Note. From Wailes 040825. Just heard that Russians have taken over Parliament building about two blocks from Legation. End note. Do you have any contact with British and other Western Legations? From Wailes 040825. No not at moment, however am now trying to get British. In meantime here names American correspondents. [Here follows the list of American news correspondents.] That’s fine. We are still trying to reach Vienna regarding convoy. Stand by. Have something coming up. OK we still awaiting a reply to that qry and feel quite sure that the husbands are very anxious to hear of their whereabouts if at all possible. From Wailes 040830. Have contacted British Legation and they know nothing more than we. They are sitting tight. (As we) Wailes from Beam. Regret cannot authorize further refuge for other than American nationals. If you are still able to communicate you may recommend exceptions. Otherwise must leave to your judgment. From Wailes 040833. I think we must stick to Americans for the reason that food in the city is getting short and we must keep those at Legation at minimum from standpoint our supplies which are sufficient for us as well as possibility water shortage. (Min) Just heard from Cardinal some time ago he saw white flag raised on Parliament building. Unable to confirm. We at the Legation are grateful for this machine being installed when it was and is of great help and assistance to the cause. It is a fine bit of equipment and we shall protect it. Re above, we share your sentiments here. We have managed to keep almost twenty four hour coverage on this equipment by putting beds near the machine and bells would awaken operator to receipt for any and all Niacts, Prioritys, etc. By [the] way what is correct time in Wash DC? It is now 2:45 am Nov 4 here now local time. I see correct time here is 0845 have just reset my watch to conform with your time. That is the correct time. We are now in touch with Vienna on a weak circuit somewhat garbled version as follows: The convoy was waiting at the border last night. Vienna has an officer waiting at the Austrian side and attempting to get word through to them. No report from the officer so far this morning. We are trying to get a clarification of the garbles. OK will pass this note on to Minister Wailes and he can inform interested parties. Vienna is trying to reach Vienna officer by radio and telephone. Fine, hope they have success and then we will probably get more info on latest developments on the Austrian border. When you get the info you will I am sure pass it along to us. You may be interested in knowing that Lodge broke news of Soviet occupation Budapest at General Assembly meeting tonight. Note 040850 from Col. Dallam. Pls call on phone Liberty 5-6700 ext 54250, 74550, 77183 and inform them you in direct contact with Budapest. From Wailes 040854. Perhaps of interest when Russian surrounded Parliament building no firing [took] place as far as we know. Also tell CarpenterIsaac White Carpenter, Jr., Controller of the Department of State. when he next presents his budget to put in plenty of money for Telex expenses as this is certainly a great help to us at the moment. Assume in due course you will let our missions in neighboring countries know what is going on as do not have time to communicate with them. AmLegation Budapest still here. For identification purposes this Gordon Bruegl. Do you have anything for us? Yes Gordon here it is. UP is reporting from Vienna that Nagy govt captured and that Radio Budapest now on air in Russian language. AP from Vienna says Russians bombarding, strafing city. It says Radio Budapest went off air few moments ago.It did so at 7:25 a.m. Hungarian news agency reports to Vienna that new Soviet controlled govt has been formed outside city of Budapest headed by six Hungarian Communists. Any confirmation? From Wailes 040900. We have no confirmation on above. Other than we can hear no strafing or bombing at this moment if it is going on must be well in suburbs. We have Vienna on line anything you wish to ask them? From Wailes 040901. Re American newspapermen group, have reached them and told them if they wanted come here they may and bring with them the German and other non-Hungarian assistants who definitely work for American press. There are not more than five. I have said we could not take in Hungarian associates which they seem to appreciate. Does Vienna have anything on the convoy yet? From Wailes 040906. Five American journalists, now down stairs and want to press with me their desire to bring in Endra Marton and wife AP–UP Hungarian correspondent recently released from jail with worldwide publicity. I don’t like taking in Hungarians but inclined to go along as I believe this is last of non-American press we will be asked to take in. If we do take them in I believe we will have to make it clear that we cannot guarantee protection from Hungarian authorities. Have you any thoughts? Regarding previous questions about American newspapermen group you may give shelter to German and other non-Hungarian nationals concerned altho this not considered asylum. Minister Wailes has gone downstairs to inform newspapermen about the Marton situation. He should be back shortly. Have just taken a peek out the window in other room but still have not seen any Russians around Legation area. In the midst of all this it looks like a nice sunny morning on the way. Hungarian news agency, as reported by AP Vienna, says puppet govt formed at Szolnok consisting following: Antal Apro Istvan Kossa Ferenc Munnich Sandor Ronai Imre Dogei Gyorgy Marosan Earlier UP from Budapest said Janos Kadar had formed new pro Moscow govt and said he had asked Soviet troops for help.Although the formation of the Hungarian Revolutionary Worker-Peasant Government (effective November 1) was proclaimed on November 4, Kádár and his associates did not reach Budapest until November 7. They were sworn in by István Dobi, Chairman of the Presidential Council. Nagy managed to escape temporarily by taking refuge in the Yugoslav Embassy. We note here his name not included in puppet govt allegedly formed at Szolnok. AP reports Hungarian news agency thru teletype to Vienna says Hungarians in Budapest taken posters [posts] behind barricades in streets and were charging Russian tanks with bottles of gasoline. From Wailes. Press delegation is really up in arms at Endre Marton wife and two kids who seem to be only Hungarians directly reporting for Amer press. Furthermore they point out that they were jailed because of alleged assistance to US. This is partially correct as far as the trumped up charges are concerned. Rather than raise too much unfavorable publicity for US (I have not mentioned consulting Dept nor will I do so) I am now inclined that lesser evil is to take these people in. Do you wish to comment or leave it to me? Leave it to your judgment. Security Council in session, has Lodge speaking. Says Soviet has ring of tanks around city. While this going on, Soviet press says Nagy has turned out to be enemy of people. Also said Radio Budapest heard playing national anthem. Voice saying “You are Hungarians, here you live and here you must die.” Note: Deputy Under Secretary Murphy is here. From Wailes 040929. Has Mr. Murphy anything he wants to tell the Minister? Yes will have something soon stand by. To Wailes from Mr. Murphy. We will do everything we can to support you. You are doing a grand job and it is a tough one. From Wailes to Mr. Murphy. Many thanks. Now a message for State and pass promptly to Army and Air Intelligence: British MilAtt called and stated that he had heard officially that the Soviets had given the Hungarian Govt an ultimatum at 0800 to the effect that if the govt did not capitulate within four hours the Soviets would bomb Budapest. He states that he was told that the govt would technically capitulate under those terms but that the insurgents would not. Do you have any info on this? No information on this. Note: We have word from Vienna thru Defense Dept that convoy was again turned back at Austrian border by Soviets. Convoy is staying overnight at Red Cross hospital at Magyarovar, but will try again cross border this morning. New subject. Bela Kovacs, Smallholder leader, with two lieutenants, now at front door seeking asylum. I will have to turn them away unless you instruct contrary. Lodge concluded statement before SC by asking for adoption of resolution he introduced last night. Cuban now speaking. Here note to Wailes from Murphy. You are authorized to grant shelter tentatively to Kovacs and his lieutenants. We will wish to consider disposition later. Action being taken now to permit them to enter Legation. From Wailes. Just made contact with head of International Red Cross to inquire what supplies have been coming in as it was our opinion that roadblocks had cut off transportation. In fact we have seen many Red Cross vehicles stopped from entering city. Red Cross said they have enough medical supplies for about ten days under present circumstances. I imagine a good bombing would use them up very rapidly. Food I think is probably a more critical problem as we gather that with city ringed by Soviets there is not more than two or three days supply (this does not apply to Legation). Re SC meeting—Cuban reviewed events Hungary which he described as “world shame” which laid at feet of USSR. UK’s Dixon now speaking. Dixon condemned “brutal slaughter” of women and children and male civilians by Soviet troops in Hungary. Australian now speaking. Just had a good flight of jets overhead. They kept right on going—did not stop. From Wailes 040955. Kovacs has apparently left but may come back and I will let him in vestibule with his lieutenants with firm understanding it is tentative and no asylum granted. If they do come back and we have bombing at noon as threatened in ultimatum, I will take them in for few minutes as vestibule largely glass. We plan to send staff to basement just before twelve and if it gets really hot we will all go there for few minutes but will tell you before hand in case you can keep machine running. It is now ten o’clock here so there are still two hours to go. [Here follows a list of Americans at the Legation.] Australian said the 2 Hungarian delegates who went to negotiate with Soviets for withdrawal of Soviet troops from Hungary have not returned and have apparently been taken prisoner.The Hungarian negotiating team, which included the newly-designated Defense Minister and former head of the revolutionary forces, General Pál Meléter; Chief of the General Staff, General István Kovács; and Colonel Miklós Szücs, was suddenly arrested at midnight by General Serov while participating in talks at the Soviet military headquarters at Tököl. Said “no need to multiply recitation of tragic events. Have before us American resolution and we can do nothing less than adopt it.” From Wailes 041010. We understand that as late as ten o’clock the Hungarians were negotiating with the Soviets and have also heard this morning that Hungarian delegation has not returned so it looks like Australian is correct although we have no positive proof. Note to Wailes. Beam has telephoned Soviet Ambassador, got him out of bed and told him we expected action on convoy as promised previously. Ambassador said he would send another telegram on the matter. From Wailes. Some sort of press conference has been called at Parliament and we will let you know results when available. We do not know who called conference. Believe all local radios now being jammed. We are on the phone to New York and will have something for you in a moment on the Security Council meeting. OK fine. We shall be here to receive anything you have to send on that subject. Still nothing new to report here all officers have left Telex room momentarily. Believe they are out in hall discussing something. From Wailes. We now have Foreign Office on phone and will send their view of this in a few minutes. Note on Security Council. Peruvian said yesterday we had hopes that Hungarian-Soviet negotiations might produce favorable results. Soviets had tried to force conditions which Hungary forced to reject. As result Soviet understood to restore regime of 1948. A regime of force, he added, with all objections it produces, collides with moral forces of world which ultimately will defeat it. The Soviet Govt has not only committed a “great crime” but also a mistake in trying to restore “Stalin tyranny”. It is impossible for any state to fight with success against moral forces of the world which in end will prevail for all time. Soviets, he concluded, are guilty of slaughtering youth, women and children and that one of the beautiful cities of Europe “the pride of our culture is now being wrecked in vengeance”. Additional note on Security Council: Chinese proposed change in US resolution. Proposed first point be changed to read: “To call upon the Govt of the USSR to desist forthwith from making war on the Govt and the people of Hungary and from any form of intervention in the internal affairs of Hungary”. Last item for now. Belgium accepted the Chinese amendment. We are on the line to New York again and will give you the gist as soon as we get it. We have all been with you in spirit on this thing and sure admire the way you have all held up. Thank you very much. From Wailes. We are now translating what we received from FonOff and local employee is taking down substance of long talk with Min of State. From Wailes 041048. MilAtt just informed me that two explosions few minutes ago were more on the order of dynamite than bombing and might have been the Margit Bridge and Chain Bridge. Further note re the Security Council meeting. Soviets are now speaking. We will give you summary of their remarks shortly. Have spoken to Bohlen in Moscow asking him to take up matter with Foreign Office there. New York has just come in again on phone and may have summary of Soviet remarks. This Vienna Telex opr. We were cut off again. Moment will try to get them back. To State Dept and OPR NY. Line to Budapest out of order. We will try to get them on the other line. No further contact established with AmLegation Budapest. 163. Editorial Note According to Beam (Multiple Exposure, pages 71–72), Hoover called him around 2 a.m. on November 4 (8 a.m. in Budapest) to say that “he had received a clandestine message” that Cardinal Mindszenty and his secretary (Egon Turchányi) were about to seek asylum at the American Legation. When asked for his advice, Beam replied that while the United States opposed asylum in principle, nevertheless it was justified in this case since “it involved hot pursuit endangering human life.” Beam later learned that Hoover checked with the President before the Hungarians were admitted. In a memorandum to Leverich on this subject, dated November 5, 1957, Sutterlin wrote: “Tom Wailes recalls that a coded message was received by the Legation about 6 a.m. on November the 4th and that it was decoded just before the Cardinal appeared at the door. It is his impression that this message authorized the extension of refuge or asylum to the Cardinal. He remembers that he was somewhat surprised that Washington should have had prior knowledge of the Cardinal’s intention to seek safety in the Legation . . . .” (Department of State, Hungary Desk Files: Lot 75 D 45, Refuge for Cardinal Mindszenty—1956–57 ) In an unsigned and undated memorandum bearing the handwritten notation “Nov. 1956,” Meeker recollected a message that reads: “Dept has just received info . . . that Cardinal Mindszenty will shortly come to the American Legation. You are authorized to admit him.” In another version, the message said “that Cardinal Mindszenty wishes seek asylum with Legation. Approval granted.” The message was thought to have come over regular channels and both parties remembered that it bore the Secretary’s name. (Ibid., Budapest Post Files: Lot 75 F 163, Mindszenty 1956–57) Mindszenty writes otherwise in his Memoirs, page 212. He relates that when Parliament was sealed off by Soviet troops, he took sanctuary in the American Legation because it was the nearest. He notes that 30 minutes or so after his arrival, cabled permission for him to enter was received from President Eisenhower and that 4 hours later Turchányi was admitted. He does mention subsequent foreign press reports to the effect that Nagy had requested United States asylum on his behalf the day before. In any event, he recalls that he was surprised by the speed with which his case was handled. On November 8, Beam sent a memorandum to Murphy on the subject of asylum for the Cardinal. He noted that the United States in the past had “strongly disapproved of the principle of diplomatic asylum,” but had been willing to afford temporary refuge in order to save human life. Section 225.2 of the Foreign Service Regulations (“Restrictions on Extending Asylum”), was cited. It reads: “As a rule, a diplomatic or consular officer shall not extend asylum to persons outside of his official or personal household. Refuge may be afforded to uninvited fugitives whose lives are in imminent danger from mob violence but only for the period during which active danger continues. Refuge shall be refused to persons fleeing from legitimate agents of the local government. In case such persons have been admitted to the diplomatic or consular premises, they must be surrendered or dismissed from such mission or consular office.” Since the Cardinal’s life had been in jeopardy as he was in flight from a foreign invader, the provision of sanctuary was considered justified. (Ibid., Hungary Desk Files: Lot 75 D 45, Refuge for Cardinal Mindszenty—1956–57) Turchányi was later apprehended by the AVH on November 10 while attempting to flee Hungary in the company of Leslie Bain who recorded this development in Reluctant Satellites, page 172. Turchányi was thereafter sentenced to life imprisonment. The subject of how the Cardinal came to the Legation is also dealt with in despatch 415 from Budapest, March 8, 1957. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/3–857) 164. Editorial Note At the 754th meeting of the United Nations Security Council, which began at 3 a.m. on November 4, Ambassador Lodge began his remarks by saying: “If ever there was a time when the action of the United Nations could literally be a matter of life and death for a whole nation, this is that time. If ever there was a question which clearly raised a threat to the peace, this is the question.” He concluded his statement by expressing his hope that the revised version (S/3730 and Rev.1) of the United States draft resolution would be adopted. In the operative paragraphs of the draft resolution, the Security Council: “1. Calls upon the Government of the USSR to desist forthwith from any form of intervention, in particular armed intervention in the internal affairs of Hungary; “2. Calls upon the USSR to cease the introduction of additional armed forces into Hungary and to withdraw all of its forces without delay from Hungarian territory; “3. Affirms the right of the Hungarian people to a government responsive to its national aspirations and dedicated to its independence and well-being; “4. Requests the SYG in consultation with the heads of appropriate Specialized Agencies to explore on an urgent basis the need of the Hungarian peoples for food, medicine and other similar supplies and to report to the Security Council as soon as possible; “5. Requests all Members of the UN and invites national and international humanitarian organizations to cooperate in making available such supplies as may be required by the Hungarian people.” Ambassador Sobolev responded that he had no official information as to new developments in Hungary and thus he asserted that the proper course would be to postpone the question until reliable information was at hand. However, he did not hesitate to castigate “counter-revolutionary elements” in Hungary partly instigated by the “subversive activities” of the Western Powers and most particularly the United States. He emphasized that Soviet forces were and would remain in Hungary “pursuant to the Warsaw Pact” and were engaged in suppressing “counter-revolutionary intervention and riots”. The Hungarian question, he maintained, did not rightly concern the United Nations and he went on to say: “The representatives of the United States and, in particular, the United Kingdom and France, will not succeed by means of demagogic speeches in concealing the fact that the inclusion of the question of the situation in Hungary in the Security Council’s agenda is a provocative act intended to divert the attention of world public opinion from the aggression committed by the United Kingdom, France and Israel against Egypt.” Ambassador Lodge retorted that the Soviet Representative “would apparently have us believe that our American programme, which aims to fill people’s stomachs with food, is somehow inferior to a Soviet programme which fills their stomachs with lead”. When given an opportunity to speak, Szabó revealed that he had not been able to make contact with Budapest and thus possessed no official information as to what had taken place. “Unofficially,” he reported, “we are informed that a new Government has been formed under the leadership of Mr. Janos Kadar, President of the Council of Ministers.” The United States draft resolution was then voted on and failed of passage due to a Soviet veto. Nine nations voted in favor with Yugoslavia, in the absence of instructions, not participating. At the next session, however, Yugoslavia was recorded as having abstained. In response to this result, Ambassador Lodge spoke as follows: “I therefore make the following motion to call an emergency special session of the General Assembly in accordance with rule 8 (b) of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly: “The Security Council, “‘Considering that a grave situation has been created by the use of Soviet military forces to suppress the efforts of the Hungarian people to reassert their rights, “‘Taking into account that because of the lack of unanimity among its permanent members the Security Council has been unable to exercise its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, “‘Decides to call an emergency special session of the General Assembly, as provided in General Assembly resolution 377A (V) of 3 November 1950, in order to make appropriate recommendations concerning the situation in Hungary.’” Resolution S/3733 was shortly thereafter adopted by a vote of 10 to 1, with only the Soviet Union in opposition. This session of the Security Council was then adjourned at 5:25 a.m. For full text of the debate, see U.N. doc. S/PV.754. 165. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–456. Confidential; Niact; No Distribution. Received at 12:23 p.m. Paris, November 4, 1956—5 p.m. 2171. Eyes only the President from Ambassador Luce. Mr. President, Franco-British action on Suez is a small wound to their prestige but American inaction about Hungary could be a fatal wound to ours. Let us not ask for whom the bell tolls in Hungary today. It tolls for us if freedom’s holy light is extinguished in blood and iron there. Then a long dark night of cynicism, futility and despair will fold over great parts of Europe and the world. And while we wait for the next light to break which surely will then be very ugly and very atomic, we will hear a growing torrent of tongues in many lands turning the deathless glory of Hungary into America’s everlasting shame. There are things even at this late hour which can be done. I respectfully submit some suggestions: 1) You can appear in person before the UN General Assembly; 2) NATO can be called into general session; 3) We can offer assistance to Austria in case of aggression; 4) We can confine all USSR diplomatic personnel in the USA until ours in Hungary are released; 5) We can notify Moscow we will break diplomatic relations if the Soviet Army continues to fire on the Hungarian population coupling this threat with an immediate offer to discuss guarantees for Soviet security from the satellites. Dillon 166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–456. Secret; Niact; Presidential Handling. Drafted by MacArthur and Bowie, approved by Murphy, and cleared with Goodpaster at the White House. Eisenhower met with Acting Secretary Hoover, Murphy, Phleger, Bowie, and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs, William M. Rountree, at the White House and also with the Director of Central Intelligence. Earlier, he had visited Dulles at the hospital. As a result of these talks and subsequent telephone conversations, the following actions were taken, with regard to Hungary: “a. A statement by the President was approved for release by Mr. Hagerty. “b. A letter from the President to Premier Bulganin was approved. “c. The text of a resolution to be introduced at the 4:00 p.m. session of the Special Session of the General Assembly was approved and telephoned to New York. “d. A Departmental text of a speech for Ambassador Lodge was also telephoned to New York. “e. It was decided there should be no UN force for Hungary.” (Memorandum for the record by Joseph N. Greene, Jr., November 4; Ibid.) Washington, November 4, 1956—4:25 p.m. 546. Please deliver following message to Marshal Bulganin from the President. Confirm time of delivery.Bohlen sent the message under cover of a personal letter to the Soviet Foreign Office. It was conveyed by an Embassy officer and signed for by the Soviets at 8:45 a.m. (Telegrams 1069 and 1070 from Moscow, November 4 and November 5, respectively; ibid., 711.11–EI/11–456 and 711.11–EI/11–556) “November 4, 1956 “His Excellency Marshal Nikolai A. Bulganin, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Moscow. “I have noted with profound distress the reports which have reached me today from Hungary. “The Declaration of the Soviet Government of October 30, 1956,See Document 141. which restated the policy of non-intervention in internal affairs of other states, was generally understood as promising the early withdrawal of Soviet forces from Hungary. Indeed, in that statement, the Soviet Union said that ‘it considered the further presence of Soviet Army units in Hungary can serve as a cause for an even greater deterioration of the situation’. This pronouncement was regarded by the United States Government and myself as an act of high statesmanship. It was followed by the express request of the Hungarian Government for the withdrawal of Soviet forces. “Consequently, we have been inexpressibly shocked by the apparent reversal of this policy. It is especially shocking that this renewed application of force against the Hungarian Government and people took place while negotiations were going on between your representatives and those of me Hungarian Government for the withdrawal of Soviet forces. “As you know, the Security Council of the United Nations has been engaged in an emergency examination of this problem. As late as yesterday afternoon the Council was led to believe by your representative that the negotiations then in progress in Budapest were leading to agreement which would result in the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Hungary as requested by the government of that country. It was on that basis that the Security Council recessed its consideration of this matter.See Document 160. “I urge in the name of humanity and in the cause of peace that the Soviet Union take action to withdraw Soviet forces from Hungary immediately and to permit the Hungarian people to enjoy and exercise the human rights and fundamental freedoms affirmed for all peoples in the United Nations Charter. “The General Assembly of the United Nations is meeting in emergency session this afternoon in New York to consider this tragic situation.See the editorial note, infra. It is my hope that your representative will be in a position to announce at the Session today that the Soviet Union is preparing to withdraw its forces from that country and to allow the Hungarian people to enjoy the right to a government of their own choice. Dwight D. Eisenhower”.When Bulganin released the text of his November 5 letter to President Eisenhower on the Middle East, the text of this letter was also made public. See Department of State Bulletin, November 19, 1956, pp. 795–797. Hoover 167. Editorial Note The Second Emergency Special Session of the General Assembly convened at 4 p.m. on November 4. Ambassador Sobolev objected strongly to the inclusion of “The Situation in Hungary” on the agenda for he claimed it would be in violation of Article 2 of the United Nations Charter, which prohibited intervention in the domestic affairs of member states. Continuing along this line, he cited the communication from the “legal” Kádár government, which opposed United Nations consideration of matters exclusively within the purview of the Hungarian People’s Republic. (A/3311) Nevertheless, the matter was inscribed on the General Assembly agenda as item 5 by a vote of 53 to 8, with 7 abstentions. In reference to the developments in Hungary, Lodge then spoke of the “sickening picture of duplicity and double-dealing,” “wholesale brutality,” and “cynical and wanton acts of aggression”. Thereupon, he submitted for adoption draft resolution A/3286. The draft had been formulated at the White House and telephoned to the U.S. Delegation at the United Nations at 3 p.m. and Lodge had made some minor changes. At this stage, operative paragraph 4 read: “4. Requests the Secretary General to investigate the situation, to observe directly through representatives named by him, the situation in Hungary and to report thereon to the General Assembly at the earliest moment and as soon as possible suggest methods to bring an end to the existing situation in Hungary in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations;” During the debate the Representative of France offered an amendment changing the language of this paragraph, to which Lodge agreed in the interest of time. Despite strong Soviet objections, Resolution 1004 (ES–II) was adopted by a vote of 50 to 8, with 15 abstentions. In the operative paragraphs of the resolution, the General Assembly: “1. Calls upon the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to desist forthwith from all attack on the people of Hungary and from any form of intervention, in particular armed intervention, in the internal affairs of Hungary; “2. Calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to cease the introduction of additional armed forces into Hungary and to withdraw all of its forces without delay from Hungarian territory; “3. Affirms the right of the Hungarian people to a government responsive to its national aspirations and dedicated to its independence and well-being; “4. Requests the Secretary-General to investigate the situation caused by foreign intervention in Hungary, to observe the situation directly through representatives named by him, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at the earliest moment, and as soon as possible suggest methods to bring an end to the foreign intervention in Hungary in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations; “5. Calls upon the Government of Hungary and the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to permit observers designated by the Secretary-General to enter the territory of Hungary, to travel freely therein, and to report their findings to the Secretary-General; “6. Calls upon all Members of the United Nations to co-operate with the Secretary-General and his representatives in the execution of his functions; “7. Requests the Secretary-General in consultation with the heads of appropriate specialized agencies to inquire, on an urgent basis, into the needs of the Hungarian people for food, medicine and other similar supplies, and to report to the General Assembly as soon as possible; “8. Requests all Members of the United Nations, and invites national and international humanitarian organizations to co-operate in making available such supplies as may be required by the Hungarian people.” The Assembly then adjourned at 8:10 p.m. For the official record of the session, see U.N. doc. A/PV.564. 168. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, November 5, 1956, 10:20 a.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster. Washington, November 5, 1956, 10:20 a.m. OTHERS PRESENT Vice President Nixon Secretary Hoover Mr. Phleger Mr. Hagerty Colonel Goodpaster [Here follows discussion of the Middle East. For text, see volume XVI, page 986.] Mr. Hoover said the whole matter of East-West exchanges and trade fairs must be reconsidered. The President thought we should suspend all of this, and that there should be no attendance at the November 7 celebrations of the Soviet Union.In telegram 1071 from Moscow, November 5, Ambassador Bohlen expressed his hope that the celebration of the anniversary of the 1917 Revolution would be boycotted. (Department of State, Central Files, 607.1161/11–556) Telegram 550 to Moscow, also sent to London and Paris, November 5, advised that U.S. Government officials had been instructed not to attend the November 7 celebration. (Ibid.) Regarding implementation of the decision to suspend exchanges with the Soviet Union, see telegram 588 to Moscow, November 13, vol. XXIV, p. 253. Mr. Hoover said he would arrange this. Mr. Phleger reported that on the Hungarian resolution the Arabs and India abstained and that there is some appearance that they may have made a deal with the USSR to abstain on the Hungarian question in order to have strong Soviet support on the Middle East question.Saudi Arabia, Syria, Yemen, Egypt, Iraq, Libya, and the Sudan had abstained on Resolution 1004 (ES–II). He thought that the General Assembly would take up the question of sanctions on November 6th or 7th. Mr. Phleger said that Cardinal Mindszenty is in our legation. We will refuse to turn him over. We will try to keep him quiet. Our international position is not too strong on trying to safeguard him. Perhaps we can get the UN into the matter to help him. Mr. Phleger said the Soviet trap was such that they were able to get almost all political leaders in Hungary out of hiding to negotiate with them, and then seized them all. The Vice President asked why Nehru is supporting the USSR by abstaining, and the President suggested that Nehru thinks of only one thing, which is colonialism, by which he means the white over colored people. The President said he thought it might be well for him to write to Nehru, bringing out that we are witnessing colonialism by the bayonet in Hungary. Mr. Nixon said he thought that if Nehru would line up with us in this matter, Russia would be ruined in Asia. He asked if Nehru’s visit to the U.S. could be expedited and the President said he was afraid that Nehru might find that things are so active that he cannot leave his Government at this moment.Nehru visited the United States in December 1956. There was discussion over the release of the President’s letter to Nehru and the President said that the question is one of protecting the ability to exchange such letters without having them released for propaganda purposes.On November 4, the Indian Government informed the U.S. Embassy that Prime Minister Nehru was prepared to release to the press the text of the letters which he had sent to President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles on October 31 and the replies which Eisenhower and Dulles had sent to Nehru. (Telegram 1154 from New Delhi, November 4; Department of State, Central Files, 684A.86/11–456). The signed original of Nehru’s letter to Eisenhower of October 31 is in the Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. A copy of Nehru’s letter to Dulles of October 31 is in Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, Prime Minister Nehru’s Correspondence with Eisenhower/Dulles 1953–1961. Eisenhower’s response to Nehru was transmitted to the Embassy in New Delhi for delivery in telegram 1149, November 2. (Ibid., Central Files, 684A.86/11–256) Dulles’ reply to Nehru was transmitted to the Embassy in New Delhi for delivery in telegram 1152, November 2. (Ibid.) Nehru’s request was discussed by Hoover and Eisenhower on November 4. The President determined that while he had no objection to Nehru’s releasing his own letters, he would prefer that his own replies not be released. (Memorandum for the record by Greene, November 4; ibid., 764.00/11–456) GColonel, CE, US Army 169. Notes on the 43d Meeting of Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, November 5, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/11–556. Top Secret. Drafted by Comstock. Washington, November 5, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman Defense—Colonel Oscar R. Schaaf Defense—Mr. Roger Ernst CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell Office of Spec. Asst. To the President—Mr. Oren M. Stephens USIA—Mr. Alfred V. Boerner OCB—Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Edward L. Freers State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Robert O. Blake State—Mr. Robert M. McKisson State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. L. Randolph Higgs State—Mr. John E. Horner State—Mr. Frank S. Collins USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey CIA—Mr. Arthur M. Cox CIA—Mr. Cord Meyer OCB—Warren A. Kelsey [The following notes are not exact quotations.]Brackets in the source text. Beam: A conference was held earlier in the day at the White HouseSee supra. which considered primarily (1) what to do if the Hungarians request us to deliver Cardinal Mindszenty who has been granted asylum at the Legation, and (2) gestures that can be taken to demonstrate in an emphatic manner the indignation of the United States and the free world over the events in Hungary. We have already taken measures to restrict passports of Americans desiring to travel to Hungary. (Mr. McKisson was asked to look into the problem of Cardinal Mindszenty.) McKisson: We have asked the Minister for his views on a possible withdrawal of recognition. Beam: We are planning to suspend the exchange program with the USSR for the time being. The Moscow Agricultural Fair is probably out. The Poznan Fair is under review. The thinking is that we should make a sharp distinction between the Soviets and the individual satellites in these questions. We would like to hear suggestions from the committee.The Ad Hoc Committee on Retaliatory Measures against the U.S.S.R. met on the afternoon of November 5 and drew up a preliminary list of possible actions for further consideration. (Memorandum from Freers to Beam, November 5; Department of State, Central Files, 611.61/11–556). The Intelligence Advisory Committee also took up the matter. The Status Report of the IAC Standing Committee on Exchanges, November 8, is ibid., EUR/SOV Files: Lot 69 D 162, East-West Contacts—IAC 1956 Only. Higgs: We are working on the idea of bringing Anna Kethly to the UN.Kéthly had been out of Hungary attending an international socialist conference in Vienna when the Soviets intervened on November 4. She arrived in New York on November 5 maintaining she was Nagy’s special U.N. Representative. There is the problem of who should sponsor her there. Beam: There are numerous technicalities. Trivers: It has been suggested that she should be brought to the White House for a meeting. McKisson: The view has been expressed that if we initiate the action on Anna Kethly we might be open to the charge of intervention. It seems we should support the introduction if some other government has proposed it. Trivers: Perhaps the Dutch or Norwegians might be appropriate. Beam: The thinking is to bring her before the General Assembly or the Committee on Human Rights. She is in the United States now and any action should be taken while interest runs high. Perhaps the Italians would be an appropriate sponsor. Meyer: Is it possible or desirable to question the right of Kos to speak for the Hungarian Government? Beam: It would be hard to question him legally without raising the problem of recognition. McKisson: If we question his credentials it would indicate that we do not recognize the regime. This would be premature. Cox: What is being done on the UN observers? Beam: Undoubtedly, the Hungarian Government and the USSR will refuse to let them in. McKisson: It is now up to the Secretary General whom we are trying to get to act right away. Meyer: Could the observers use radio and other reports? McKisson: That would be next best. Beam: Should we ask for a condemnatory resolution? McKisson: IO in State is pressing for the inspection commission. If it is refused entry, the next question would be whether to introduce a resolution condemning the Soviet aggression. To confuse all of the issues, the Russians are now proposing a joint U.S.-USSR police action in Egypt. Boerner: Can we request them to permit recognized charitable organizations to go into Hungary? McKisson: The distribution and use of aid is a problem. There are reports that the Soviets have interfered. We must try to devise some system to insure that the needy will be the actual recipients of aid. This should be the second part of the UN action. Beam: McLeodR.W. Scott McLeod, Administrator of the Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs. is working on an administrative action which would permit entry into the United States of émigrés from Eastern Europe countries even though the country of origin will not guarantee to take the emigrants back. Campbell: How far will the expression of indignation go? Beam: It is to take the form of indignation against the return of Stalinism and it has been said that we should not reverse the spirit of Geneva. Blake: Lacy is studying the question of suspension of East-West contacts with the USSR. We are arranging to keep the Soviet election observersOn September 29, the Soviet Union had accepted the U.S. invitation to send election observers and they arrived in the United States on October 22. as much as possible out of the mass media. Boerner: The UN observers should go out as soon as possible and collect testimony even if they do not get into Hungary. Meyer: We are getting out a White Book based on refugees, radio monitering, etc. Higgs: Should we not needle the neutrals? Beam: We should try to encourage them to change their position, but it is difficult. Meyer: Would it be desirable to form a government-in-exile? Beam: Our general policy, with the exception of the Baltic States, has been to avoid recognition of governments-in-exile unless there is a chance of getting them back in soon. Boerner: Where is Bela Kovacs? Beam: He was at the Legation for a while.See Document 162. Boerner: We should take some measures, perhaps a letter to Nehru, to focus attention on the inconsistencies of their position. The purpose would not be simply to embarrass. Beam: If the Arab countries introduce a condemnation of the U.K. and France, the U.S. might have to abstain. Higgs: Would it be desirable to send medical supplies to Hungary by balloon? Meyer: It is not a very effective method, but it might be considered again now that the border is closed. Beam: It seems desirable to use the Red Cross at the present time to get medical supplies to the wounded. Higgs: Mr. Murphy has been getting calls from a Congressman whose constituents are of the opinion that the U.S. encouraged the Hungarians to revolt and are now doing nothing. Perhaps more vigorous action in the UN would help in this regard. PBCOCB Staff Representative 170. Telegram From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of Germany to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–556. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Paris and London. Bonn, November 5, 1956—9 p.m. 1742. Reference: Embassy telegram 1718 November 4;The Minister at Bonn, William C. Trimble, reported in telegram 1718, November 4, that the West German Defense Minister, Franz Josef Strauss, had called him at Chancellor Adenauer’s request to ask him to inform Hoover that he had received news of the Soviet intervention in Hungary. (Ibid., 764.00/11–456) Trimble called the Department of State at 8:40 a.m. on November 4 to get the message to Acting Secretary Hoover. Murphy noted on the memorandum of the telephone conversation that he had called Trimble at 5:35 p.m. on November 4 to ask him to tell Adenauer “of our sympathy but they will understand the practical difficulties in the way of practical actions.” (Memorandum of telephone conversation, November 4; ibid., 764.00/11–456) Embassy telegram 1716, November 3.Telegram 1716 from Bonn, November 3, reported that the German Minister of Agriculture had proposed a joint food assistance plan to aid Hungary, utilizing German supplies for immediate delivery which would then later be replaced from U.S. stocks. (Ibid., 864.49/11–356) Trimble saw Brentano this afternoon and spoke along lines indicated Murphy telcon November 4 (Embassy telegram 1718, November 4). He then inquired regarding Foreign Minister’s views Hungarian situation. Brentano replied with considerable emotion that he had been following developments Hungary closely during past week and had been in constant communication with Adenauer on subject. Matter had been discussed at length cabinet meeting this morning and also meeting CDU faction from which he had just come. In all these talks parallel had been drawn between Hungary and what might have happened or could happen East Zone. Brentano continued that divergence between US one hand and France–UK on other regarding Suez had provided Soviets with unique opportunity to deliver what he described as worst blow West has suffered since war. He said that without going into merits or demerits Anglo-French position and legality or illegality their action Suez, he deplored Security Council action which he felt had triggered Soviet move Hungary. Soviet repressive actions there in which thousands might well be liquidated could mean end to Hungarian democratic elements and this taken in conjunction with divergence West would have seriously adverse effects on will for freedom in other satellites and East Zone. Brentano said he had read Senator George’s statement to press expressing fears that Middle East conflict would constitute death blow NATO but that despite grave concern he (Brentano) had expressed he did not share Senator’s views.Senator Walter F. George’s comments, as expressed in an interview with The Augusta Herald, were cited in The New York Times on November. 2. Returning Hungary, Foreign Minister said he realized that it would have been impossible to render military assistance to rebels and furthermore felt that economic aid as had been proposed German Ministry Agriculture (Embassy telegram 1716, November 3) no longer feasible at this stage since such food supplies as might be sent to Hungary would fall into hands of pro Soviet elements and not patriots who either under arrest or being hung. Immediate task before us was to recreate Western unity and to counteract as best we could effect Hungarian situation on other satellite peoples, including East Germany. With these objectives in mind Adenauer had decided adhere original plan go Paris tomorrow to see Mollet instead of postponing visit as he had contemplated two days ago.Adenauer and Brentano went to Paris to see French Prime Minister Guy Mollet and ask him to agree to an immediate cease-fire. (Telegram 1784, from Bonn, November 8; Department of State, Central Files, 651.62A/11–856) At conclusion conversation Brentano referred to what he described as AFN news broadcast last night which could have effect inciting revolt East Zone and requested that broadcasts this nature be discontinued. We are requesting USAREUR take appropriate action. Conant 171. Notes on the 44th Meeting of Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, November 6, 1956Source: Department of States, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/11–656. Top Secret. Drafted by Comstock. Washington, November 6, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman Defense—Colonel Oscar R. Schaaf Defense—Mr. Roger Ernst CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell Office of Spec. Asst. to the President—Mr. Francis G. Williamson (for Mr. Stephens) USIA—Mr. Alfred V. Boerner OCB—Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Edward L. Freers State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Robert O. Blake State—Mr. Henry P. Leverich State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. Randolph L. Higgs State—Mr. John E. Horner CIA—Mr. Arthur M. Cox USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey OCB—Mr. Roy M. Melbourne OCB—Mr. Warren A. Kelsey (The following notes are not exact quotations.) Beam: The general purpose of this meeting is to review measures to be taken with regard to Hungary and the USSR, and, if there is time, the Polish situation. With regard to Hungary, (1) RFE is broadcasting appeals to the Soviet troops and will soon distribute pamphlets urging them not to fire on Hungarians,At the Acting Secretary’s Staff Meeting on November 5, it was decided that the Committee should “carefully look at the proposal [by Allen Dulles] to broadcast to and pass leaflets to Soviet troops in Hungary and other comparable proposals”. (Ibid., Daily Summaries: Lot 60 D 530, Top Secret Daily Summaries) In a memorandum to Beam and Elbrick on this date, Murphy indicated that he concurred in the proposal, but believed such operations required “considerable skill and care.” He noted that he had told Dulles that he “was convinced that if we did it, we could expect a violent reaction from Zhukov and Sokolovsky, both of whom I know are extremely sensitive on any type of propaganda directed at the troops. I told him that I felt that we could, by a skillful program, accomplish a great deal of good experience with the Russian forces in Hungary who have, according to Moscow radio, been indoctrinated along the lines that they have come into Hungary to protect the Hungarian workers against fascists and black reactionaries. Many of these are fresh troops, new to the Hungarian scene, including young soldiers. These might be particularly good targets for an effective propaganda line, if well conducted.” (Ibid., Central Files, 940.40/11–556) (2) we plan to press for distribution of relief in Hungary through the International Red Cross, (3) we have tightened up on U.S. passports, and (4) an effort is being made to take administrative action to make it easier for satellite refugees to enter the United States. The five or six American correspondents who are in Hungary will stay, but we are not permitting any more to go in right now. Mrs. Kethly is up in New York now and she will probably appear before the UN or, at least, one of the committees. Cox: She is going to make a speech before a mass meeting organized by Leo CherneChairman of the Board of the International Rescue Committee. this coming Thursday. Beam: The United States should not take any initiative to get her before the UN but we should not hold back our seconding support. Blake: Her effect will be best in Hungary and Asia. Beam: In view of the feeling expressed at the White House,See Document 168. the Moscow Agricultural Exhibit will probably not go on, but it is apparently left up to the OCB. Freers: We may have to drag our feet on a lot of things of this kind. The visit of broadcasters has been suspended. We do want to continue such apparently profitable operations as Amerika Illustrated. Freers: It might be desirable to tell the Soviets simply that we cannot decide now concerning the fair. (Mr. Leverich read a draft telegram to the U.S.–U.N.) Cox: Will there be a resolution of condemnation? Beam: Not yet. People might be put too much on the spot to go along with it. Comstock: Under the UN cable, will measures be taken to try to get the UN observers into Hungary right away? Leverich: That is apparently a part of the Secretary General’s report that is called for in the telegram.See telegram 252, infra. Cox: Kadar has appealed to the UN for recognition of his government.U.N. doc. A/3311. Boerner: We might consider exploiting that appeal. Beam: The Military Attaché’s report is that there is still fighting in Budapest.Reported in telegrams B–243 and B–245, November 5 and November 6, respectively, from Budapest. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–556 and 764.00/11–656) Higgs: Did not Secretary Dulles say that we should try to get first priority for the Hungarian situation in the UN?At the Secretary’s Staff Meeting on October 31, Dulles “emphasized that he did not want us to become distracted by Middle Eastern events from the critical importance of following and taking appropriate actions on the Hungarian situation.” (Notes by Howe; ibid., Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75) Beam: Unfortunately the events in Egypt overshadowed Hungary. Boerner: One suggestion that has been made is that we should get refugees out to various free world countries to tell their story. Cox: The good ones are being screened and they can be taken on tours. There are some points of contention, however, between some of the recent émigrés and the earlier Hungarian emigration. Boerner: We have heard that there are a large number of children among the refugees and that some of them have been wounded. These might be taken out to other countries and even placed for a time in homes of earlier refugees who are well off. Beam: There is a lot of sympathy in other countries for something along these lines. It should be possible to take some action. Boerner: If the Suez cease-fire is genuine, we might focus on it at the UN and try to get a similar action for Hungary. Beam: It would be well if some country would propose a UN police force for Hungary. Leverich: We understand that the Pakistani delegateMohammad Mir Khan. has been so instructed. Beam: This should be encouraged but we do not want to confuse the Suez situation right now. Boerner: We need a statement on humanitarian aid provided some way can be found to get to the Hungarian people. Leverich: We are working on a statement. Boerner: Something should be done to bring out the fact that the UN wants observers in Hungary as soon as possible. Cox: We have the first draft of the White Book recounting the first 15 days of the struggle. A later edition will be a more detailed volume and will include pictures. It is being published by the Free Europe Committee.In 1957, A White Book: The Hungarian Revolution, edited by Melvin A. Lasky, was published in the United States for the Congress for Cultural Freedom by Frederick A. Praeger in New York. We have had suggestions that a recorded radio program be prepared based on actual monitored Hungarian programs. We also have some good film by Fox Movietone which might be worked into a documentary. Beam: Those are good suggestions. What should be done about the USSR? There is a move by some international labor unions to carry out a boycott on Soviet ships. Trivers: Iceland might be a useful place to encourage the boycott. Campbell: We might be able to have some influence with Nehru in the matter Higgs: The Indian AmbassadorArthur S. Lall. said he did not know why his government had abstained in the voting. Beam: It has been suggested that the code transmission of the Embassy here be cut off but we do not consider it advisable for a number of reasons. Congressional travel to the Soviet Union is off. An effort to obtain stricter East-West trade controls is being considered; the new situation strengthens our hand in COCOM. The possibility of blocking Soviet assets here has been considered and also of barring passage through the Panama Canal of Soviet ships, but neither of these is likely to be adopted. We are reconsidering the question of cooperation with the Soviet Union in the international geophysical year. In UN we are voting against Soviet candidates for office where otherwise we would abstain or vote favorably. Cox: Has withdrawing from the Olympics been considered? Beam: This is not advisable in view of our policy on exchanges. We now have to consider planning for possible contingencies in other satellites, but this will have to be left for a later meeting. Cox: Is the balloon embargo on Poland still in force? Beam: Yes, for the time being at least. PBCOCB Staff Representative 172. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United NationsSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–656. Confidential; Priority. Washington, November 6, 1956—9:24 p.m. 252. Re Hungary. 1. We have been considering what next steps in GA should be. We believe we should not lose present momentum or permit Middle Eastern situation divert all attention from flagrant character Soviet actions. 2. Suggest you explore urgently with Secretary-General what his plans are for forthcoming GA meeting on Hungary. It might begin by his announcement of steps he is taking pursuant resolution adopted by GA November.Resolution 1004 (ES–II). These might include appointment his representatives, any arrangements on despatching observers to Hungary and description messages sent Moscow and Budapest and humanitarian assistance which he has mobilized. 3. We understand number Members still desire speak on Hungarian item, presumably by way of explanation of vote. Subject USUN’s assessment possible undesirable repercussions in connection current Middle Eastern tactical situation, request USUN approach Asian abstainers (India, Indonesia, Burma, Ceylon, Afghanistan, Nepal) and express our deep disappointment and shock at their abstention. Note Nehru statement regarding HungaryThe New York Times reported on November 6 that Nehru had told a UNESCO conference in New Delhi the day before: “We see today in Egypt, as well as in Hungary, both human dignity and freedom outraged and the force of modern arms used to suppress peoples and to gain political objectives.” On November 5, in his first direct communication with Nehru concerning Hungary, President Eisenhower referred to this speech and commented: “It is our duty to mankind not only to bring before world opinion the facts with respect to the deplorable situation in Hungary, but to make it clear that the leaders of free and democratic countries cannot remain silent in the face of such terrifying pressures upon our fellow beings.” The text was approved by the President at 11 p.m. on November 5 and transmitted in telegram 1176 to New Delhi, November 6. (Department of State, Central Files, 684A.86/11–656) and inquire whether if they were without instructions at time GA acted owing urgent character Hungarian situation, they may not now be able associate themselves favorably with action taken by GA. Leave in USUN’s discretion whether same approach can usefully be made to Arab abstainers. 4. If press reports confirmed Soviet forces are flagrantly interfering with recognized Red Cross activities in Budapest, this would be point which other members of GA could effectively press in ensuing discussion, and resolution focused on humanitarian side could be submitted, calling on USSR and Hungary not to obstruct legitimate Red Cross activities, again urging Members to aid by contributing emergency relief supplies, and making a general appeal to Members on behalf Hungarian refugees, possibly through some special program of assistance under auspices UN High Commissioner for Refugees. 5. Dept has given urgent consideration to possibility hearing Anna Kethly. While we believe US should not take overt initiative in urging her appearance before GA, particularly because it might invite new Soviet charges of American complicity in Hungarian uprising, request USUN explore with various European Members (e.g., Norway, Denmark, Belgium, Netherlands, Italy) ways in which her views could be presented to GA. Possibilities that occur to Dept include prepared statement by Kethly that could be circulated at request some Member or included in speech; or hearing in GA. Last alternative would be unprecedented and raises number serious questions, including its implications re US attitude toward Kadar Govt and problem created by presence other Hungarian representatives GA. At same time GA has heard individuals in past, though in main committees which of course are not organized in present special emergency session (e.g. Michael Scott,Reverend Michael Scott was the first oral petitioner to testify before the Fourth Committee of the General Assembly in November 1949 on behalf of the Herero and Ovambo of South West Africa. Dr. TannousDr. Izzat Tannous represented the cause of the Arab refugees of Palestine before the United Nations in 1952. on Arab refugee problem). We would hope some European delegation could explore matter directly with Kethly, after which tactics could be worked out. Biographic data on Kethly transmitted November 5 by UNMIS. Hoover 173. Despatch From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 848.00/11–656. Confidential. Warsaw, November 6, 1956. No. 179 REF Embassy Despatch 175, Nov. 6, 1956Despatch 175 transmitted a list of commodities which the Poles might request if U.S. economic assistance were provided. (Ibid.) SUBJECT Polish Economic Situation: The Issue of U.S. Assistance In our effort to assist in the consideration of Polish problems in Washington it is deemed advisable to present in semi-outline form the Embassy’s concept of the current Polish economic situation. I. Atmosphere and Circumstances: As the Embassy has previously reported in its discussions of the Poznan riots that took place in June of this year, and as the Embassy noted repeatedly prior and during the changes that resulted in the coming into power of Mr. Gomulka, the economic difficulties and pressures existing in this country have had an important effect on its political, governmental and international relations. The Embassy’s priority telegram 540 of October 26 enumerated nine specific areas of economic problems.Not printed. (Ibid., 748.00/10–2656) Previous despatches which are of particular significance in this connection are:None of the despatches listed is printed. “Housing Situation”, No. 107, Sept. 5 “Unemployment”, No. 83, Aug. 22 “Continuing High Prices”, No. 108, Sept. 5 “Poor Condition of Handicraft Industries”, No. 95, Aug. 28 “Tight Foreign Trade”, No. 172, Nov. 6 The Embassy’s telegram 562 of October 29Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/10–2956) presented in six numbered points important aspects of the economic-political situation of which this despatch is an extension. The offers of US economic assistance in recent months were confined to offers of agricultural products. In January–February 1956 there was an offer of wheat.See footnote 2, Document 68. Through the International Red Cross, in June 1956, after the Poznan riots, there was another offer of food.Documentation on this subject is in Department of State, Central File 848.49. Corollary questions which arose in discussion and exchange of correspondence with the Polish government regarding these two offers involved the following points: the unwillingness of the Polish government to accept the foodstuffs as a gift; their rejoinder proposal that opportunities be given for Poland to purchase US agricultural products at world competitive prices; the additional or inferred desire on the part of the Polish government for credits to finance agricultural purchases. Additional points which similarly have not been clearly resolved in this matter are: (a) the availability of export licenses for such goods and (b) the fact that other sources of supply, such as Canada, are open to the Poles. It is presumed that the Poles have canvassed other sources to obtain the most favorable price and credit conditions possible. The Department will recall that in response to the American invitation to Poland to send observers to the US electoral campaign a reply was received in the form of a note dated October 8, 1956 (Embtel 406)See footnote 2, Document 92. in which a counter offer was made to discuss other problems of mutual interest to the two countries. No reply has been made to the October 8 Polish note. The importance attached to this offer by the Polish government is underscored in its press treatment (Embtels 614 and 616) of the recent exchange of tentative views on the need or desire of Poland for economic assistance.Reference is to a Polish Press Agency release of midnight November 3 regarding the U.S. economic aid approach. Telegram 614 transmitted the Embassy’s translation; telegram 616 was an analysis. (Both ibid., 748.5–MSP/11–456) Negotiations leading towards a solution of all pending US-Polish problems is not the object or scope of this despatch. Many issues, on either side, would undoubtedly be brought up during such a comprehensive negotiation. The interests of other countries that might be affected by changes in US-Polish economic relations would include, among others, the Soviet Union, which for the past twelve years has had extremely close economic ties with Poland. The role of Poland with its associates in the CEMA groupThe Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, established in 1949, bound the Soviet Union and its satellites economically. and its ability to continue active participation with the Soviet satellites’ economic interchange and interdependence would require re-examination. The interests of the British, Dutch, Belgian, French and other Western nations in assisting Poland by government action or in substantially increasing profitable trade through commercial channels will require serious consideration and may call for joint policies to be established by the respective governments. The attitude which Poland assumes towards Yugoslavia and Hungary may also have a decisive influence. It is too soon to estimate the extent to which the Gomulka regime in Poland will become parallel domestically, ideologically and internationally to the Tito regime in Yugoslavia. The Polish government has thus far followed a doubtful, changing and ambiguous attitude in its relationship to Hungarian developments. Its vote in the United Nations to support the Soviet stand regarding HungaryReference is to Resolution 1004 (ES–II). is a sign that Polish actions in this sphere are more meaningful to the US than are the ambiguous press articles and statements made here by the government’s leaders. II. Considerations that should be Weighed: A. Whatever the decision or series of decisions, their phasing and timing is of importance. B. The same holds true with respect to publicity. This will require a careful balancing of advantages and disadvantages. (The Poles unilaterally published news of this topic (Embtels 609, 613)Neither printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 848.00/11–356 and 748.5–MSP/11–456, respectively) to exert a calming influence at a time of tension in Warsaw over the Hungarian crisis. C. Equally important is the matter of quid pro quo. There are many items that could be listed as highly desirable for the US government or for its citizens, to get from Poland. D. Ideological considerations enter strongly into what the US government can do, for they shape American public opinion, the willingness of Congress to appropriate funds, and the flexibility and extent of action that can be taken by the Executive Branch. E. The American public has long been thinking about the need to offer food, financial and economic help, even military aid, as well as technical assistance, to under-developed countries, or to regimes threatened by a Communist menace. Varieties of this ideology have been the basis for Marshall Plan aid, Greek-Turkish aid, the International Cooperation Administration, the Mutual Assistance Program, MAAG, and others. But it is only the Yugoslav example that we have on the other side, i.e., giving aid to bolster up and strengthen a Communist regime. The Yugoslav precedent is not analogous to the Polish situation. For the Gomulka regime reiterates again and again its membership in the Warsaw Pact (Yugoslavia is not) and within the past weeks has repeatedly and forcefully gone on record as favoring the Soviet alliance, Polish-Soviet friendship. Poland voted with the USSR on the Hungarian issue; Yugoslavia did not. Tito made a greater break with Stalin, eight years ago, than Gomulka does today. The US did not help a Yugoslavia with Russian troops in control of the country. III. Arguments Against Aid to a Polish Communist Regime: A. The Communist Gomulka Polish regime is a party to the Warsaw Pact, which is directed against NATO and the United States and other basic political, diplomatic and defense policies of the USA. There is a possibility that the Warsaw Pact may be changed. When and if it is changed, this argument can be re-examined. For the present, Poland, by virtue of its geographic position, if nothing else, is almost certain to remain a member of the Pact or some similar Bloc defense arrangement as long as NATO exists. It is equally certain that Soviet troops in one guise or another will continue to be stationed in Poland at least as long as Soviets remain in East Germany. The Gomulka regime has admitted and even defended this position during the past week. As a member of Bloc defense the foreign policy of Poland continues by definition to be inimical to the best interests of the United States and the West. The withdrawal of Soviet troops from Poland and formal withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact and other Bloc defenses would surely be a very definite indication of Polish independence; it is submitted that the Gomulka regime has thus far demonstrated no willingness whatsoever to take either of these major steps. It may be well argued that Gomulka couldn’t even do so if he wanted to. B. Any added strength that Gomulka obtains can be channeled by Gomulka in such a way that the same amount of strength, economic aid, credit, or trade at his discretion may be devoted to Communist purposes. Those purposes might be to enter the commercial markets of the Middle East, India, or Iran. Those purposes might be to infiltrate and subvert Cambodia, Burma, or Indonesia. Those purposes might be to furnish ships, arms, guns to Egypt, to Algiers, to Morocco, or to other areas thereby causing dissent or disruption in the relationships between those areas and the US, or the British, Dutch, and French. By the same token, we might be working against our own policies with Western Germany and its reunification by strengthening Gomulka in his position. If there are controversial issues such as Western Territories, armaments, or trade policies between Germany and Poland, we do not want to grant aid so that Gomulka can get strength from us with which to oppose Germany. C. Military considerations. Why should the US aid the economy of a country that is occupied by Russian troops? There would be no inducement for the troops to leave. More and more bases for tanks, infantry, aircraft, and naval power could be built up and strengthened in locations strategically close to Berlin, London, Paris and Brussels. While these military build-ups continued, the US would, in effect, be subsidizing them, building them up, feeding the people who worked on those military installations. We would be, militarily speaking, working against ourselves and against our NATO allies. Indeed, it is our thought that it was the recent deterioration of economic conditions within Poland which gave rise to the pressures that produced Poznan riots and the subsequent developments away from Soviet control. These tendencies are in keeping with US basic policies towards the satellites; we should do nothing to slow down those tendencies, or to reduce their effects. Poland helped North Korea in the war, taxing her economy to do so. That caused a direct loss of American lives and treasure. Now, should we subsidize and bolster Poland after its strong effort to defeat us? D. After 12 years of Communism in Poland, there is a failure, evidenced in all fields, agriculture, mining, industry, housing, police state, Parliament, free speech and movement of people, etc. Workers are underpaid, production is low, a minimum standard of living for a European people is the result in a country where, prior to Communism, the agriculture of the country not only fed the people but allowed surplus to be exported. This unrest exploded at the Poznan riots; it was fully documented in terms of human misery, neglected youth, low standard of living, hatred of police state, brutalities, harshness and secrecy of the Communist way of life, at the Poznan trials. This is the result of the Communist system. Another Communist leader, Gomulka, is now to carry on. Why should we use our talents and our funds to turn into a Communist success what is a Communist failure? E. The success of Communism. Any aid and strength given to Gomulka will enable him to meet his dilemmas: to add to consumers goods rather than heavy industry; to speed up or slow down agricultural collectivization; to skim off such economic help or trade subsidies as he wishes in order to work out his policies with East Germany, USSR, satellites, China, Middle or Far East. The resolution of his existing dilemmas would leave him free to devote his energies to other Communist purposes, and we can be sure that none of them bode well for the USA. Is it to the benefit of the US national interest to extricate Gomulka from these Communist difficulties? F. It is one of the objectives of US policy to drive a wedge between the USSR and the satellites. As the Polish economy has been all but completely integrated into that of the USSR and the satellite bloc, it would require enormous funds, supplies, goods, technicians, expenditures, time, and cooperation to pry Poland economically away and start her on a fresh path, at US initiative and cost. It does not require US aid to do this. It has been started here already by Polish leadership with the “own road to Socialism” and “equality and independence” slogans of Gomulka. What the Poles have done within the past few weeks has been to our advantage. It was done by themselves. US aid might hinder or deter this process by relieving the pressures that have produced these changes. If Gomulka is unable to give wage raises or to increase standards of living, the pressures might increase against a domestic Communist state that fails to give the people what they need and want, as they have previously arisen against a Soviet-dominated regime that did not satisfy the Poles. G. Probably no further initiative need be taken by the United States. Any request for assistance, aid, credits, or improved trade relationships should come from the Poles. This would clarify a number of points in Gomulka’s relations with the Kremlin that might otherwise remain doubtful. H. The Department will undoubtedly take steps so that it does not find itself in a position of defending a Communist regime. For if developments go further in Yugoslavia, or elsewhere, than in Poland, then the “support” of Gomulka-ism by the US may serve as an obstacle to greater changes elsewhere, or in Poland itself. Gomulka policy statements, to date, reiterate the alliance with the USSR; Plenum resolutions are replete with working class dictatorship plans and phraseology. I. Opportunity may be presented to exploit the Soviet policies fastened upon Poland: retention of its Army, making of Gomulka’s claim to independence a hollow boast, unfair trade conditions under which Poland continues to deal with the USSR. J. It is the understanding of the Embassy that in the current Rumanian-United States negotiations,See Document 139. there are on the agenda such questions as payments for war damage to US property, reimbursement for US properties nationalized by the Rumanian government, the introduction of American newspaper and publications into Rumania, and the granting of permission for American citizens (dual nationals) to return to the United States. As is stated in Section II, C, above, and in the second paragraph of page 2, above, many issues on either side could be brought up during a comprehensive across-the-board negotiation between Poland and the United States, and various items for quid pro quo could be furnished by the Embassy to the Department. Whilst there is no overriding consideration known to this Embassy to indicate that Rumania and Poland should be treated in a similar fashion, the question of parallel or diverse treatment of these two satellite countries will doubtless be a matter for policy consideration by the Department. K. Recent developments in Poland which have been observed and reported to the Department by the Embassy include the release of the Cardinal,Stefan Cardinal Wyszynski was released from house arrest on October 28. the ousting of Marshal Rokossovsky from membership in the Politburo (he is now “on leave” from his post as Minister of Defense), and the return to the USSR of some 32 Army officers. Other developments, such as the public emphasis of the Polish government and by the Communist Party leadership on the Polish-Soviet alliance, and the retention of large Soviet military forces on Polish soil, have also been reported. If the Poles themselves, on their own initiative, continue to advance towards independence and rid themselves of other elements of Soviet control, the objectives of American foreign policy will be achieved without any US aid or assistance programs. When and if this tendency stops, and an additional force is judged necessary in order to continue or to revitalize it, would be the time to consider whether changes in American economic policy towards Poland would be justified in order to further our political and diplomatic objectives. A positive and constructive aspect of this line of action would be to show not merely to Poland, but also to the other satellites, that if steps are taken to establish their true autonomy and independence, they can look forward to sympathetic consideration of economic requests from the United States. L. In the Embassy’s confidential telegram No. 493 of October 22Telegram 493 presented alternative interpretations of developments in Poland. (Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/10–2256) it was stated that the Embassy is sufficiently suspicious of the Soviet and Polish Communists to continue to watch for evidence to support the thesisThis thesis is not accepted by the Embassy, but evidence to support it will be reported, when and if found. [Footnote in the source text.] that the October crisis in Poland was planned by the Soviets to make the puppet regime more palatable to the satellite population, and possibly to lure Western aid to relieve the Soviets of the full responsibility for the low standard of living. The basis for the suspicion is that the Soviets probably did not let the Poles “do what comes naturally”, but planned and created the crisis; at any moment the movement could have been nipped in the bud by the liquidation of Gomulka (indeed a Western Chief of diplomatic mission has been informed that Gomulka is being used as a temporary stalking horse for Soviet forces), and by the fact that the events transpiring in Poland were in a way predicted by the 20th Congress of the CPSU. In view of this suspicion, and the lack of conclusive evidence of the extent, if any, to which Gomulka intends to truly break off from the Soviets, it appears highly advisable to watch developments carefully before making commitments as to US policy. If the Gomulka regime should totter and fall, due to incompetence of leadership, due to its being upset by more openly pro-Soviet forces, or due to Communism’s inherent evils for the community, the US should not be placed in a posture of having economically supported and maintained that regime. It is fully realized that the National Security Council has adopted policy statements regarding assistance to countries that may break away from the USSR’s control. The evidence does not show that Poland has done so, to any extent. M. Without prejudice to the question of whether the US is willing or able to give Poland substantial aid, aid in such quantity over a long period of time and of such a type that will really contribute significantly to a stronger economic position for the Polish regime, it is likely that as a psychological warfare initiative, Washington will want to incline towards being “cautiously positive” on the subject of aid. This approach is related to the NSC decision to promote “peaceful evolution” of the situation in Eastern Europe.Apparent reference to NSC 5608/1, Document 80. It is highly doubtful that the US will favor a policy of “more catastrophes à la Hungary the better”. For the trouble with such a policy is that it leaves Russia, bloody-handed though it may be, in possession of the field, to a greater extent than it is in Poland today. For the present, therefore, it appears advisable to defer consideration of large-scale, long-continuing substantial aid, which could be captured and used for their own purposes by the Communists. A smaller, symbolic program of private organizational aid may be deemed adequate to meet the demands of the situation, as is pointed out in Part IV below. N. There is no commitment, moral, legal or otherwise, to undertake an “aid program” for Poland. The basis on which the Embassy approached the Polish Foreign Office in keeping with the Department’s instructions, was the President’s earlier address regarding helping freedom-loving peoples.See Document 99. The evidence that Poland has a freedom-loving government is far from persuasive, especially in the light of Poland’s vote in the United Nations on the Soviet side of the Hungarian question, and in view of the recently stated reliance of Poland upon the Soviet alliance. If Poland does not show by her future actions that she has become “freedom-loving” the sine qua non for economic assistance has not been supplied. Furthermore, the position of the Polish government, stated by the Foreign Office orally to the American Ambassador, and published in the Polish press on November 4See footnote 8 above. places the major emphasis not on “aid programs” but on restriction-free trade relations, with the possibility of credits. As the question of free trade relations would involve such legislative legislation as the “Battle Act”,For text of this act, named after Representative Laurie C. Battle of Alabama and known as the Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act (P.L. 213, approved on October 26, 1951), see 65 Stat. 644. It called for the termination of all U.S. economic, financial, and military assistance to any country trading embargoed items to the Soviet Union and its satellites. and such administrative questions as the enforcement and continuance of the policies of the International Coordinating Committee, “COCOM”, apparatus, it is by no means clear that the Polish emphasis is reciprocated by the United States. There may be much more ground for divergence than for concurrence of policies between the two governments in this sphere. IV. Help the Polish People. This, if decided upon as advantageous to the US to do, could be accomplished in a variety of ways. In this process, the interest and assistance of US citizens of Polish extraction can be given an entirely satisfactory outlet. There can be stepped-up gift package programs, through PKO, Red Cross, Jewish, Catholic, and Protestant religious organizations; loans, gifts, or shipments to churches, to societies, or to individuals. These could be accompanied by letters, publicity, and personal messages. Adverse action by the Gomulka regime could quickly put a stop to such gifts. Quid pro quos could be introduced into the program, covering religious, cultural, and press freedoms and cooperation. Any prestige deriving from this activity would accrue to non-Communist organizations rather than to a Communist regime. The Polish nation is very largely Catholic. The freeing of the Cardinal from house arrest has made a considerable impact upon the public. The channeling of either privately donated aid, or of United States government food surpluses through the nation-wide outlets organization of the Catholic church would probably place in the hands of the needy those items and products which have small strategic value, and would give the Communist Gomulka regime the minimum of prestige. An increased exchange of persons, official and unofficial, covering various fields of activity, conceivably would meet the double requirements of American and Polish government policy. The Polish Foreign Office, in its note of October 8, and in the conversation with the Ambassador on October 25,Regarding the Polish note, see footnote 2, Document 92. Regarding the Ambassador’s conversation, see Documents 109 and 110. made this suggestion. It is a policy that has received the approval of the United States government. In its implementation, such a program could contribute much to the influencing of Polish citizens with a durable pro-US effect; it would offer an opportunity to private individuals and organizations in the US that have Polish connections and sympathies to act; it would not contribute quickly or substantially to an increase in Poland’s military or strategic potential. There already exist agencies of the American government that are equipped and ready to put such a program into execution, including the Department of Agriculture, the United States Information Service, and others. V. International Action. If action to give economic assistance to Poland is taken by other countries, acting separately, or jointly, a considerable amount of discussion and collaboration would probably be advantageous. There are forums and organizations for this: the UN, the World Bank, the new International Development Agency, the International Red Cross, the Economic Commission of Europe, the European Coal and Steel Community, and the Organization for European Economic Cooperation. In determining the US attitude towards such international action, the factors and considerations mentioned above could be taken into account before reaching policy determinations. Willard F. BarberCounselor of Embassy Comment by the Ambassador: The foregoing is a compilation of thoughts and ideas of various members of the staff at Warsaw on the subject of possible aid to Poland. It represents an expansion of detailed discussion of various basic ideas and suggestions already submitted to the Department as the six points in Embassy telegram No. 562 of Oct. 29, 1956, and the nine points in Embassy telegram 540 of Oct. 26, as well as what we call the “shopping list” contained in Embassy despatch No. 175 of Nov. 6. This despatch should, therefore, be considered in that sense and not as a recommendation for or against aid to Poland. As regards the desirability of extending aid to Poland, there is a divergence of views even among members of my staff and between them and myself as there likewise must be a divergence of views in Washington. The difference is not so much, however, on the question of whether aid should or should not be extended but rather a difference of opinion as to what aid should be given, how it should be given, and when it should be given. A decision on these points depends upon careful consideration by Washington level authorities of the multiple factors covered in this despatch and a decision or decisions thereon at appropriate times. Substantially, my own views as of the present moment are as follows: 1. There is in Poland no catastrophic situation such as exists now in Hungary or might exist if there were a great shortage of foodstuffs which required what might be called the humanitarian type of emergency aid. 2. Until the Polish Government gives us a more suitable reply than a press release to our aid approach of October 25, we are somewhat stopped from making further offers of aid or assistance to Poland unless we want to make ourselves look somewhat ridiculous along the lines of the song, “Please, oh please take my money”, from “Call Me Madam”. 3. Assuming the Polish Government responds to our approach of October 25, 1956, and we agree to enter into discussions, I am afraid that, if the response is along lines indicated by Mr. Winiewicz on Oct. 25, those discussions may be long drawn out. It is difficult for me at the present time to see how we can acquiesce in Mr. Winiewicz’s “trade not aid” formula with respect to a wide range of commodities, without strengthening and enhancing the prestige of the Polish regime which is still closely allied with the Soviet Union. 4. Notwithstanding the above, I believe there is still an area in which we could extend aid and assistance which would benefit the Polish people and not too greatly add to the prestige of the regime. This field lies in the realm of exchanges of persons and some assistance largely in the agricultural and scientific fields. Such items will be found in the “shopping list” contained in Embassy despatch 175. In general, they relate to exchanges of agricultural students and technicians, the possible supply, on credit terms, of fertilizer and feed grains. Aid of this kind could be handled in such a way as to give maximum publicity in Poland so that the Polish people would know where the aid is coming from and the results would benefit, first, the Polish farmer and, second, the Polish people in general by increased production in foodstuffs. J. E. Jacobs 174. Notes for an Oral Report to the Operations Coordinating Board by the Chairman of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems (Beam)Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 5616 Series. Confidential. Attached to a memorandum from Beam to Fisher Howe, dated November 7, and forwarded, in turn, to W. Tapley Bennett by Archer Blood of the Reports and Operations Staff (S/S–RO) on November 9 and circulated as well to C, S/P, EUR, IO, P, and U/MSA. Washington, November 7, 1956. STEPS WITH SPECIFIC REFERENCE TO HUNGARY (1) Dramatic statements by American leaders (the timing up until now has been good but of course such statements should not be overdone). (2) The US Delegation at the UN has been requested to take follow-up steps; (a) to ask Secretary General to report to early General Assembly meeting on action envisaged in Resolution of November 5Resolution 1004 (ES–II) had been passed on November 4. including arrangements to send observers to Hungary and nature appeals he may have made to Moscow and Budapest. (b) to consider asking Asian abstainers on resolution to reconsider and further explain their position. (c) to suggest possible further resolution calling on USSR and Hungary to facilitate International Red Cross activities in Hungary, again urging contributions from member states. (d) to urge Pakistan to continue with its reported willingness to suggest and provide contingent for an international police force in Hungary. (e) to endeavor to arrange appearance of former Hungarian Cabinet Minister, Anna Kethly before UN, or reading of statement by her, or her appearance before one of the committees of the regular General Assembly session. (3) Propaganda appeals in Russian to Soviet troops in Hungary and East Germany by leaflet and by radio (in process of being done).See footnote 2, Document 171. (4) Continue with US assistance to refugees from Hungary; coordinate these activities on longer range basis; and early issuance by White House of vigorous statement (already drafted in State) reporting on US assistance activities and appealing for further support (all of these steps now being taken). (5) Press with the Hungarian authorities for the distribution of US relief through the International Red Cross or other international agencies (This has been done in response to an inquiry from the Hungarian Legation in Washington concerning the President’s offer of 20 million dollars of relief).See Document 155. (6) Assistance to select refugees to travel to key countries to tell their story (This being started and would include US tour by Anna Kethly, if she is willing to go). (7) Early announcement of administrative action to restore immigration quotas for Hungary (being set in motion). (8) White book on Hungary to be issued by RFE;See footnote 10, Document 171. composite program of radio recordings of appeals by Hungarian patriots; collection of film (already being done). (9) Expression of US appreciation of assistance being rendered Hungarian refugees by Western European countries; suggest they might broaden this by reception and care of Hungarian children in the same manner as was done by these countries after World War I (it would be appropriate for inclusion in a speech at UN). (10) Emphasize meaning of Hungarian experience in propaganda especially directed to neutralist countries, also Iceland, in view of base question. ACTIONS AIMED SPECIFICALLY AGAINST USSR It is not recommended that we revive the cold war on the scale of intensity of the late Stalin period. We shall certainly take some steps, and very definite ones, to register our revulsion against the Soviet attack on Hungary. These will include a suspension of the exchange of official delegations under the East-West contacts program and also non-attendance at Soviet social functions. We would also view sympathetically steps such as are now being undertaken by labor organizations in various countries to refuse to handle Soviet ships and goods. On the other hand, we would not wish to jeopardize some of the gains, small as they may be, resulting from the Geneva conferences. Thus, we would like the Amerika magazine exchange to continue and we should be willing to go ahead with limited cooperation with the USSR in the International Geophysical Year. Unless Soviet actions become generally more threatening, it would seem best to refrain from drastic measures such as blocking Soviet assets, intensifying trade embargoes, etc. 175. Memorandum of Discussion at the 303d Meeting of the National Security Council, Washington, November 8, 1956, 9–11:25 a.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Drafted by Gleason on November 9. The time of the meeting is from the Record of the President’s Daily Appointments. (Ibid.) A talking paper prepared for Hoover’s use at this meeting by the Bureau of European Affairs was forwarded to him by Beam on November 7. (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 5616 Series)  Washington, November 8, 1956, 9–11:25 a.m. [Here follow a paragraph listing the participants at the meeting and agenda item 1, “European Oil Supply Position in View of Developments in the Near East.” For text, see volume XVI, page 1070.] 2. Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. Security The Director of Central Intelligence said that he would first report briefly on the situation in Hungary. He said that the Soviet repression in Hungary had been ruthless and brutal to the last degree. . . . there were eye-witness accounts of what had happened from the U.S. Legation in Budapest. Mr. Dulles then reviewed what had happened in Hungary since the last meeting of the National Security Council,See Document 152. including reference to the Soviet admission that they had now 200,000 troops deployed in Hungary. Mr. Dulles also alluded to Janos Kadar, the head of the Hungarian Government. Mr. Dulles described Kadar as a potential Gomulka if his hands had not been so deeply stained by the blood of his own countrymen and if he had not acted in collaboration with the Soviets. Even so, he may yet turn out to be a Hungarian Gomulka—not, said Mr. Dulles, that he could put his trust in Kadar. Mr. Dulles went on to describe briefly the European reaction to what the Soviets had done in Hungary, concluding that these Soviet actions had reduced Soviet prestige in Western Europe to its lowest point in many years. He ended with the prediction that the rebellion in Hungary would be extinguished in a matter of days, if not of hours. Nevertheless, the Soviets would be faced with a problem in Hungary for many, many years to come. In turn, the situation presents the United States with the problem of what more we can do, . . . The President said that this was indeed a bitter pill for us to swallow. We say we are at the end of our patience, but what can we do that is really constructive? Should we break off diplomatic relations with the USSR? What would be gained by this action? The Soviets don’t care. The whole business was shocking to the point of being unbelievable. And yet many people seemed unconvinced. For example, said the President, he had just had a message from Nehru—or was it a point he made in a recent speech? Wherever it came from, Nehru had said that what was really happening in Hungary was obscure.The New York Times reported on November 12 that in a speech delivered on November 9, Nehru had several times described the Hungarian situation as confusing. Could anything be blinder? The President also cited Premier Bulganin’s message to him received this morning,For text, see Department of State Bulletin, November 19, 1956, pp. 796–797. in which Bulganin stated in effect that what was going on in Hungary was none of the business of the United States. The Vice President inquired whether Soviet action in Hungary had produced any unfavorable reaction in Asian capitals. Had anything occurred there comparable to the demonstrations which Mr. Dulles had described as occurring in Western Europe? Mr. Dulles replied that not very much in the way of unfavorable reaction had occurred in Asia, although there were a few instances. The Vice President commented that this seemed to indicate that our own true story had not got across in Asia. Secretary Hoover stated that if the British and French had not at this particular time decided to move into Suez, things would not have happened as they did in Hungary. If the British and French had stayed out of Egypt and the Soviets had nevertheless moved against Hungary, they would have been ruined in the eyes of world public opinion. Secretary Hoover doubted if they would under the circumstances have dared to move against Hungary. The President expressed his agreement. [Here follows discussion of the Middle East. For text of the discussion not printed here, see volume XVI, pages 1078–1086 passim.] [Here follows discussion of the Soviet presence in Syria.] Furthermore, the President said, it remained wholly inexplicable to him that any state in the world, Syria included, would play with the Russians after witnessing what had happened in Hungary. It is for this reason, continued the President, that we must go on playing up the situation in Hungary to the absolute maximum, so the whole world will see and understand. The Vice President agreed with the President’s proposal, and said that in carrying it out we should not neglect Asia. Mr. Dulles indicated that the Free Europe Committee was already engaged in preparing a White Paper which would give the world all the facts about what had happened in Hungary from the beginning. The President proceeded to quote from his most recent message from Nehru,In his November 7 letter to the President, Nehru had written as follows: “You have referred in your letter to what I said about the situation in Hungary. I have, indeed, been greatly troubled by what has happened there, and I drew the attention of Mr. Bulganin to it. He has briefly replied and has promised to send a fuller reply later. Meanwhile, we have been told by the Russian Government that they had previously decided to withdraw their troops from Hungary and had declared their general policy on the 30th October. Subsequent events compelled them to intervene temporarily to protect the lives of their own people as governmental authority appeared to have vanished and, in fact, killings were taking place. I entirely agree with you that armed intervention of any country in another is highly objectionable and that people in every country must be free to choose their own governments without interference of others.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File) commenting that Nehru seemed to be falling for the Moscow line—buying their entire bill of goods. The Vice President stated that the great message which we must get across to the rest of the world was that no state could afford to play in with the Soviet Union unless it wished to be taken over. [Here follows discussion of the Middle East.] At this point the President interrupted Secretary Hoover to say that Admiral Strauss had just sent him a note stating that moving pictures had been taken of Soviet tanks killing Hungarians in the streets of Budapest. The President asked whether such movies should not immediately be disseminated through our Embassies all over the world. Mr. Streibert answered that the USIA was already engaged in doing precisely this, and was trying to get the story out just as fast as it could. The President said it would be a good idea to send one of the best reels to Nehru. The Vice President advised sending one to Sukarno in Indonesia. [Here follows discussion of the Middle East.] The Vice President expressed the hope that while we must deal with the Near East problem, we should also give the Congressional leaders a good stiff talk on Hungary. There has been too great a tendency to allow developments in the Near East to divert attention from Hungary. Let’s assure that the Congressional leaders do not leave without a knowledge of what had really happened in Hungary.See Document 177. The Vice President thought this topic should come last in the briefing, and also suggested that the movies mentioned earlier should be shown to the Congressional leaders. The President commented that the present Congressional leaders have been acting in a wholly admirable fashion. The Attorney General warned the President that the Congressional leaders were very likely to ask him whether, in view of what had happened, the Government should not move now to exclude the Soviet Union from membership in the UN. The President replied that if he were asked this question he would say that we couldn’t shoot from the hip, but state that this was certainly something to be considered. [Here follows discussion of the Middle East.] Mr. Allen Dulles suggested that the Hungarian topic come first rather than last in the briefing of the leaders. The President and many other members of the Council thought this suggestion wise. The President went on to express the feeling that the Russians had jumped rapidly into the Near East situation not simply because the British and French had given them an opportunity, but because they have long hoped that somehow or other they could reach into the Middle East. Accordingly, we must be careful in briefing the Congressional leaders not to place all the blame for what had happened on Great Britain and France. Admiral Radford expressed warm agreement with the President’s suggestion. It was unwise to blame overmuch the British and the French. We should instead put the Near East situation in its true perspective, and indicate clearly ultimate Communist responsibility for what has occurred in the Near East. [Here follows discussion of the Middle East.] S. Everett Gleason 176. Editorial Note Hungary remained a subject of concern at the United Nations throughout November 8. The Secretary-General addressed an aide-mémoire to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Hungary (U.N. doc. A/3315) in which he referred to the fact that Resolution 1004 (ES–II) had called upon him to observe the Hungarian situation through representatives designated by him and to report back to the General Assembly “at the earliest moment”. He asked the Hungarian Government if it would admit observers for the purposes specified in the resolution. Until the investigation was completed, he indicated that he would be unable to conclude the other matters assigned to him by the resolution. At the start of the 568th meeting of the General Assembly, János Szabó objected to its consideration of Hungarian internal affairs as exceeding its jurisdiction, especially since the new Káadár government had declared the earlier Nagy appeals invalid. The Danish Representative commented that inasmuch as Szabó had previously spoken for another government he thought it appropriate to ask the Secretary-General to furnish information concerning his credentials. (U.N. doc. A/PV.568, pages 21 and 23) The Credentials Committee deferred a decision on this subject by a vote of 6 to 3. (Delga 38 from USUN, November 8; Department of State, Central Files, 310.5/11–856. As Lodge was informed the following day, the Department was disposed not to accept the credentials of any Hungarian United Nations Representatives as a means of exerting pressure to gain the admission of the observers. (Telegram 258 to USUN, November 9; ibid., 320.5780/11–956) The United States did not believe that it could permit the Hungarian case to be dismissed without further international action. Increasingly the tendency was to focus on humanitarian concerns because that avoided “possible undesirable repercussions in Middle Eastern case and minimizes ‘Cold War’ aspects Hungary.” In that manner the United States hoped to gain the initiative and not find itself confronted by proposals from nations such as Italy and Pakistan, which while neither “constructive” nor “responsive” to the problem would nevertheless be difficult to oppose. (Gadel 1 to USUN, November 8; ibid., 764.00/11–856) Together with Cuba, Ireland, and Peru, Italy and Pakistan submitted a resolution on November 8 again calling for Soviet withdrawal from Hungary, free elections, and an investigation by the Secretary-General. (U.N. doc. A/3316) The United States hoped to persuade Italy to defer a vote on this proposal for a day or two in favor of the United States proposal, which was scheduled to be tabled the next morning. (Gadel 2 to USUN, November 8; Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–856) 177. Editorial Note Speaking to the Bipartisan Legislative Leaders meeting at the White House on the morning of November 9, President Eisenhower made the following remarks: “The President wanted to note particularly that Hungarian developments have served throughout most of the world to convict the Soviet of brutal imperialism. This was the opposite of the old situation when neutral nations would never view Russia as being guilty of either colonialism or imperialism, and when Russia would never be disbelieved and we would never be believed. Further, the Hungarian situation warns us again that the Soviet is capable of changing its face almost instantly.” The Director of Central Intelligence followed the President: “Mr. Dulles stressed the ruthlessness and brutality of Soviet repression, citing the language of Soviet directives over radio communications. He concluded that Russia had lost a satellite and gained a conquered province, that in the outside world the myth of sweet reasonableness of communism has been destroyed with a resultant denunciation of it by former Party members and that the Soviets now realize that satellite armies are not at all trustworthy.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Legislative Meetings) Acting Secretary of State Hoover also addressed the legislators, reading from a paper prepared at the Department of State entitled “White House Congressional Presentation.” He concluded, in regard to Hungary: “1. The other Soviet satellites and Yugoslavia have been profoundly stirred. The pressures in East Germany have been stepped up. “2. Some of the Asian nations are awakening to the true nature of Soviet ‘assistance’. “3. The Western European nations have been brought to realize that the Soviet threat is again menacing and are looking to the tightening of NATO bonds. “4. Irreparable damage has been done within the Soviet European empire despite the setback to Hungary’s freedom. The Soviets cannot tighten their rule without creating new strains throughout the entire bloc. They have been forced to make concessions in Poland, as they did to Tito, which carry the seeds of disintegration.” (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–1356) At the end of the meeting, the participants adjourned to a conference room where they saw “the Hungarian atrocities film.” 178. Memorandum of Telephone Conversations With the President, November 9, 1956Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Prepared in the Office of the President. November 9, 1956 4:48 Cabot Lodge, from UN, N.Y. Resolution coming to the floor again tonight on Hungary.For text of the draft resolution, see the editorial note, infra. Amb. Lodge wondered if President could find his way clear to sending Bulganin another message, urging consideration of it. Lodge said there is the feeling at UN that for 10 years we have been exciting the Hungarians through our Radio Free Europe, and now that they are in trouble, we turn our backs on them.In the course of the 570th General Assembly meeting the morning of November 9, Soviet Representative Vasiliy Vasiliyevich Kuznetsov had accused the Voice of America and Radio Free Europe of appealing for a “counter-revolutionary upheaval” in Hungary. (U.N. doc. A/PV.570, p. 50) The President insisted that is wrong—that we have never excited anybody to rebel. Said further that Lodge can check State and USIA. Amb. Lodge said that is what they are beginning to throw at him, and he is glad to know this from the President. He will call State Dept. and ask them to prepare something. 4:50 Secy. Dulles (in Walter Reed) First, Secy. Dulles said he heard this morning’s meeting went very well.See Document 177. The President said it really did; and that afterwards, Johnson,Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson. HalleckHouse Minority Leader Charles A. Halleck. and whole group of others said it was the best thing they ever saw. They were urged to just keep still. About the week end, Secy. Dulles asked why didn’t the President consider going to farm for a little longer period—after election strain, and all this. But the President won’t. The President told Dulles of Cabot Lodge’s call. Second Hungarian resolution coming up, and they will pass it tonight. It seems that at the UN particularly many of our European friends are asking why we are so fretful about France and Britain with a few troops in Egypt, while we don’t show as much concern about Hungary. Lodge wants President to send another message to Bulganin, saying this is before the Council again this evening, and urging them to consider and act on it. Again to say we would send in UN observer team, to determine needs for food and medicine, and getting out the wounded. The President, however, feels there have already been too many messages. Dulles said he was not very enthusiastic about another to Bulganin. The President’s question: Are we in danger of putting ourselves in wrong in that we will urge Ben-Gurion and people like that if we don’t try to put same pressure on this fellow? Dulles’ reply was, I think, “Well, but you have.” The President repeated feeling that we have excited Hungarians for all these years, and now turning our backs to them when they are in a jam. Dulles said we always have been against violent rebellion. The President said he had told Lodge so, but was amazed that he was in ignorance of this fact. The President said, finally, he might dictate a short message saying this is again before the Council, and he wants to point out again the great feeling of relief if he would support that Resolution and act upon it. Then give draft message to Herbert Hoover for an opinion. The President doesn’t want to let Cabot down. But hates to send messages back and forth, when we know they won’t pay any attention to them . . . Ellipsis in the source text. Mr. Dulles said he doubts that the feeling about turning backs on Hungarians exists in any quarters but the French and British. President said that Lodge had mentioned France in particular. [Here follows discussion of the Middle East.] The President will go ahead with Bulganin draft message.The final paragraph of the November 11 Eisenhower message to Bulganin reads as follows: “It is difficult to reconcile your expressed concern for the principles of morality and the objectives of the United Nations with the action taken by Soviet military units against the people of Hungary. Your letter to me of November 7 concerning this tragic situation was deeply disappointing. Were the Soviet Government now able to comply with the Resolutions of the U.N. on the subject of Hungary, it would be a great and notable contribution to the cause of peace.” (Telegram 579 to Moscow; Department of State, Central Files, 674.84A/11–1156) He is sure it will have no influence on Bulganin; whether it has any influence on the UN, he is not sure. 5:06 Actg. Secy. Hoover. The President told him of conversation with Secy. Dulles, and about the proposed message for Bulganin. One thing President overlooked in discussing it with Dulles, was that the first paragraph would be an acknowledgment of their note of congratulationsOn November 8, Bulganin sent a message of congratulations to the President on his re-election. (Ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, Bulganin/Eisenhower Correspondence 1955–1958) Telegram 580 to Moscow, November 12, transmitted Eisenhower’s “grateful” acknowledgement. (Ibid., Central Files, 711.11–EI/11–856) In his memoirs, Bohlen noted his opposition to the “pleasant” acknowledgement of the Soviet message since the purport of the message was to demonstrate to the world that, despite the Soviet action in Hungary, relations with the Soviet Union were normal. (Witness to History, pp. 419–420)—and then call his attention to the Resolution that is up again, urging him to consider it, saying there is nothing else that could contribute to peace of the world. President told Hoover, also, of the 2 erroneous feelings in UN: (a) that we more or less egged the Hungarians on into this mess, and then turned our backs to them; (b) that we get very indignant about our friends in Egypt, and don’t show any concern for the others. Hoover thinks that the French only are expressing that feeling. He pointed out Bulganin’s short cryptic note on the message pertaining to foods and medicinesNot further identified.—and now all we could add would be the one on the observers going in. He thinks if we really wanted to accomplish something, we should get Nehru fired up a little bit; however, Hoover does not know whether Nehru would go in on the observer idea. President expressed wish that we had an Ambassador out there to whom this morning’s film could be sent.John Sherman Cooper had left India in April 1956 and Ellsworth Bunker had not yet been appointed to succeed him. The film was shown at the Bipartisan Legislative Leaders meeting; see Document 177. Instead, he suggested Indian Ambassador. Mr. Hoover said it could be flown over—will give that some thought. As for this next message, Hoover thinks there is very grave danger of wearing out President’s appeal on this situation. He wasn’t aware that there had been so many, until it came out at this morning’s meeting. The President will send him draft anyway, to be considered by State people. Asked that Mr. Hoover let AnnReference is to Ann Whitman. know whether or not they send it out. 179. Editorial Note At the 570th General Assembly meeting the morning of November 9, Ambassador Lodge introduced the following draft resolution: “The General Assembly, “I “Considering that the military authorities of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics are interfering in the transportation and distribution of food and medical supplies urgently needed by the civilian population in Hungary, “1. Calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to cease immediately actions against the Hungarian population which are in violation of the accepted standards and principles of international law, justice and morality; “2. Calls upon the Hungarian authorities to facilitate, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics not to interfere with, the receipt and distribution of food and medical supplies to the Hungarian people and to cooperate fully with the United Nations and its specialized agencies, as well as other international organizations such as the International Red Cross, to provide humanitarian assistance to the people of Hungary; “3. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Hungarian authorities to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General and his duly appointed representatives for the carrying out of the tasks referred to above. “II “Considering that, as a result of the harsh and repressive action of the Soviet armed forces, increasingly large numbers of refugees are being obliged to leave Hungary and seek asylum in neighbouring countries, “1. Requests the Secretary-General to call upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to consult with other appropriate international agencies and interested Governments with a view to making speedy and effective arrangements for emergency assistance to refugees from Hungary; “2. Urges Member States to make special contributions for this purpose.” (U.N. doc. A/3319) Lodge indicated that the resolution served an immediate need and should be quickly adopted. He considered the longer-range objectives of the five-power resolution introduced earlier (see Document 176) worthy of support. (U.N. doc. A/PV.570, page 48) 180. Editorial Note A number of resolutions dealing with Hungary were introduced and adopted at the 571st meeting of the United Nations General Assembly, which convened between 3 and 8:10 p.m. on November 9. Austrian Ambassador Franz Matsch introduced a draft resolution (A/3324) dealing with relief aid to eliminate the suffering of the Hungarian people. Then, in an effort to moderate the “alleged” harshness of some of the language in the United States-sponsored draft resolution (A/3319), Ceylon, India, and Indonesia introduced several amendments (A/3325), which deleted some specific references to the Soviet Union. Ambassador Lodge, however, indicated that the changes were unacceptable. The first vote to be taken was on the five-power draft resolution (A/3316), introduced on November 8. Ambassador Leonardo Vitetti of Italy agreed to the deletion of the words “and of the Convention on Genocide” prior to the vote. As amended, Resolution 1005 (ES–II) was passed by a vote of 48 to 11, with 16 abstentions. Hungary and Poland joined the Soviet Union in opposition to the resolution. The amendments to the United States resolution were then collectively voted on and were defeated by 45 votes to 18, with 12 abstentions. In this instance, Poland and Hungary voted in the affirmative while the rest of the Soviet bloc abstained. Thereafter, the United States won approval of Resolution 1006 (ES–II) by a vote of 53 to 9, with Hungary, Poland, and the Soviet Union casting negative ballots, while 13 nations abstained. The Austrian Representative deleted the pharase “by the fighting which is still continuing” from the first paragraph of the preamble to his draft resolution prior to its adoption (Resolution 1007 (ES–II)) by a vote of 67 to 0, with 8 abstentions. Poland and Hungary voted in favor; the Soviet Union abstained. The resolution reads: “The General Assembly, “Considering the extreme suffering to which the Hungarian people are subjected, “Urgently wishing effectively to eliminate this suffering, “Convinced that humanitarian duties can be fulfilled most effectively through the international co-operation stipulated in Article 1, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, “1. Resolves to undertake on a large scale immediate aid for the affected territories by furnishing medical supplies, foodstuffs and clothes; “2. Calls upon all Member States to participate to the greatest extent possible in this relief action; “3. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake immediately the necessary measures; “4. Urgently appeals to all countries concerned to give full assistance to the Secretary-General in the implementation of this task.” Ambassador James J. Wadsworth then announced that the United States was making $1 million available at once to the Secretary-General to be used to assist Hungarian refugees. (U.N. doc. A/PV.571) At the closing meeting of the Second Emergency Special Session of the General Assembly on November 10, Ambassador Lodge introduced a draft resolution (A/3330) “to place on the provisional agenda of its [the General Assembly] eleventh regular session, as a matter of priority, the question on the agenda of its second emergency special session”. Despite Hungarian and Soviet opposition, this was agreed to by a vote of 53 to 9, with 8 abstentions. (Resolution 1008 (ES–II)) Also on November 10, Secretary-General Hammarskjöld addressed another aide-mémoire to the Government of Hungary, which had not yet replied to his previous communication, asking whether it would permit the entry of observers he designated. He noted that if he did not hear something shortly that he would have “to submit the situation to the General Assembly for consideration and the steps it may wish to take.” Hungary’s initial response was to say that it was studying the contents of the aide-mémoire. (U.N. doc. A/3335) Hammarskjöld also addressed an aide-mémoire to the Soviet Union asking it to support his demand to Hungary so that he might be enabled to fulfill his mandate. (U.N. doc. A/3326) Pursuant to Resolutions 1006 and 1007 (ES–II), the Secretary-General sent a note verbale to the Hungarian Foreign Minister on November 10 requesting information “concerning the needs of the Hungarian people for medical supplies, foodstuffs and clothes from abroad”. Once he had this information, Hammarskjöld stated his desire to discuss the best way of providing the required assistance. (U.N. doc. A/3337) On November 11, the Hungarian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs informed the Secretary-General that “for technical reasons” the official text of Resolution 1004 (ES–II) was not yet available to him and it would have to be secured before Hammarskjöld’s aide-mémoire (A/3335) could be given detailed consideration. (A/3340) 181. Telegram From the Embassy in Austria to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–1156. Secret. Repeated to Moscow, Paris, Belgrade, and Munich. Vienna, November 11, 1956—5 p.m. 1268. Proximity and ties of history and blood between Austria and Hungary have perhaps distorted impression which I have received in Vienna of intensity and depth of feeling in Europe as it helplessly watches what appear to these Europeans as the death throes of Hungarian freedom. Nevertheless the offers of haven to refugees and other acts have demonstrated that the feeling of horror and frustration is not peculiar to Austria. When correspondents now in Budapest are able file their stories this feeling doubtless will become even more intense. In such a situation it is natural that one instinctively looks for someone to blame for his own impotence. Despite the British and French action in Suez which does indeed draw much of the fire (and this is surely no help to us) the US is the target of bitter criticism on part of many Austrians and more so on part of hundreds if not thousands of Hungarians with whom we have had direct or indirect contact. One of reasons is doubtless realization that no country other than US has capability of doing anything effective but reason almost universally given is that past declarations of policy but more specifically our radio and balloon operations have led to belief that we would be prepared do more than we actually done if any of the subject peoples attempted break free from Soviet tyranny. I am of course aware that neither the leaflets dropped nor the nature of broadcasts were designed to incite an uprising scope of these operations and in case of balloons dramatic nature of method did in fact given rise in considerable measure to false expectations. Regardless of cause I believe our future position in this part of world will suffer greatly if Hungarian affair ends without some action on part of US of a nature different from anything we have done, or at least made public so far. Our actions in the UN so far do not in my opinion achieve the purpose as they are widely regarded here as fitting into a pattern of our exploiting as part of the cold war any Soviet error. No Austrian to whom I have talked has produced a concrete practical suggestion other than that of an ultimatum from the US to the Soviet Union and they back rapidly away from this when asked to consider its implications. I find myself unable to make any suggestion without becoming involved in discussion matters of high policy beyond my competence and to which I know Department is giving most intense consideration. I am insufficiently informed of recent indications Soviet intentions and capabilities to do much more than shoot in the dark. Following are therefore not recommendations but suggested lines of thought and based on assumption nothing can be accomplished that will at this time effectively rescue Hungarian people from their tragic situation. Any action would of course have to fit into framework of policy decision whether we consider our best interest lies in eventual reestablishment Soviet New Look with at least indirect encouragement satellites seek freedom via path of national Communism or whether we should exploit to full Soviet action Hungary in intensification cold war with risk return to Stalinistic methods in East Europe and possibility new explosion. In any event seems to me we should attempt channel present anti-Soviet feeling in free world (as well as within Soviet bloc) into some constructive direction. Apart from Hungarian question our prestige and moral standing in Austria at least is higher than it has been for many years and any lead we give will have major effect. Hope following may at least be suggestive to those considering problem. Appears to me that unless we see possibility direct and confidential approach to Soviet Government, further statement by President or alternatively letter from him to Bulganin is called for.A letter to Bulganin from President Eisenhower was transmitted in telegram 579 to Moscow, November 11. (Ibid., 674.84A/11–1156) For maximum effect it should be made while there is still some active resistance continuing in Hungary and before Soviet policy toward Hungarian question in light new situation has become settled. Any action along this line could of course not be in fact or appearance a propaganda line but at least a genuine reassertion of our principles if not a declaration of our future policy. For example could the President not make an offer to Soviets that in return for immediate firm commitment from them to US or UN to withdraw Soviet forces from Hungary completely within given period of time—such as 6 months or a year—we would undertake certain commitments of which following are illustrative only: 1. We would recognize any Hungarian Government that may now be set up as an interim government until such time as Soviet troops are withdrawn and enter into joint effort with Soviet Union and other countries rebuild Hungarian economy. 2. That we would not seek (or accept) military arrangements with Hungary, or that we would recognize Hungarian neutrality if declared by government established after withdrawal Soviet troops. 3. That we could extend economic assistance or credits to other satellites, etc. Coupled with whatever carrots that were included could be threats or at least a dark picture of where the alternative road might lead. Realize we may not be in a position in present rapidly changing situation particularly in the Mediterranean to make the policy determinations which such statement or letter would involve but so far as I can see from here our interests will suffer if there is nothing more affirmative or positive on our part to compensate for enormous sacrifices of the Hungarian people and to hold out hope for their future than relief activities and unfulfilled UN resolutions. Thompson 182. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Beam) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–1256. Secret. Also sent to the Acting Secretary through Murphy. Washington, November 12, 1956. SUBJECT Recognition of New Hungarian Government. The present status of this question is as follows: Prior to leaving Washington Minister Wailes was instructed not to present his credentials upon arrival until he had received further instructions from the Department. Mr. Wailes arrived in Budapest on November 1 and on November 3 the Department authorized him to present his credentials, inasmuch as the Nagy Government seemed to be evolving along satisfactory lines.See Document 161. The Soviet attack began at 5 A.M., Budapest time, November 4 and Mr. Wailes was, of course, unable to act. After the fall of the Nagy Government, the Department instructed him not to present his credentials to the new regime pending further notice.He was instructed in telegrams 200, November 4, and 211, November 7. (Department of State, Central Files. 123–Wailes, Edward T.) Mr. Wailes has been continuously in touch with the Hungarian Foreign Office but as far as we know with no other Hungarian authorities. Istvan Dobi, the President of Hungary, to whom Wailes’ letter of credence was addressed, does not appear to have been eliminated and may nominally hold the same position. The decision taken tentatively in the Department is that Minister Wailes should continue to function without presenting his credentials as long as he is able to do so,At the Secretary’s Staff Meeting on November 6, Phleger suggested that the presentation of credentials be delayed and Murphy agreed that this should be the case until developments could be assessed better. Exactly one week later the matter was taken up again. At this meeting, the decision was deferred again. (Ibid., Secretary’s Staff Meetings; Lot 63 D 75) Wailes was informed in telegram 232, November 13. (Ibid., Central Files, 123–Wailes, Edward T.) particularly for the reason that his continued presence affords additional protection to Cardinal Mindszenty, who has taken refuge in the Legation, and enhances staff morale. Mr. Wailes has expressed his concurrence with this position. We are proceeding on the assumption that should the Hungarian regime refuse to deal with Minister Wailes because he has not presented his credentials, he should be withdrawn and the Legation be left in the hands of a Charģe d’Affaires. It would be inadvisable for the following reasons to break relations and withdraw our Legation: A. It would be disadvantageous from an intelligence-gathering point of view; B. We may be able to exert some influence on the future course of events by our presence in Budapest; C. U.S. withdrawal would be interpreted by the Hungarian people as abandonment of their cause.In telegram 272 from Budapest, November 12, Wailes advised against the closure of the Legation, advancing arguments A and C. (Ibid.) The Department expressed itself in Topol 778 to Paris, November 9, as believing it counterproductive to terminate relations with Hungary and the Soviet Union. (Ibid., 764.00/11–856) An anomalous situation exists in the UN at present. The Hungarian Minister-Designate to Switzerland was named by the Kadar Government as their representative to the UN and his credentials were telegraphed to the Secretary-General. These credentials were ruled as legally acceptable by the United Nations but in the General Assembly debate on FridayNovember 9. a number of delegations questioned whether any credentials issued by the Kadar Government could be regarded as valid. In this situation, we instructed our Embassy in Bern to withhold issuance of the visa for which Mr. Marjai, the Hungarian Minister-Designate, had applied.Telegram 714 to Bern, November 9, ordered the withholding of the visa for Jozsef Marjai until further instructions. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–756) Withholding of recognition of the proposed Hungarian UN representative would seem justified as a means of exerting pressure to bring about the admission of UN observers to Hungary in accordance with the General Assembly resolution. Aftermath of the Polish Crisis and the Hungarian Rebellion, November 1956–February 1957: Inquiries into the Alleged Role of U.S. Radio Broadcasting in the Hungarian Rebellion; U.S. Relief Assistance to Hungary and the Refugee Problem; U.S. Economic Assistance to Poland; Adoption by the National Security Council of NSC 5616/2, November 19, 1956 183. Editorial Note On November 12, the Kádár government informed Secretary-General Hammarskjöld “that the sending of representatives to be appointed by the Secretary-General of the United Nation is not warranted.” At the same time, Hungary expressed a willingness to cooperate with the International Red Cross in relief aid. (U.N. doc. A/3341) While he was pleased with this latter response, Hammarskjöld sought to persuade the Hungarian Government to reconsider its other decision. (A/3346) On the afternoon of November 13, the Secretary-General took up these points with Hungarian Foreign Minister Imre Horváth, in New York. Hammarskjöld raised the possibility of going to Hungary personally to deal with the U.N. role in relief administration. While he noted that he would have to check with his government, Horvath stated “You are always welcome”. The Secretary-General, who was to leave for Cairo the next day to negotiate the entry of the U.N. Emergency Force into Egypt, was reasonably certain that he would be able to travel to Hungary. (Delga 88 from USUN, November 14; Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–1456) Hammarskjöld hoped to set up two groups, an observer team which would proceed to Hungary and an investigation group based in New York. On November 16, pursuant to paragraph 4 of Resolution 1004 (ES–II), he named as members of the latter group: Judge Oscar Gundersen of Norway, Ambassador Arthur S. Lall of India, and Alberto Lleras Camargo, former Director General of the OAS and ex-President of Colombia. As it turned out, the Hungarian Government offered to meet with Hammarskjöld in Rome concerning relief aid and other United Nations resolutions. (A/3358) The Secretary-General replied on November 16 that Budapest and not Rome was where he proposed to confer. He indicated furthermore that he would take up this matter in New York upon his return from the Middle East. (A/3362) 184. Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of State (MacArthur) to the Acting Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11–EI/11–1356. Secret; Limit Distribution. A marginal notation on the source text reads: “Secty saw 11/13/56 H.H.Jr.”. Aside from Hoover, copies were sent to Murphy and to William B. Macomber. Washington, November 13, 1956. SUBJECT Briefing of the President, 8:30 a.m., November 13, 1956 Colonel Goodpaster and I met with the President this morning pursuant to the new liaison arrangements. Following the intelligence briefing which Colonel Goodpaster gave, the President was briefed on pertinent items in the Top Secret summary.The Department of State’s Top Secret Daily Summaries are ibid., Daily Summaries: Lot 60 D 530. In the subsequent discussion, the following points were of interest: [Here follows discussion of items 1–2.] 3. Several times during the conversation, the President expressed concern over reports which seem to indicate that many European people had the impression that the US had incited the Hungarians to rebellion. He said this concerned him and we should devote all our efforts to correcting this impression. He said it has never been our policy to incite captive peoples to insurrection, but we have always stood ready to assist in their peaceful liberation through giving strong moral support to the captive peoples. I told the President that we had this problem in mind and that I would of course let Mr. Hoover know of his concern that we find means of correcting the false impression speedily. [Here follows discussion of items 4 and 5 on the Middle East; see volume XVI, page 1120.] I assume that you will have S/S show appropriate paragraphs of this memorandum to appropriate Assistant Secretaries on a need-to-know basis. DMacA 185. Notes on the 46th Meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, November 13, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/11–1356. Top Secret. Drafted by Kelsey. Washington, November 13, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman Defense—Colonel Oscar R. Schaaf Defense—Mr. Roger Ernst CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell Office of Spec. Asst. to the President—Mr. Oren M. Stephens USIA—Mr. Alfred V. Boerner OCB—Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Edward L. Freers State—Mr. Robert O. Blake State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. John E. Horner State—Mr. Frank S. Collins Office of Spec. Asst. to the President—Mr. Francis G. Williamson CIA—Mr. Arthur M. Cox CIA—Mr. Emmons Brown CIA—Mr. Cord Meyer, Jr. USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey OCB—Mr. Warren A. Kelsey 1. Allegations Against RFE. Mr. Freers stated that Mr. Beam had asked him to take over the Chair for this meeting and that since he had nothing to bring up he wondered whether anyone else had. Mr. Comstock said that he thought that Mr. Beam wanted a discussion of the allegations made in Germany and elsewhere that RFE had stirred up the Hungarians to revolt and that the U.S. had then abandoned them.Telegram 1828 from Bonn, November 10, reported Bundestag speeches and Free Democratic Party press releases critical of RFE’s role in the Hungarian revolt. (Ibid., 940.40/11–1056) Mr. Freers mentioned that a Presidential statement on the subject was being prepared for issuance at his first press conference after the election on November 14,The President made a statement on Hungary at his press conference on the morning of November 14. For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1956, pp. 1095–1108. and Mr. Boerner mentioned that Mr. Streibert had told the President that VOA was innocent of such actions. Mr. Meyer said that he wished to make four points about these charges. First, the chronology of events refutes them. The October 23 rally was a demonstration of sympathy with Poland and the shooting had turned this demonstration into a riot. The legal government of Hungary had accepted the demands of the populace and the uprisings had been spontaneous. Second, RFE has never promised Western armed assistance in case of revolt nor incited the Eastern European populace to any action on the basis that such assistance might be forthcoming. Third, during the revolt we cross-reported events in Poland and Hungary; that is, we gave the Hungarians news about Polish events which Budapest did not give them and which may have encouraged them in their revolt, but this was straight news reporting and was done with the authorization of the Department of State and was consistent with policy. Fourth, we are insistent that RFE should not lecture the Hungarians nor give them tactical advice. An implication might have been made that Nagy should accept the demands of the populace but this does not bear out the allegations. Mr. Boerner said that VOA had concentrated on reporting what went on in Hungary. As a check, he was having the Hungarian language scripts translated and analyzed.VOA broadcasts to Hungary between October 23 and November 5 were reviewed by Andor Klay, Supervisor, Hungarian Unit, Division of Research for USSR and Eastern Europe. (Memorandum for the record by Jean Jerdaman, December 17; ibid., P/PG files: Lot 60 D 605 IPS General) He pointed out that when Pravda first made the charge that the West was stirring up the revolt, the Hungarian communist newspaper Szabad Nep had refuted this accusation.See footnote 7, Document 132. Mr. Meyer added that the Kadar Government had blamed the revolt on conditions brought about by the Rakosi clique and this, too, refuted the Pravda charges. Pravda had later weakened or withdrawn its accusation. Mr. Campbell said the President’s statement might well take a positive line; that is, we have always preached freedom and it was not this but the Soviet mishandling of the Hungarians which caused the blood bath. Mr. Freers said that the draft statement he had seen did make that point. Mr. Boerner said that his organization had a Hungarian defector, an eyewitness of the revolt, who was prepared to say that VOA and RFE had not incited revolt, and Mr. Meyer said that his organization had three refugee leaders of revolutionary committees who would say the same and who are sending a protest to the West German Free Democratic Party which had been particularly critical of the American-sponsored radio stations. The present situation was compared by Mr. Boerner to that after the East Berlin riots of June 17, 1953, when we had been accused of both action and inaction. He also mentioned critical views expressed on a domestic American television program. Mr. Burris raised the question, to whom do we address our argument? The Pravda charges have already been pretty well met but we must consider the feelings of the refugees and of such people as the Germans, the Swiss, and also domestic sentiment. The Western European criticism seemed to be directed not so much toward the content of the radio broadcasts as to the fact that we did not follow them up with effective action to help the Hungarians. Mr. Freers said that the Yugoslavs and Indians, on the other hand, had criticized our activity rather than our inactivity but we had always made it plain that we were opposed to the use of force. Mr. Boerner said that a long statement would sound too defensive. It should be a brief general statement to the effect that the demands for liberty had been so great that it had burst all bounds. The Presidential statement could not meet criticism in Germany fully but it would meet domestic American criticism. At this point, Mr. Beam entered, took the Chair, and read a draft of the President’s statement. 2. Balloons. Mr. Beam asked whether balloons were now being released over Eastern Europe and . . . replied that, by agreement with the State Department, none at present were going over Poland or Hungary, but that they were being released over Czechoslovakia and East Germany. Colonel Schaaf asked whether any were reaching the Soviet troops massed on Poland’s borders, and . . . replied that they did in East Germany. 3. Mongol Troops. Mr. Beam asked whether it was true that “mongol” troops were being used by the Soviets in Hungary and whether this fact was being exploited for propaganda purposes. Mr. Campbell said that it was being so exploited in Western Europe but not in Asia. Mr. Blake made the point that troops from all of the Soviet Union’s races were formed into mixed units and that therefore there were bound to be “mongols” in any large body of Soviet troops. 4. Olympic Games. Mr. Campbell mentioned that the Hungarian Olympic performers were defecting en masse. 5. Hungary and the UN. Mr. Brown asked what action on Hungary was being taken in the United Nations. Mr. Beam replied that it had been suggested that the UN observers go to Europe immediately but that we considered it more advantageous to get an investigating team started which would not have to go to Hungary to perform its work, since it would have access to documents, refugees, etc. Moreover, Mr. Hammarskjold might try to get to Budapest on his way back from Cairo. We hope that he would be able to do so since the advantages of having a UN official in the country at present would outweigh the consideration that the present Hungarian Government might gain some prestige thereby. In answer to questions why we preferred the investigators to the observers, Mr. Beam said that we had nothing against the latter but since it was obvious they were not going to get into Hungary the investigators offered better prospects. Mr. Blake gave the names of persons tentatively selected for the investigating team and Colonel Schaaf said that we should make the point that the communists were afraid to admit the observers.See Document 183. Mr. Meyer inquired whether any UN action was possible about the Soviet mass deportations from Hungary.Telegram 281 from Budapest, November 13, reported the first substantiation of Soviet deportation of Hungarians on a significant scale to the Soviet Union. (Department of State, Central Files, 661.64/11–1356) If the UN were on record against such deportations this would be a restraining factor. Mr. Beam mentioned that Italy might introduce a resolution condemning Soviet actions in Hungary but before taking our position on that we wanted to see what was in the resolution, since we would not want the British and the French condemned in the UN as aggressors in the Near East. Telegrams from BudapestTelegram 276 from Budapest, November 13, described the Kádár government as “certainly completely Soviet-dominated.” (Ibid., 764.00/11–1356) showed that there was no real government in Hungary but only Soviet occupation and this gave Mr. Lodge good material for exploitation. 6. Labor Boycott. Mr. Meyer stated that the international labor boycott of Soviet goods and services was becoming effective and that longshoremen in New York had refused to load the baggage of couriers. Mr. Blake mentioned the possibility of retaliatory Soviet action against our couriers. 7. Recognition of the Kadar Regime. Mr. Meyer asked whether we were going to recognize the Kadar regime. Mr. Beam replied that we do not want our new Minister to present his credentials but that we also did not want to have to withdraw our diplomatic staff from Hungary. Consequently, the Minister will probably eventually leave and the delegation [Legation] in Budapest would be headed by a Chargé d’Affaires. Ambassador Thompson had suggested a private U.S. approach to the USSR with a proposal that we would recognize the Hungarian Government as an interim government until Soviet troops were withdrawn, recognize Hungarian neutrality, and extend economic help.See Document 181. The Department was doubtful about such an approach, however, since the Soviets might come back with a corresponding move on the Near East. An approach by a neutral such as Sweden would be preferable. 8. Attitude on Neutral Nations. Mr. Meyer asked whether any progress had been made in representations to those countries who had abstained on UN resolution on Hungary. Mr. Beam replied that a letter was being sent to Nehru to counteract Bulganin’s letter to him,Telegram 1242 to New Delhi, November 11, contained Eisenhower’s response to Nehru. The President expressed his hope that India would find it possible to support actions in the United Nations dealing with the Hungarian situation. He went on to say that “Bulganin’s reply does not overcome the stark fact that a foreign power is intervening militarily to repress brutally the desire of the Hungarian people to exercise their fundamental rights to freedom and independence.” (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–1156) and Mr. Blake added that we were trying to encourage a statement from some Arab nations condemning Soviet action in Hungary. President Chamoun of Lebanon had expressed an interest in this. 9. Use of Hungarian Defector. Mr. Boerner again mentioned the Hungarian defector his organization now has and who is being surfaced shortly. This man is a professional photographer who took a lot of pictures of the fighting and wrote a blow-by-blow eyewitness account. Good use could be made of his pictures and story. The Nagy regime had been anxious to get him out and had issued him a diplomatic passport. He is to appear shortly before the Senate Internal Security Committee, but another sponsor would be desirable. 10. Miscellaneous Points Briefly Touched Upon. a. Mr. Boerner inquired about Nagy’s whereabouts and Mr. Beam said that they were unknown. b. Mr. Beam inquired whether jamming had been lifted in Poland. Mr. Cox replied that it had and also that internal jammers were out of action in Hungary. c. Mr. Meyer inquired about Anna Kethly’s activities and Mr. Beam said that the Second International is now sponsoring her.Kéthly met with Murphy and Beam, among others, the following day to outline her activities in seeking U.N. accreditation. Her major objective was to secure Soviet withdrawal under U.N. supervision, and she emphasized as well the need for International Red Cross control of the distribution of medical and other relief aid. In his memorandum of the conversation, Klay observed that “Notably absent from her account were any remarks tending to confirm allusions attributed to her in some press reports as to an alleged responsibility of American propaganda agencies for inciting the Hungarians to revolt.” (Ibid., INR Files: Lot 58 D 766, Hungary) Warren A. KelseyAssistant OCB Staff Representative 186. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/11–1356. Confidential; Priority. Warsaw, November 13, 1956—6 p.m. 670. Deptel 238.Telegram 238 to Warsaw, November 6, instructed the Embassy to inform the Polish Foreign Office that an official reply to the U.S. aid offer was still expected. (Ibid., 748.5–MSP/11–456) Saw Winiewicz this morning and told him Department did not regard PAP release official reply to approach on aidSee footnote 8, Document 173. which I made October 25 Pursuant Department’s instructions.See Document 110. He replied that was correct, saying PAP release was issued in response inquiries from Polish correspondents and rumors going around concerning offer of aid by US to Poland. When I asked when we might expect official reply, Winiewicz said he was prepared give it to me then and there, orally, in same manner in which I had presented our approach to him. He said matter had been considered by his government. Following substance conversation: Begin Summary. Poland cannot accept any aid or assistance of US (A) which carries implied or expressed political connotation or significance and/or (B) which provides for controls, to be exercised by American controllers in Poland, over end-use of such aid. He thought (A) was no great problem now in view President’s and Secretary’s statements that US was prepared give aid without requiring as condition the adoption of any political form of society by the recipients (apparently refers to remarks President’s speech October 31See Document 149. and Secretary’s speech October 27See Document 128.). As regards (B) he remarked he understood our laws and regulations concerning certain types aid required American controllers which made such aid difficult for Poland to accept. At this point, Winiewicz said Poland did not need emergency aid such as now required by Hungary; also increase in gift parcels, of which he had heard much, would not help solve Poland’s economic problems. Poland needed and would like have certain aid or assistance, on basis short-term credits (2, 3 to 5 years) or loans (he mentioned Export-Import Bank with which Poland’s relations and credit in past had been good) with respect following: (1) Grains, particularly wheat and rye. There is considerable need for feed grains for stock and hogs (fact confirmed by our agricultural officer WenmohsJohn R. Wenmohs.). When Tasked in what quantities, Winiewicz replied he was not certain. When I suggested corn, he said, “oh no, because our Polish hams have distinct Polish flavor due our feeding methods. If we feed them corn, we’ll merely get Virginia hams.” Somewhat later in conversation he mentioned USSR had excellent wheat crop this year and Poland could get wheat there but inferred from his insinuations that as Soviet terms harsh, preferred American wheat. (2) Fats and oils. Poland has considerable need (could not name quantities) for soya bean oil and certain fats for soap-making purposes. (3) Cotton. There is need for from 15 to 20,000 metric tons of American cotton, repeating what he had said previously that Polish mills are adapted use such cotton. (4) Fertilizer. There is need for fertilizers for types crops grown in Poland. Given no details as to types and quantities. (5) Coal mining machinery and improved mining methods. Coal mining is one of Poland’s best economic assets and there is growing domestic need for coal due increase in industrial production and in population. According present plans, there must be reduction in coal exports to meet domestic needs. This might not be necessary if Poland could buy modern machinery such as used in US and gain by learning our methods. He remarked that machinery purchases could best be handled by loan as he did not believe US Government possessed machinery as in case agricultural products. Winiewicz then remarked that there is big question in his mind as to what extent our complicated east-west trade regulations might impede kind of aid Poland needed but hoped this difficulty could be resolved. He then remarked we must remember in view of present world situation and Poland’s peculiar relations with USSR, it was difficult carry on Poland’s foreign relations and handle matters this kind. It was at this point he mentioned that USSR had good wheat crop this year (referred above) and that Poland could get hard currency credit from USSR to buy machinery but implied terms both cases would be onerous. In concluding, he said it was his opinion that less publicity there was about matter at this time better it would be for success. He gave as his reason peculiar relations with USSR, mentioning that high representatives of government would be going in few days to Moscow to discuss Polish-USSR problems in light recent developments and that until there could be something more definite about US aid, it was difficult answer numerous inquiries from correspondents and public. Said he thought only thing could be said publicly is that two governments are discussing possibility aid through normal commercial relations. Replied I did not know how Washington would feel about this. In concluding, said I would advise Department of what he had told me. End Summary. Comments: 1. This occasion Winiewicz seemed display more interest our aid approach than on October 25. His references to press and public inquiries may indicate regime is being queried why US aid not accepted. 2. At no point in conversation did he refer again “round-table” discussion all outstanding US-Polish problems which he emphasized October 25 and reference to which appeared PAP release. This would seem indicate these two matters can be dealt with separately. 3. Got impression regime finds it somewhat difficult discuss US aid at this time when other pressing problems resulting from recent events not yet discussed and resolved with USSR. 4. Got impression Winiewicz reference to possibility aid from USSR mentioned not as sort of blackmail (if we don’t get aid from USA we can get it from USSR) but rather to indicate decided preference for US aid, along lines indicated, as compared similar assistance from USSR. Jacobs 187. Telegram From the Office of the Permanent Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–1356. Secret. Repeated to USUN. Paris, November 13, 1956—8 p.m. Polto 1082. Pass Defense ISA. NAC continued discussion of Hungarian and Middle Eastern situations in private session November 13.These matters had first been taken up on November 7. (Polto 1033 from Paris, November 7; ibid., 764.00/11–756) Hungary. Ismay thought previous Council discussions had resulted in agreement that Perm Reps should urge respective governments to: (a) coordinate efforts in UN to exert maximum pressure on Russia, (b) give asylum to Hungarian refugees and provide supplies to Red Cross for Hungarian relief and (c) ban all cultural and sport activities with Russia. Regarding latter, asked what governments doing about Olympic Games. US indicated it cancelling participation in Moscow 1957 trade fair and suspending all bilateral cultural exchanges with Russians. Thought this would not include Olympic Games. Netherlands reported it had withdrawn from games, stressed was not governmental decision but decision of sports authorities. Decision taken because atmosphere inappropriate and money could more usefully be given to Hungarian relief. France and UK had no information about their intentions participate in Olympic Games. Canada thought it was too late cancel games. Germany reported its teams were going to games. On basis discussion, Ismay thought decision on participation should be left to individual governments. Regarding issuing stamp commemorating Hungarian resistance, US expressed view governments might appropriately decide on individual basis to issue stamp, but would be difficult obtain NATO position on this in view differing traditions and regulations on issuing stamps. UK and Denmark had no answer from their governments. No one else spoke. US reported Presidential decision admit 5,000 Hungarian refugees. Italy reported its authorities prepared accept 2,000 refugees in addition to children. Canada stated it giving priority to admission Hungarian refugees and had given $100,000 to UN refugee organization and $100,000 to Red Cross for Hungarian refugee relief. Germany indicated it accepting 3,000 refugees. France said Hungarian refugees already arriving in France, thought no limit had been set on entries. Emphasized need to help aged and infirm. Portugal said its authorities prepared accept 5,000 Hungarian refugees. Ismay thought this evidence of spontaneous desire assist Hungarian people should be publicized. At US suggestion, Council agreed urge member governments support report by UN of steps taken this regard. US reported Norway, Denmark and Sweden supporting Kethly appearance before General Assembly. Thought would be helpful if another NATO government joined in support, although thought US and UK should not do it. France reported it had information Kethly appeared recently at public meeting in New York, where she “raised fist and said in no case should Hungary be separated from Soviet Union.” France said also Kethly speaking November 13 in Paris, so NATO could get idea of her views. Netherlands said it planning support Kethly appearance before Assembly. Ismay recalled general Council view NATO countries should not withdraw missions or heads of mission from Moscow. Canada asked what were governments’ views on recognition new Hungarian regime. UK reiterated view question of recognition need not involve withdrawing or leaving mission since head of state unchanged. France pointed out was unwise state officially recognition withdrawn, because would be forced withdraw missions. Netherlands thought question should be left open and examined again if Hungary raised it. Turkey wished report its government’s views on Hungarian situation. Thought was relatively simple question of popular revolt against Soviet domination. Nothing could justify Soviet repression. Thought Soviet action showed insincerity of its peace propaganda. Turkey could envisage similar moves occurring in other satellites and thought matter should be kept before NAC. [Here follows discussion of the Middle East.] Perkins 188. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–1456. Secret. Repeated to Vienna. Moscow, November 14, 1956—7 p.m. 1199. I have read with interest the earlier messages from Embassy Vienna concerning suggestions as to how we should deal with Soviet Union in connection with Hungarian events but had in general been disposed refrain from comment, in part because I agree with some views expressed therein and also to avoid overloading communications with telegraphic dialogue with Vienna. However, Vienna’s 1268 to Department, repeated Moscow 36 of November 11,Document 181. goes beyond general considerations and makes specific and concrete suggestions for an approach to the Soviet Government and I feel therefore I must comment. There is much in this telegram with which I agree, including in particular reference to unfortunate comment moral commitment US has acquired in public opinion through heavily publicized balloon and radio operations even though as is apparent these operations had nothing to do with outbreak Hungarian revolution. I also agree that we should seek to devise some method to channel current anti-Soviet feeling into some constructive direction for the furtherance of our main purposes. However, while certainly brutal repressive action may be anticipated in Eastern Europe in event new outbreak, I do not believe Soviets can or are contemplating return Stalinist rule. With reference to concrete suggestions in Embassy Vienna reftel, I would oppose any approach Soviet Government along those lines since I feel results would be almost exactly contrary to purpose intended. Even if any reliance could be placed on “firm commitment” for future withdrawal Soviet troops, time period proposed, six months to one year, would offer Soviets and puppet government considerable margin of time to consolidate Communist regime and liquidate any possible anti-Communist leadership in Hungary. To offer in exchange to recognize “any Hungarian government” would seem to me to make US an accessory after the fact and would in essence, at least for period contemplated, legalize retention [garble]. I am not advocating that we should refuse all connection with whatever new Hungarian “government” may emerge from current situation or withdraw our Legation, but believe this question should be reserved pending developments. With reference to suggestion concerning absence US military interest re Hungary, I have already had occasion to draw attention of at least some Soviet leaders in early stage to Secretary’s Dallas speechSee Document 128. in which our attitude is clearly set forth on this point. While I agree in principle we should concentrate on withdrawal Soviet troops, as earlier suggested from Vienna (Vienna’s 1205 to DepartmentTelegram 1205, November 8, estimated that any national Communist regime in Hungary would not have enough popular support to govern. The Soviet alternatives were either to impose military occupation or to concede many of the demands concerning internal affairs that had sparked the fighting. Ambassador Thompson believed the United States should seek Soviet troop withdrawal rather than concentrate on the nature of the government. Any decision on recognition of the Hungarian Government should be based on its ability to ensure the removal of Soviet troops. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–856) repeated Moscow 33), I do not believe realistically any distinction can be made between presence Soviet troops and nature political regime since latter is totally dependent on former and entire purpose Soviet action with all its consequences to Soviet reputation throughout world was to ensure retention Communist political system. In circumstances I cannot see, beyond keeping our moral position intact, much that we can possibly do to help Hungarian people at this juncture short of use of force which would be a direct military encounter with Soviet troops and which for variety reasons I assume is not within our calculations. However, while recognizing with regret our inability to do much effective and in understandable desire to do something, we should be extremely careful not in any way become involved in approval or sanction Soviet actions. On general course Hungarian developments I believe Soviet policy will clearly be to promote national Communism in Hungary and will endeavor while insuring maintenance Communist system to produce developments somewhat along Polish line; publication here of Kadar’s radio announcement points very much in that direction. In conclusion, however, I am in entire agreement with Ambassador Thompson’s views that we should re-examine our entire position in Eastern Europe with I believe recognition that in present circumstances path of national Communism rather than any encouragement to armed uprising seems to offer best possibility for eventual recapture of independence and freedom by peoples concerned. Bohlen 189. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Prochnow) to the Chairman of the Council on Foreign Economic Policy (Randall)Source: Eisenhower Library, CFEP Chairman Records. Secret. Washington, November 14, 1956. SUBJECT Comments on Suggested Measures to Aid Poland and Hungary Over and Above Economic Aid Mr. Hoover has asked me to comment upon the various suggestions which you made to Mr. Jackson as to further steps which might be taken to assist Poland and Hungary.On November 1, the Secretary of the Council on Foreign Economic Policy, Paul H. Cullen, addressed a memorandum to Randall suggesting that agricultural surpluses be offered to Poland and Hungary at prevailing dollar prices; that most-favored-nation treatment be extended to them; that their membership in international economic and financial organizations such as GATT and the IBRD be advocated; and that unilateral and multilateral export controls be reviewed with an eye toward their relaxation. (Ibid.) These recommendations were incorporated in Randall’s November 1 memorandum to William H. Jackson. In addition, Randall suggested the negotiation of a treaty of friendship, navigation, and commerce and he also called for a review of the advisability of adjusting existing claims against Hungary and Poland. Copies of the memorandum were sent to the Secretaries of Commerce, State, and Treasury, the Administrator of ICA, and to the President’s Administrative Assistant. (Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/11–256) The events intervening since you wrote your memorandum to Mr. Jackson change the situation as far as Hungary is concerned. It is not now possible to make an evaluation as to the exact nature of the present government in Hungary. Therefore, our comments on Hungary should be read in the light of the above statement. In the case of any satellite country, if the President is prepared to make a determination that a particular country is no longer under domination or control “by the foreign government or foreign organization controlling the world Communist movement,” the United States Government will be in a position to take a number of steps to increase trade and other economic relationships with the particular country involved. It would be possible, for example, to give economic assistance, to enter into PL 480 transactions and to extend most-favored-nation treatment. However, until that determination is made, measures which can be taken are limited. It would not now be possible to make the above determination in the case of Poland. The Polish Government has indicated that it is not in a position to accept United States economic assistance, though it would be interested in United States credits on account of its investment and consumer needs.See Document 186. Attached are specific comments on each of the suggestions which you made in your memorandum of November 1 to Mr. Jackson. Herbert V. Prochnow [Attachment] “1. Offer to sell agricultural surpluses to Poland and Hungary at world prices for dollars. An earlier request from Poland for such action on our part was turned down quite recently.”The Counselor of the Polish Embassy, Henryk Jaroszek, informed the Department of State on July 31, 1956, that his country was still interested in purchasing wheat. (Memorandum of conversation by George Lister, July 31; Department of State, Central Files, 848.49/7–3156) Urgent and continuing consideration is being given by the Department to the possibility of making surplus agricultural commodities available to Poland and Hungary at any time that such a step would further US objectives. The Polish Government has already been informed of US willingness to extend economic assistance without political strings. Agricultural products could be included under such assistance under Titles II or IIITitle II of 68 Stat. 454 was “Famine Relief and Other Assistance”; Title III was “General Provisions.” of Public Law 480. With respect to Hungary the United States on October 29 authorized the use by American voluntary agencies in Austria of 2,000 tons of food to Hungarians needing food relief. On November 3, a program of $20 million of emergency relief was offered to the Hungarian people. Events in Hungary over the November 4-5 week-end have made it impossible for the US to ship relief goods into Hungary for the present but every effort is being made to allocate as much of this aid as is necessary for the immediate relief of some 10,000 Hungarian refugees in Austria. Meantime the Department is considering the advisability of a revision in US policy to permit dollar sales of agricultural products at world market prices to Poland (and perhaps Hungary, depending on further developments in that country) for cash or credit. Should the Department recommend a revision in current US policy and that recommendation were accepted, the US would be able to permit sales for dollars at world market prices for the item in which Poland thus far has shown the chief interest, namely wheat. The other major agricultural product that would be affected would be cotton. If in addition to cash sales the US should also permit extension of credit, Poland could then apply for an Export-Import Bank loan for up to 18 months. Commodity Credit Corporation also has a program of up to 3 year loans to American exporters—the benefits of which the latter are permitted to pass on to foreign buyers. Other avenues for making agricultural commodities available to Poland and Hungary would be through sales for local currency or barter (both under Public Law 480) provided the Congress would amend the law to permit such transactions or the President declared these countries to be “friendly” to the United States. The Administration attempted unsuccessfully during the last session of Congress to obtain an amendment to Public Law 480 to permit barter transactions with the satellite countries. “2. Move at once to promote trade with these two countries by taking the following steps: a. Extend most-favored-nation treatment to Poland and Hungary and thus make available to them tariff concessions now enjoyed by free world nations.” Section 5 of the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1951As enacted on June 16, 1951, Public Law 50 (65 Stat. 72) extended the authority of the President to enter into trade agreements under Section 350 of the Tariff Act of 1930 for 2 more years dating from June 12, 1951. The Tariff Act of 1930 (46 Stat. 590) was amended on June 12, 1934 by the addition of Section 350 entitled “Promotion of Foreign Trade” to Title III. (48 Stat. 943) reads as follows: “As soon as practicable, the President shall take such action as is necessary to suspend, withdraw or prevent the application of any reduction in any rate of duty, or binding of any existing customs or excise treatment, or other concession contained in any trade agreement entered into under authority of Section 350 of the Tariff Act of 1930, as amended and extended, to imports from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and to imports from any nation or area dominated or controlled by the foreign government or foreign organization controlling the world Communist movement.” Treaties of friendship, commerce, and consular rights between the United States and Poland, and between the United States and Hungary, containing a most-favored-nation provision in customs matters, were accordingly terminated effective January 5, 1952For text of the treaty with Poland, signed on June 15, 1931, see 48 Stat. 1507. and July 5, 1952,For text of the treaty with Hungary, signed on June 24, 1925, see 44 Stat. 2441. respectively. A Presidential determination that Hungary and/or Poland were not dominated or controlled by the foreign government or foreign organization controlling the world Communist movement would be a prerequisite to making available to these countries tariff concessions now enjoyed by free world nations. In the absence of such a determination the language of Section 5 would appear to preclude any other action by the Executive Branch at this time pending amendment by the Congress. b. Relax our export controls which sharply limit trade with Poland and Hungary, and seek to obtain appropriate relaxation of multilateral controls. On the basis of the brutal Soviet suppression of the revolt in Hungary, it appears that the Soviets have now determined to take a harder line in the satellites. Under these circumstances it would be premature to consider the relaxation of either our United States or the COCOM strategic controls. . . . Since the strategic control lists are highly selective, there is a wide range of possibility for an increase in trade with Poland and Hungary in non-strategic items. It should additionally be noted that since Poland is the principal trans-shipment point for shipments to Communist China, carried largely in Polish vessels, any strategic relaxation in trade controls applicable to Poland would result in increased diversions of Western-origin strategic goods to the Communist Chinese. “3. Advocate membership for Poland and Hungary in international financial and economic organizations such as GATT, the World Bank, and the International Finance Corporation.” The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is primarily designed to facilitate international trade among countries maintaining the essence of the free enterprise and competitive economic system. It is not particularly well geared to meet the problems of countries whose trade is entirely controlled by the central government. Portugal, Spain and Yugoslavia, for example, are not members of GATT. It is doubtful whether the economic benefits deriving from membership would be particularly attractive to either Poland or Hungary. Participation in GATT requires tariff negotiations with other countries prior to membership. A time gap of some length would therefore be indicated before actual membership could be effected. Tariff concessions, moreover, would have little significance in terms of imports into Poland and Hungary and other countries would accordingly be reluctant to make meaningful concessions on their part. This exemplifies the marginal usefulness to Poland and Hungary of membership in GATT. Poland and Hungary are eligible to join International Bank and International Monetary Fund. Poland was a member of both these institutions but withdrew. At the time of this membership, its quota in the International Bank was $125 million (of which 2% must be paid in gold or dollars). Its quota in the International Monetary Fund was also $125 million of which 25% normally would need to be paid in gold or dollars. Their interest in joining the International Finance Corporation will depend on subsequent internal developments; presumably they would not be interested unless they were prepared to foster private business enterprises. “4. Negotiate a treaty of Friendship, Naviagation and Commerce with Poland and Hungary such as we have with other nations.” a. Treaties of friendship, commerce, and navigation with Poland and Hungary were terminated in 1952 pursuant to provisions of the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1951, the purpose of the provisions being to secure denial of trade agreement concessions to countries under Soviet or Communist domination. An attempt to negotiate new treaties with those countries would raise questions as to whether the countries are now free from such domination and are likely to remain free. It is probable also that questions of East-West trade controls and the effect of certain standard treaty provisions thereon would need to be considered. b. It appears probable that independent governments in Hungary and Poland will be under serious threat of restoration of Soviet dominance for some time. United States proposals for treaties of friendship, commerce, and navigation are frequently subject to attack from Communist sources as instruments of imperialistic economic domination. Since such treaties cannot be expected to immediately produce significant advantages to the signatory countries, it should be considered whether attempts to negotiate such treaties might not have an immediately disadvantageous propaganda effect, or even provide bases for some sort of intervention by the U.S.S.R. c. It is understood that in the case of Poland the government intends to retain its communistic system. The normal treaty of friendship, commerce, and navigation has been designed to establish standards for countries where free enterprise prevails at least to an appreciable extent. No treaty project for a country with a wholly socialistic economy has yet been devised, and there would be serious problems involved in the development of such a project. Some of the provisions of the normal treaty could doubtless be adapted, but the heart of the treaty consists in the provisions relating to private investment, and those could have little application in a communistic economy. d. In view of the above considerations, it would appear to be worth serious consideration whether the best policy would not be to await further stabilization of the situations in Poland and Hungary, and then to consider the establishment of treaty relationships in connection with a study of prevailing legislation and general economic policies in those countries. “5. Review the advisability of further adjusting claims which the United States may have against Poland or Hungary, such as those arising out of World War I debt, nationalization and expropriation, lend-lease, defaulted dollar bonds, and surplus property sales.” There would appear to be little room for beneficial adjustment as concerns Polish World War I debts. Most foreign countries consider World War I debts as completely dead, and Poland doubtless has no thought of ever resuming payments. Its last such payment was in 1930, and with the exception of Finland no other debtor countries are making payments. Furthermore, a unilateral adjustment with Poland would raise problems regarding the status of all World War I debts. Surplus property credits also do not lend themselves well to adjustment. The magnitude of these claims is relatively well established and similar claims exist against a number of other countries. In such cases, it has been United States policy not to write down claims even when United States aid is simultaneously extended to the country in question. Poland has been making regular dollar payments on the annual principal installment of these credits, but not on the interest installment. There is no lend-lease account outstanding with Poland. The settlement of defaulted dollar bonds held by private United States residents is a matter ordinarily negotiated by the Foreign Bondholders Protective Council, Inc. We might wish to suggest to the Poles that they reopen these negotiations if this should be consistent with our broad approach to Polish debts. The value of United States claims arising out of Polish nationalization and expropriation has never been calculated closely. As an example: very rough estimates made in 1946 and 1951 vary from $80 to $150 million. There is obviously much room for adjustment as concerns these claims. We should welcome reopened negotiations, but would want to examine the individual claims closely before arriving at a precise magnitude in our negotiating position.Secretary of Commerce Sinclair Weeks replied to Randall on November 16. He thought it might be appropriate to sell Poland surplus agricultural commodities at world dollar prices. If Poland took the initiative, he indicated his receptivity to any effort that nation might take to join international economic and financial organizations. He considered the conclusion of a treaty of friendship, commerce, and navigation to be premature, because Polish internal conditions precluded agreement on many points the United States believed essential. Finally, he supported opening negotiations to settle outstanding claims. (Eisenhower Library, CFEP Chairman Records, Poland & Hungary File) 190. Despatch From the Legation in Romania to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.66/11–1456. Confidential. Bucharest, November 14, 1956. No. 186 SUBJECT Some Comments on Implementation of US Policy in Rumania The following comments on possible changes in the implementation of United States policy in Rumania as a result of recent events, are forwarded as representing my preliminary thoughts. During the last year, in accordance with United States policy, I have been encouraging closer relations with the Rumanian Government both in the cultural and economic spheres. This encouragement has been expressed along lines consistent with and directed towards the long-term objective of attempting to wean Rumania away from the Soviet bloc orbit. It has been directed towards bringing home to the Rumanian regime, particularly through pressure from lower levels where leadership is in the hands of opportunists or professional technical men rather than hard-core Communists, the greater advantages, both economic and cultural, to be obtained from close association with and dependence upon the United States. Specifically, I have urged the Department to grant visas to Rumanian agricultural representatives to visit the United States, study U.S. agricultural processes, and purchase hybrid corn and agricultural equipment; to permit a representative of the Dept. of Foreign Trade to investigate the sale of cement to the United States; to permit a group of Rumanian chemists to investigate contract possibilities in the United States; to encourage the sending of U.S. athletes, musicians, artists, and exhibits on an exchange basis to Rumania; and to develop trade in non-strategic goods to the fullest possible extent. By the same token I have attempted in my personal relations with representatives of the Rumanian Government to be friendly, inviting them to the Residence and entertaining them as I would representatives of countries with whom we have normal diplomatic relations. All members of the Legation staff have done likewise. The attempt to implement U.S. policy by these procedures has, I believe, resulted in progress and has been well justified though nothing spectacular could of course be expected in so short a time. Tremendous interest in the possibilities of U.S. trade have been stimulated by the above described visits and by visits of U.S. businessmen to Rumania. Rumanian experience with U.S. agricultural machinery has whetted their appetite for more. Not only I myself, but every member of the Legation staff is bombarded with questions concerning the possibilities of trade. The recent conference [convention] initiated by the RomaniansSee Document 139. was solely, I submit, for the purpose of working out, as a part of the mechanism for the settlement of claims, an incentive for the U.S. to trade with Rumania. By the same token in the cultural field we are being pressed for movies, exhibits, and visiting artists and musicians. The desire for close relations with us is a natural one on the part of those at the operating level of the Government. As stated before most of them are not Communists and have western affiliations. Once restrictions on their natural instinct to deal with us have been lifted by the top hierarchy, they fall all over themselves in their eagerness for U.S. contacts. We may take it for granted that interest and anticipation of what Rumania can gain from the United States is at this moment at a high pitch. The recent events in Hungary, in which Rumania played a considerable part, acting as a base for Soviet operations and a communication channel for the transportation of Soviet troops between Hungary and the Soviet Union, and through its press following minutely the Soviet line including open attacks upon the United States as backing the so-called fascist invasion of Hungary warrants a close study of our immediate future actions in this country, with particular reference to the continuation of the above described procedures towards increased economic and cultural activity. It is particularly important to consider what effect our reaction to these events can have on our ultimate objective. The following analysis attempts to present some of the factors to be considered: In a recent visit to the Department,See Document 42. I set forth in conferences my theory on the possibility of trying to woo the Rumanians away from dependence on the Soviets by the above described procedures and I urged that these procedures be stepped up. This theory was based on the premise that in this country, first of all, quite possibly the Soviet guard was lowered further than anywhere else. This was due to the fact that the naturally apathetic and non-aggressive Rumanian people had been in the last ten years terrified into complete submission, and the absence of any leadership outside of the regime, as well as the absence of any serious difference within the Communist Politburo reduced the chances of even an attempt at revolt to a minimum. Secondly, in this country there are fewer hard-core Communists than in any of the satellite countries. The old regime was thrown out, and the new Communist regime installed by the Soviet Union from the top, not by the acts of any large or active indigenous Communist group; necesarily therefore, non-Communist opportunists, technicians and professional and businessmen hold positions of considerable importance in the government; there are not sufficient Communists with ability or know-how to go around. As a result of these two conditions, it seemed to me that an unusual opportunity was offered for experimentation in the field of bringing pressure on the top leaders, through these non-Communist groups, which might start forces that eventually would be difficult to control. If these technical and professional men, whose job it is to try and implement the five-year plans and bring about the steady advance of the industrialization program of the Communist regime, could get a taste of what the U.S. could offer Rumania in this field, there was every likelihood of their bringing pressure to bear on the Politburo to take advantage of these opportunities. The Rumanian regime could be made to begin to appreciate how much faster the country would grow with guidance from the West than from the East. However, by the same token, it seems obvious that it is especially important to indicate to the regime, and at all levels, how much Rumania can suffer from close association with the Soviets. The dangers of permitting this country to indulge in one of her most prevalent weaknesses, that of having her cake and eating it too, and letting her get benefits from the United States without suffering detriment from wrongs (even if forced upon her) committed as a result of her Soviet connections, are very clear. It is just as essential, I submit, to bring home to her very forcibly by shock treatment the handicaps and frustrations she can suffer as a result of Soviet domination, as it is to show her the greater advantages she can reap from other than Soviet affiliations. The most effective way of accomplishing this in my opinion would be to cut off immediately all trade negotiations of any kind and permit no more export licenses to be issued to Rumania for the time being. The reasons for this action should be simply and clearly stated to the Rumanian authorities concerned with these matters. This should include particularly the GarstGarst’s comments on his trip to Romania are in Department of State, Central Files, 411.6041/6–856. deals of hybrid corn and machinery since the Rumanians set great store by the Garst relationship. It should be noted, also, that the first of the above premises is of course no longer true. The experience of the Soviets with Hungarian resistance and the loyalty of the Hungarian army to the people is bound to make them very careful in all satellite countries, including Rumania, from now on. It remains to be determined what should be done in the cultural field. Our efforts in this field are only in the very initial stages. First of all for obvious reasons it is believed that of course all cultural relations should be held in abeyance until emotional feelings aroused by the Hungarian affair have quieted down. Thereafter, it is submitted, these relations should be slowly resumed and gradually built up. Cultural relations result in benefits for the people as distinguished from the regime. They stimulate and maintain interest in the United States on the part of the people. Cultural relations in the trade field such as moving pictures of United States machinery and trade practices can drive home to the level upon which we wish to work the benefits of U.S. trade which the relation of the regime with the Soviets has prevented from coming to fruition. It is particularly in this line that an effort should be made after the passage of a suitable time. The Rumanian Government as well as the other satellites, has been concentrating during the past year in building up its prestige in the eyes of the Western and particularly of the Afro-Asian world. Strong efforts have been made and have been continuing to persuade me to advise my Government to raise United States diplomatic representation to the rank of Ambassador. At the present time there are only four Ministers here besides myself. England, France and Italy have been recently joined by Egypt. It is reported that Israel and Argentina will increase their representation to that of Minister. I have recently been holding informal conversations with the British, French and Italian Minister on the question of the advisability of an announcement by each of our governments separately that Rumania’s close adherence to the Soviet Union recently has convinced us that she has not shown sufficient independence to warrant our having any more representation than a Chargé d’Affaires here. It is agreed that this would have a shattering effect on Rumanian prestige and in view of their particular temperament be unusually effective in its impact. What effect this could have on the Rumanian people is a matter that should be carefully considered. The present reaction of the Rumanian people is one of extreme disappointment, amounting in some instances to disgust and disapprobation, at the failure of the United Nations and of the United States to come to the aid of the people of Hungary. This is a familiar and expected reaction of a people who have no intention of sticking their own necks out but expect everyone to rush to their aid at no matter what risk. Further discouragement by such action as that described above would not in my opinion make them any more supine than they are now. It would not make them dislike the present regime or hate the Soviets less. There is not only no present resistance but there are no signs of resistance in the future which might be discouraged by this action. It is not believed that the morale of the people would suffer as a result of such action. It is recognized that this entire matter is deserving of considerably more studied treatment than has been given to it in this preliminary despatch. These thoughts are submitted as first reactions to the events in Hungary. These events, due to their geographic proximity, the active participation of the regime in furnishing transportation for Soviet troops, and above all the close affiliation of the Hungarian minority in Rumania to the people of Hungary, have made a tremendous impact on the people of Rumania. They are watching and will continue to watch the reaction of the United States (for which they have had extensive admiration amounting in some instances to adulation) with the greatest attention. Robert H. Thayer 191. Aide-Mémoire From the Austrian Embassy to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–1556. Ambassador Karl Gruber presented this aide-mémoire to Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration Loy W. Henderson. Also present was Tyler Thompson, Coordinator of Hungarian Refugee Policies and Activities. Henderson stated that the United States did not intend to separate families and would administer its procedures as liberally as the law permitted. (Memorandum of conversation by Horace G. Torbert, Jr., November 15; Ibid.) Washington, November 15, 1956. As a consequence of the tragic events in Hungary more than 25.000 refugees have, within a few days, crossed the Austrian frontiers and have found shelter in Austria. In view of the nature of the fighting as well as of the incredible sufferings in Hungary it is to be expected that the stream of refugees will continue and that their number will increase considerably. Austria has during the last decade given shelter to more than half a million refugees, about 190.000 of whom are still in this country. Just as in the case of all these earlier refugees, Austria in these days is conscious of her obligations imposed by humanitarian principles and she readily grants asylum to all refugees in accordance with the convention on refugees. These refugees are crossing the Austrian frontiers without any belongings, partly sick and wounded, accompanied by their wives and children. Austria assumes a considerable burden in taking care of these refugees. The Austrian Federal Government notes with satisfaction that a number of states have already in the first days declared themselves ready to share these burdens with Austria by accepting refugees in their countries and by contributing money and relief donations. In view of the great number of refugees that have come to Austria and of those that are still to be expected, the Austrian Federal Government, however, considers it necessary that all states who share the belief in the principles of humanity continue to contribute to the burdens thus arising, in proportion to their economic possibilities. The Austrian Federal Government, therefore, urgently requests all these states to facilitate the fulfilment of this task. The Austrian Federal Government believes that the following measures would primarily constitute most effective help for the refugees. 1. The rapid admission of refugees to the various countries. The Austrian Federal Government, however, would like to point out that a prior examination of the human and economic qualification of the refugees as a condition for their admission, as well as an admission of only certain age groups, or an admission subject to other qualifications would not constitute effective assistance. Austria cannot examine the economic or human qualifications for each refugee to remain in Austria, but grants shelter to whoever asks for asylum. It is, therefore, only just that the other states should admit refugees in the same varying composition as they are being admitted by Austria. In particular it should be avoided that families be separated by admitting for immigration only ablebodied and younger persons. 2. Financial contributions. The accounting of the amounts contributed by the different governments will be made under the control of the Austrian Court of Accounting (Rechnungshof) which is responsible to the Austrian parliament. The Austrian Federal Government will in time submit a report on the use of the money. 3. Contribution of various relief goods such as foodstuff, clothes etc. Contributions of such relief goods should, however, only be made after prior consultation with the Austrian Federal Government in order to avoid surplus in one field and scarcity in another: direct contact may be established with the Federal Ministry of Interior, which will act as a central point for such relief shipments. The use and distribution of those relief goods will also be accounted for in time. 192. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet UnionSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–1156. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Beam; approved by Murphy; and cleared with Elbrick, Walmsley, and Phleger. Also sent to Vienna and repeated to Stockholm and Bern. Washington, November 15, 1956—8:27 p.m. 601. We have given careful study to the suggestions in Vienna’s telegrams 1205See footnote 4, Document 188. and 1268Document 181. and agree that the cardinal objective should be to bring about Soviet troop withdrawal from Hungary. From the text furnished us, Bulganin statement to Nehru on this subjectIndian Ambassador G.L. Mehta forwarded to the President the substance of Bulganin’s note on Hungary on November 9. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File) does not go beyond previous general assertions but we intend take steps to bring to Nehru’s notice the importance of making troop withdrawal a key test of Soviet promises. Your 1199Document 188. just received and similar questions have occurred to us re advisability of direct US approach to Soviets. Latter unlikely to be impressed with our professed lack of military interest in Hungary since real political advantages would accrue to us from Soviet withdrawal. Furthermore Soviets might attempt to broaden direct approach on Hungary into attempt to privately negotiate with us on Middle East. Occurs to us appeal re Hungary to Soviets might usefully come from European nation, perhaps non-NATO neutral such as Sweden or Switzerland with confidential US support. Approach in Moscow might strengthen projected Hammarskjold discussions in Budapest. Basis of neutral appeal could be that Soviet attack on Hungarian population has caused profound widespread shock throughout Europe and that disturbances and misery far from over as shown by reported deportations and continuance of Budapest strike.The Workers’ Council of Greater Budapest, which was established on November 14, called off its strike on November 19 as a sign of good will, but other local councils did not. Could be pointed out that Hungarian reaction certain to become even more bitter and it would be to Soviet advantage to make use of outside assistance in order to bring about pacifying and honorable way out from current difficulties. In order avoid cutting across UN resolutions neutral appeal should concentrate broadly on need for plans for withdrawal Soviet forces, latter perhaps in connection with Hungarian declaration of neutrality. Approach could be supported by reference to possible economic assistance to Hungarians under UN auspices. Views addressees requested. Hoover 193. Editorial Note On November 15, Cuba introduced in the General Assembly a draft resolution, which was subsequently twice revised, dealing with the issue of deportations. The United States supported A/3357/Rev.2 despite a reference to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. Operative paragraph 2 of the draft, as amended, urged the Soviet Union and Hungary to cease deportation of Hungarian citizens. Ceylon, India, and Indonesia also introduced a draft resolution on forcible deportations on November 19, which was revised three times. (U.N. doc. A/3368/Rev.3) This resolution urged Hungary to accede to the Secretary-General’s request to allow observers to enter Hungary in order to report on the issue of forcible deportation. The Department of State view was that the United States Delegation should not lobby too strongly for passage, but that a U.S. vote in favor would serve to secure Asian cooperation. Some Latin American delegations and some members of the United States Delegation had reservations about the Asian resolution in that, unlike the Cuban proposal, it did not accept as fact the information about the Hungarian deportations. But since the overriding consideration was the desire to get observers into Hungary, a positive vote was considered advantageous. The full positions of the United States Delegation to the Eleventh Session of the General Assembly are in the minutes of the third meeting of the delegation, US/A/M/(SR)/52, November 26; Department of State, IO Master Files. In the course of the debate in the General Assembly on the Cuban draft resolution on November 19, the Hungarian Representative (Horvath) bitterly castigated the “regrettable role played by the Radio Free Europe and Voice of America broadcasts.” (A/PV.582, p. 105) Ambassador Lodge responded: “As regards the statement that we sought to give the impression that there would be United States military help in Hungary, I assert on the very highest authority—and this has been gone into very thoroughly—that no one has ever been incited to rebellion by the United States in any way, either by radio broadcasts or any other way.” (A/PV.583, p. 117) On November 21, both the Cuban and the Asian resolutions on deportations were adopted by substantial votes, but Hungary and the Soviet Union opposed in each instance. In addition to Resolutions 1127(XI) and 1128(XI), a third resolution was passed that day dealing with refugee relief. (1129(XI)) For text of these resolutions, see U.N. doc. A/3572, page 63. 194. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State–Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, November 16, 1956, 11:30 a.m.Source: Department of State, State–JCS Meetings: Lot 61 D 417. Top Secret. Drafted by Murphy’s Special Assistant, Richard B. Finn. Those in attendance included, among others, Murphy, Bowie, and Beam of the Department of State; the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, Lieutenant General C. P. Cabell, and Robert Amory of the CIA; Gleason from the NSC; Chairman of the JCS Admiral Radford; and the Chiefs of Staff of the Air Force and Army, Generals Nathan F. Twining and Maxwell D. Taylor, respectively; the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Arleigh A. Burke; and the Commandant of the Marine Corps, General Randolph McC. Pate. A note on the source text reads: “State Draft. Not cleared with Defense.” Washington, November 16, 1956, 11:30 a.m. [Here follows a list of participants.] 1. Eastern Europe At Mr. Murphy’s request Mr. Beam reviewed the situation. A general strike continues in Budapest. Kadar does not have the confidence of the workers. Deportations which had been on a considerable scale may have been reduced or stopped because of protests by the Hungarian people. The Hungarian Foreign Office is confused and refers everything to the Soviet Union. Satellite missions and the Indian mission in Budapest are getting excellent treatment in contrast to other missions. The U.S. is maintaining a policy of aloofness to the Kadar regime and is watching developments. We think it best to keep our staff in Budapest and not to break relations. Hammarskjold has requested the Hungarian Government to permit UN observers to enter and is himself planning to go to Budapest. Press stories indicate that Soviet troops in Hungary are puzzled at the extent of the revolt because they had been told they were sent to Hungary to fight fascists. In reply to Admiral Radford’s question, Mr. Beam said that there had been reports of student demonstrations in Rumania and there was general uneasiness throughout the satellite area.Telegram 294 from Bucharest, November 14, referred to the increasing number of student arrests. (Ibid., Central Files, 766.00/11–1456) He also said that our communications with our Legation in Budapest are now pretty good. Mr. Murphy commented that we are making efforts mostly by radio to reach Soviet troops in Hungary, an activity which Marshal Zhukov would undoubtedly dislike, since he has always been very sensitive about the morale and thinking of his forces.See footnote 2, Document 171. Admiral Radford inquired about the Hungarian proposal to meet Hammarskjold in Rome. Mr. Beam said that we would oppose a meeting in Rome rather than in Budapest. Admiral Radford said he had a feeling that we were not pushing hard enough on Hungary. Mr. Murphy replied that we all have somewhat that feeling and that the Department is examining every means of getting favorable action. He reviewed the efforts being made to play up Soviet deportation of Hungarians and other efforts being taken through the UN to focus attention on Hungary. He noted that the issue of accepting the credentials of the new Hungarian delegation is now under consideration by the UN Credentials Committee. Regarding other satellites, Mr. Beam commented that the present boss in RumaniaGheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej. is a strong man who has been able to maintain tight control. We have little news about Bulgaria but control there is also tight. Mr. Murphy said he thought the recent remarks of Marshal Tito were important and would have a definite effect.Reference is to Tito’s November 11 speech to the Yugoslav League of Communists at Pula, in which he described the first Soviet intervention in Hungary as “absolutely wrong,” but the second intervention as necessary to safeguard socialism in Hungary. For text of the address, see Zinner, National Communism, pp. 516–541. He also referred to a statement by the four Asian prime ministers who have recently met in New Dehli and criticized Soviet actions in Eastern Europe.Reference is to a communiqué issued by the Prime Ministers of India, Ceylon, Indonesia, and Burma. Mr. Murphy expressed the opinion that Tito’s statement would have a greater impact than anything the U.S. could say. He commented that the attitude of Yugoslavia might be considered as having some bearing on the question of our military aid program for Yugoslavia. General Twining commented that the Joint Chiefs are encouraged a little by the recent Yugoslav position. [Here follows discussion of matters unrelated to Eastern Europe.] 195. Editorial Note On November 19, President Eisenhower sent a personal message to C. D. Jackson of Time, Incorporated, in which he wrote: “I know that your whole being cries out for ‘action’ on the Hungarian problem. I assure you that the measures taken there by the Soviets are just as distressing to me as they are to you. But to annihilate Hungary, should it become the scene of a bitter conflict, is in no way to help her. At the same time, if the United Nations is to work, Mr. Hammarskjold must act as he, and the United Nations, see fit. “One of my friends sent me a particularly moving document on the case of decency versus extinction. I quote from it two or three sentences: “ ‘Partisanship has no place when such a vital question (as atomic self-destruction) confronts us. Mothers in Israel and Egypt, sons in England and France, fathers and husbands in the United States and in Russia are all potential victims and sufferers. After the event, all of them, regardless of nationality, will be disinterested in the petty arguments as to who was responsible—or even the niceties of procedure . . . That War (would be) so terrible that the human mind cannot comprehend it.’ “I realize that this letter in no sense answers your urgent suggestions. Someday perhaps you will be down here and we can talk matters over.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries; the ellipsis is in the source text.) 196. National Security Council ReportSource: Department of State, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1, Poland and Hungary. Top Secret. In a covering note to the NSC, November 19, Lay summarized the action taken by the NSC at its 304th meeting on November 15: “The President has this date approved the statement of policy in NSC 5616/1 as amended and adopted by the Council and enclosed herewith as NSC 5616/2; directs its implementation by all appropriate Executive departments and agencies of the U.S. Government; and designates the Operations Coordinating Board as the coordinating agency.” Annex A containing statements by the President and Secretary of State on Poland and Hungary and Annex B containing U.N. resolutions on Hungary are not printed. Washington, November 19, 1956. NSC 5616/2 INTERIM U.S. POLICY ON DEVELOPMENTS IN POLAND AND HUNGARY General Considerations 1. Events of great magnitude in Poland and Hungary necessitate an appraisal of the situation and consideration of current U.S. policies, objectives, and courses of action toward those countries. Our initial objective toward the Eastern European satellite area has been to encourage, as a first step toward eventual full national independence and freedom, the emergence of “national” communist governments. While these governments might continue to be in close political and military alliance with the Soviet Union, they would be able to exercise to a much greater degree than in the past independent authority and control in the direction of their own affairs, primarily confined in the first stage to their internal affairs. Poland 2. Developments in Poland appear favorable to the attainment of this objective. The Gomulka Government has proclaimed its “national independence and equality” and has asserted its right to pursue its own internal road to “socialism”. At the same time it has declared continued loyalty to its alliance with the USSR and, though requesting the retirement of Soviet armed forces to their usual stations, has declared Soviet troops must remain in Poland and East Germany. 3. In Poland, as in Hungary, recent developments have revealed the strong anti-Russian and anti-communist sentiments of the population. Unlike Hungary, the existence of strong leadership in Poland at a critical moment, fear of a reunified Germany with irredentist claims, and the timely promise of reforms, together with an assertion of “national independence” linked with a closely calculated defiance of Russian pressure, evidently has served to enable a reconstituted Polish communist government to set forth on its new course with the acquiescence, if not support, of the majority of Poles. 4. The United States has already indicated directly to the new Government that a Polish request for economic assistance, particularly for wheat or other surplus commodities, would be given sympathetic study.See Document 109. Severe legal and administrative limits are imposed on such assistance.See Annex C. [Footnote in the source text.] On the other hand, opportunities exist for materially aiding Poland in the general area of trade with the free world. Hungary 5. Developments in Hungary have differed significantly from those in Poland. In Hungary, a nationalist movement, similar to that in Poland, was triggered into national revolt by the intervention of Soviet troops called in by the Hungarian Government in the first hours of its difficulty. The subsequent demands of the people on the government went far beyond those originally sought and became anti-communist as well as anti-Soviet. Under Nagy, the Hungarians moved from a program of modest reforms to one in which the Nagy Government announced Hungary’s withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact and appealed to the UN for aid in obtaining the cessation of Soviet intervention, the withdrawal of Soviet troops and the recognition of Hungarian neutrality. 6. The Soviet Government renewed on November 4 its efforts to suppress the Hungarian revolt by installing a new puppet regime headed by Kadar, and by the employment of greatly increased Soviet armed force. Soviet reaction to UN actions and to the President’s appeal to Bulganin on November 4See Document 166. have made clear Soviet determination to maintain its position there by force of arms. The Kadar regime has reverted to a program of modest reform promises including a promise to negotiate in the future for the withdrawal of Soviet forces while making it clear that the political and military alliance with the USSR must be maintained. 7. The direct intervention of Soviet troops in fighting the Hungarian population, and the threat of intervention of Soviet forces in Poland, illustrate that, at least in those countries where Soviet troops are stationed, the Soviet Union is willing to use its armed forces to prevent the coming into power of a non-communist government, or to prevent a communist government from altering a policy of close military and political alliance with the USSR. Moscow was apparently willing in the case of Poland to accept, however reluctantly, a communist government which, while remaining loyal to its military and political alliance with the USSR, asserts its “national independence” and its right to pursue its own internal road to communism. Policy Conclusions 8. The events in Poland and Hungary have revealed to both the Soviet Union and the rest of the world how much the maintenance of Soviet control in East Germany and Eastern Europe depends upon the presence of Soviet forces in this area. . . . 9. It seems unlikely that U.S. action short of overt military intervention or obvious preparation for such intervention would lead the USSR deliberately to take steps which it believed would materially increase the risk of general war. Soviet suspicions of U.S. policy and present circumstances which involve Soviet troop movements and alerts probably increase the likelihood of a series of actions and counter-actions which might lead to war. Courses of Action Poland 11. Provided that the current situation with respect to Poland is not fundamentally altered: a. Make an early approach to the Polish Government in response to its note of October 8See footnote 7, Document 173. indicating our willingness to discuss with it all problems affecting U.S.-Polish relations. 12. In the development of economic relations with Poland encourage the Poles to devote their energies to the satisfaction of consumer demands and peaceful trade. 13. While avoiding specific endorsement of the Gomulka Government, seek to influence the new Polish leaders to adhere to and fulfill its commitmentsSee SNIE 12–2–56. [Footnote in the source text. SNIE 12–2–56 is Document 137.] for reform made to the Polish people which will advance U.S. objectives. 14. Increase contacts and exchanges between Poland and the United States on economic, scientific and cultural bases in the context of NSC 5607.For text of NSC 5607, see vol. XXIV, p. 243. Hungary 16. In pursuing our immediate objective of terminating harsh Soviet measures of repression and retaliation, mobilize all appropriate pressures, including UN action, on the USSR against such measures, while reassuring the USSR that we do not look upon Hungary or the other satellites as potential military allies. Such appropriate pressures might include the following as required: a. Maintain constant pressure in the UN and elsewhere on the USSR for compliance with the UN Resolution of November 4, 1956.Reference is to Resolution 1004 (ES–II); see Document 164. b. Initiate or support UN action designed to achieve free elections in Hungary under UN auspices, as soon as law and order have been restored. c. In the event of continued Soviet defiance of UN Resolutions, consider: (1) Initiating or supporting UN action for an embargo by member nations on all trade with the USSR. (2) Initiating UN action or action with other nations outside the UN or unilateral action to obtain agreement to sever diplomatic relations with the USSR. 17. Consider whether it is advisable to make in the UN or elsewhere a proposal of Hungarian neutrality on the Austrian model. 18. Seek to keep alive the commitments for reform made to the Hungarian people which will advance U.S. objectives, including the total withdrawal of Soviet forces from Hungary. 19. Immediate relief assistance for the Hungarian people in the form of medical, food and other supplies has been offered through appropriate channels and should continue to be made available to supply their needs for the duration of the emergency.The U.S. Government was not planning to deal directly with the Hungarian Government on relief matters. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) had undertaken the responsibility of making relief arrangements and the United States was assessing the suitability of those arrangements. (Telegram 1402 to Bonn, November 21; Department of State, Central Files, 864.49/11–1656) The first Red Cross relief convoys had entered Hungary on November 11 and 14. 20. If a government comes to power in Hungary at least as independent as that in Poland: a. Be prepared to make available at Hungarian request economic and technical assistance in moderate amounts sufficient to give the Hungarians an alternative to complete dependence on Moscow. b. Increase contacts and exchanges between Hungary and the United States on economic, scientific and cultural bases in the context of NSC 5607. c. Furnish disaster relief, especially for Budapest. d. Take appropriate steps to reorient Hungarian trade toward the West, and urge the countries of Western Europe, especially West Germany and the United Kingdom, to offer economic assistance and trade inducements. 21. Encourage the Austrians to maintain their announced policy of granting asylum to Hungarians who may seek it. Aid the Austrians to meet the problem of an increased number of Hungarian refugees by financial and other material assistance from U.S. resources; and encourage the UN and friendly governments to assist. Should a considerable number of Hungarians seek refuge in Austria, urgent consideration will have to be given by the United States and other friendly governments to their immediate care and swift resettlement. Encourage the Yugoslav Government to grant asylum to Hungarians crossing over into Yugoslavia and to cooperate in international measures for their care and resettlement. General 22. As a matter of high priority, exploit fully throughout the world propaganda opportunities afforded by recent events in Poland and Hungary. 23. The Planning Board should urgently undertake a study of policies and actions which will encourage or bring about withdrawal of Soviet forces from Eastern Germany and Eastern Europe. 24. As soon as developments in the area can be adequately assessed, review “U.S. Policy Toward the Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe” (NSC 5608/1),Document 80. and “U.S. Policy Toward Yugoslavia” (NSC 5601),Scheduled for publication in volume XXVI. in the light of such developments. 25. As a matter of urgency, under currently organized governmental mechanisms, undertake a study of the situation in other European satellites to formulate plans and determine U.S. courses of action in the event of future revolutionary actions or uprisings, whether successful or unsuccessful, in those countries which indicate a movement away from control by the USSR. Annex C (Prepared by the International Cooperation Administration) The extent to which U.S. assistance could be made available would vary according to whether or not the recipient country would agree to comply with the Battle Act.See footnote 19, Document 173. (It should be noted that the President may grant exceptions to the applicability of the Battle Act with respect to certain shipments, but not in respect of arms, ammunition, implements of war, and atomic energy materials.) I In case of non-agreement to comply with the Battle Act, assistance would be limited to the following: (A) Mutual Security Assistance: 1. Under Section 401 (up to $30 million in the case of either country) by Presidential Determination that such assistance is important to U.S. security. 2. Under Sections 402 and 505, sales of agricultural surplus or other commodities or services, but only if the local currency proceeds were used for concurrently developed programs for the purchase of commodities for third countries and appropriations for the benefit of such countries were charged. (B) P.L. 480: surplus agricultural commodities: 1. Under Title I. Sales can be made only to “friendly nations,” which requires a determination that these countries are no longer “dominated or controlled” by the USSR or a foreign organization controlling the world communist movement, and provided further that the local currency proceeds be used either by the U.S. or for the purchase of commodities for third countries. 2. Under Title II. Emergency Relief could be provided only to the peoples, not to the Government. 3. Under Title III. Commodities could be donated to voluntary agencies for use directly in the assistance of needy persons. II In case of agreement to comply with the Battle Act the following additional possibilities exist: (A) Mutual Security Assistance: 1. Under Section 131. Defense Support—commodities or services. For assistance in this category the President would be required to find that such assistance will strengthen the security of the United States and promote world peace and the recipient country would be required to subscribe to the several undertakings and agreements specified in Section 142. Defense Support Assistance could be given wholly on a grant basis. However, funds for this purpose would have to be sought. (FY ’57 Defense Support funds appropriated for Europe primarily Yugoslavia and Spain amounted to $68,700,000, to which might be added some “carry-over” from prior year funds. The amount for Europe could be augmented, up to 20 percent, by Presidential transfer of funds under Section 501.) 2. Under Section 409, ocean freight charges could be provided for shipments by voluntary agencies or the American Red Cross. (Total appropriated for this purpose is $3 million.) (B) P.L. 480: Surplus agricultural commodities: 1. Under Title I, sales could be made for local currency, to be utilized by the countries involved for agreed purposes. 2. Under Title II, emergency relief could be provided directly to the Governments rather than limited to their needy people. 197. Memorandum From the Acting Director of the United States Information Agency (Washburn) to the PresidentSource: Department of State, USIA/IOP Files: Lot 63 A 190, Hungarian Situation—1956. Confidential. Two annexes dealing, respectively, with examples of VOA programming prior to and during the revolt and a Presidential statement on USIA’s mission are not printed. Washington, November 19, 1956. SUBJECT Voice of America Broadcasts to Hungary [Here follows discussion of schedule, format, and basic policy.] Tone and Content: As the official voice of the U.S. Government, the tone of VOA broadcasts has been kept straightforward, factual, forceful—in line with Director Streibert’s memorandum to the President of October 27, 1953.For text, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. II, Part 2, p. 1754. Stridency and inflammatory content have been avoided. Programs have relied on truth, objective news coverage, and commentary from the U.S. policy viewpoint. The main lines of emphasis during the period from November 1954 to the Geneva Summit MeetingIn July 1955. were: (1) to keep alive behind the Iron Curtain the idea and hope of freedom, (2) to reflect U.S. interest in and concern for the welfare of the East European peoples, (3) to state periodically that the U.S. could not accept Soviet domination of the enslaved peoples of satellite Eastern Europe as permanent, (4) to voice U.S. support of the right of the peoples of Eastern Europe to governments and institutions of their own choosing, and reinforce the belief that the Soviet puppet regimes can not meet the test of history, (5) to foster satellite nationalism, and (6) to keep alive a sense of identification with Western ideals. In compliance with NSC directives, these lines of emphasis did encourage the satellite people to stand fast in the face of their Soviet dominated regimes. However, VOA did not incite to revolt nor did it in any way commit the U.S. to any action to restore liberty to the Soviet satellite nations. For the most part the above lines were formulated in public statements by high-level U.S. Government officials and were emphasized as appropriate in VOA output. After the Summit Meeting these lines were modified upon the recommendation of Minister Ravndal, who expressed the view that the Hungarian people did not need to be reminded of Soviet oppression—that they were already doing all that could properly be expected of them, and were aware of U.S. sympathy. Accordingly, VOA output to Hungary placed greater emphasis on news of important world developments of interest to the Hungarian people, on features depicting American life and thought, and on the theme of peaceful change. Also, after the 20th Congress of the CPSU, a major effort was made to encourage evolutionary changes weakening the ties binding the satellites to the Soviet Union. This was promoted primarily by cross-reporting evolutionary actions and trends within the Soviet orbit. Recent Programming: During the uprising of the Hungarian people, which began October 23, VOA neither encouraged nor discouraged the Hungarian freedom fighters; it sought only to keep the Hungarian people informed as best it could. Broadcasts to Hungary consisted entirely of heavy news coverage of the Hungarian developments and reporting world reaction to the events in Hungary. The statements of the President and the actions taken in the UN were given the fullest coverage. With respect to developments taking place in Hungary on which we had to rely in large measure on Hungarian sources, extreme caution was exercised to avoid broadcasting back news which might prove inaccurate or inflammatory. All news carried in the broadcasts was centrally gathered and carefully edited. In its tone, the Hungarian broadcasts were calm, factual, and objective. Care was taken to omit material, although verified, which might have had an incendiary effect on the Hungarian audience, such as stories concerning Soviet atrocities. Certain programs even warned the freedom fighters to be cautious and not go too fast. Anna Kethly, a leader of the Hungarian Social Democratic Party, and a member of the Imre Nagy Government, at a press conference in Washington last week stated that the Hungarian uprising was a spontaneous revolt and was not instigated by any outside source. U.S. broadcasts kept the patriots informed, but did not inspire their actions. Abbott WashburnPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 198. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.64/11–1956. Secret. Repeated to Vienna and Munich. Budapest, November 19, 1956—11 p.m. 324. Department pass USIA. Bela Kovacs and two of his lieutenants sought asylum at US Legation on morning November 4.See Document 162. Asylum request denied but temporary shelter overnight granted due heavy bombardment. Legation officers who conversed with Kovacs impressed by his sincerity and honesty. Some hurt feelings involved on his part because he like Hungarians in general had presumed on greater American aid than was possible to grant. Hungarian-speaking officer of Legation engaged Kovacs in conversation which led to discussion of VOA and RFE and of US policy vis-à-vis satellites in general. Kovacs expressed opinion that US radio misled Hungarian people into believing they could count on effective US aid in event of trouble with Soviets. Kovacs said official pronouncements from highest US Government levels had also lent toward creating this illusion. He vehemently stated his opinion that if US policy toward Soviet Communism was purely defensive one the US should have directed its anti-Communist propaganda activities at USSR and should have left the East European states alone. Kovacs left little doubt that in his opinion the US for the attainment of its own selfish goals, had cynically and cold-bloodedly maneuvered the Hungarian people into action against the USSR. Although in opinion of the Legation the Hungarians would have acted the same even though our radio media had pursued more moderate line vis-à-vis the Hungarian Communist Government, there is no question that our past radio propaganda is at present source of much embarrassment to us. Legation personnel who have lived through entire period here since October 23 are keenly aware of idealistic manner in which Hungarians have behaved and of the high moral plane on which revolution was conducted. This makes it all the more difficult to explain or attempt to justify our radio propaganda programs and political pronouncements—a fact which I feel most strongly should be borne in mind in formulating future programs and pronouncements both for Hungary and other curtain countries. Information about Bela Kovacs temporary presence in Legation is not to be used by the media.In telegram 262 to Budapest, November 21, the Department of State expressed concern about the frequent recurrence of “vague accusations against RFE” of the kind made by Kovacs. The Legation was requested to provide specific examples of broadcasts which it considered “ill advised” or subject to “serious misinterpretation.” (Department of State, Central Files, 611.64/11–1956) Wailes 199. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Dulles) to the PresidentSource: CIA Files. Secret. Attached to a memorandum from Cord Meyer, Jr., to Allen Dulles dated November 23. Washington, November 20, 1956. SUBJECT Radio Free Europe The U.S. Government has never admitted responsibility for the acts or statements of RFE. However, policy guidance has been given RFE and that guidance, with minor deviations, has been followed, as indicated below. 1. In line with National Security Council policy and with the guidance of the Department of State, the policy governing RFE’s broadcasts to Hungary and the other satellites was based on the following principal points during the four month period between the publication of Khrushchev’s secret speech to the 20th CPSU Congress and the outbreak of the Hungarian revolution: a. To encourage peaceful evolutionary changes working toward the liberalization of their institutions. b. To cross-report the progress of anti-Stalinism and the achievement of a degree of liberalization in the several captive nations. c. To take full propaganda advantage of the Tito–Khrushchev declaration in Belgrade (2 June 1955)Not printed. See Document 15. which states, “questions of internal organization or differences in social systems are solely the concern of the individual countries.” Moreover, an RFE policy directive, in full effect since 12 December 1951, states categorically: “Speakers are warned not to yield to a natural impulse to bring hope to their compatriots by promising armed intervention by the West. To raise the hopes of our audiences in this fashion would be to do them a cruel disservice; it would also constitute radical misrepresentation of the present policies of the western powers. Such talks may not be broadcast on RFE.” The peoples of Hungary and Poland have been encouraged to look not to armed revolt, but to the gradual relaxation of the de-Stalinization process as their best hope of eventual freedom. 2. During this period RFE (as well as Free Europe leaflets) played the Khrushchev “secret speech” heavily; reported western reaction and the reaction of various communist party leaders in the West to the secret speech; gave full play to the Belgrade Declaration of “differing roads to Socialism”, gave appropriate treatment to the rehabilitation of various “Titoists” and national communists throughout the satellite area, reported all evidence of the liberalization process wherever taking place; and gave full play to the attempts of Gomulka to establish greater freedom from Soviet control in Poland. RFE also broadcast messages of encouragement expressed by President Eisenhower, Secretary Dulles, Adlai Stevenson and other American leaders, pledging that the cause of the eventual freedom of the captive peoples would remain a basic part of American policies. The resolution of the U.S. Senate and the platforms of both political parties, calling for freedom of the captive peoples by peaceful means, were likewise given full coverage. 3. When the Hungarian revolution began on 23 October, RFE immediately broadcast the news of the demonstrations which took place in Budapest. As the peaceful demonstrations changed to revolution, and as various local Hungarian radios fell into the hands of patriots, RFE was given specific authorization to report the broadcasts of such radios throughout the country but was cautioned to avoid tactical advice and intervention. By this means the general population outside Budapest became better informed about the course of the uprising since these patriot radios could be heard only in limited areas due to their low power and to Soviet jamming. RFE also broadcast western reaction to Hungarian events, including statements by the President of the United States, the Secretary of State, and expressions of solidarity with the patriots on the part of western trade unions, student groups and other leaders and organizations. RFE gave full play to free-world reaction against the use of Soviet military repression, and also fully covered the action on the part of the United Nations with respect to Hungary. During this period, RFE also broadcast various appeals in Russian to Soviet troops in Hungary not to fire on the Hungarian people who were fighting for freedom, and urged the withdrawal of such troops from Hungary. 4. As far as can be determined from a review of scripts currently available, no RFE broadcast to Hungary before the revolution could be considered as inciting to armed revolt. No RFE broadcast to Hungary implied promises of American military intervention. However, after the revolution was well under way, a few of the scripts reviewed do indicate that RFE occasionally went beyond the authorized factual broadcasting of the demands of the patriot radio stations within Hungary to identify itself with these demands and to urge their achievement. There was some evidence of attempts by RFE to provide tactical advice to the patriots as to the course the rebellion should take and the individuals best qualified to lead it. As soon as these deviations from policy were noted, steps were taken to insure rigid supervision of broadcasting content. Tapes of the actual broadcasts are expected shortly and will be reviewed by Hungarian language specialists. 5. Conclusions: a. Policy guidance provided to RFE and by RFE to its Hungarian desk was consistent with U.S. policies toward the satellites. RFE broadcasts were generally consistent with such policies. b. From all information available to date, RFE did not incite the Hungarian people to revolution. c. From all information available to date, RFE did not directly or by implication offer hope that American military help would be forthcoming to the patriots. d. RFE broadcasts went somewhat beyond specific guidances in identifying itself with Hungarian patriot aims, and in offering certain tactical advice to the patriots. e. The chronology and nature of events in Hungary and the statements of the Hungarian Government itself prior to its overthrow make it clear that the uprising resulted from ten years of Soviet repression and was finally sparked by the shooting on 23 October of peaceful demonstrators, and did not result from any external influence, such as RFE broadcasts or Free Europe leaflets. 200. Memorandum From the Director of the International Broadcasting Service (Button) to the Acting Director of the United States Information Agency (Washburn)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 511.404/11–2856. Secret. Drafted by Alexander A. Klieforth, Chief of the Eastern European Branch of the International Broadcasting Service (IBS/PME). Attached to a memorandum from E. Lewis Revey, Chief of the Soviet Orbit Staff in the Office of Policy and Programs of USIA (IOP/LS), to Ralph S. Collins, Public Affairs Adviser of the Office of Eastern European Affairs (EE). Washington, November 21, 1956. SUBJECT Comment on Budapest Cable No. 324 of November 19, 1956Document 198. We have read Budapest cable No. 324 of November 19, 1956, particularly the third paragraph, with much interest. For many years, the relationship between our Legation in Budapest and the Voice of America was a model of cooperation, support and understanding between the field and Washington. In a steady stream of telegrams, despatches and official-informal communications, the Legation in Budapest continuously and immediately informed Washington of developments in Hungary and usually made recommendations as to how these developments were to be treated by the media. The former minister to Budapest, Mr. Ravndal, was a strong believer in the necessity and efficiency of VOA programming to Hungary, once calling it the most effective arm of American policy in Hungary and his staff shared this view. On his return to the United States last summer, on the occasion of a Hungarian-American celebration in Cleveland, Ambassador Ravndal requested that his address there in Hungarian be broadcast to Hungary by the Voice and this was done with wide coverage.The speech was broadcast in August and September. (Telegrams 53 and 65 to Budapest, August 20 and 31, respectively; Department of State, Central Files, 123–Ravndal, Christian M.) A number of the recommendations and suggestions made by our mission in Budapest could not be used either because of the volume of the suggestions or because of the necessity to maintain in Hungarian output a careful balance and necessary attention to commentaries on American foreign policy and features and other material projecting the American way of life. Because of over-all policy considerations, it was normally impossible for the Hungarian Service to use suggestions made by the mission in Budapest that it speculate on certain developments as they occurred. The list of official messages from the Legation in Budapest containing media recommendations is very long and the recommendations themselves usually most detailed. To cite but a few examples of recent months, Telegram 428 of May 23 and Telegram 431 of May 25Neither printed. (Ibid., 764.00/5–2356 and 764.00/5–2556, respectively) analysed the ferment within organizations and groups in Hungary and recommended review of what it termed the miserable failures of the Communist regime. The Legation asked that the media play up the rich and varied life in the contemporary United States, and by inference stress the barrenness of life under Communist rule (for example, Telegram 431 of June 1).Reference should be to telegram 434, June 1, not printed. (Ibid., 864.412/6–156) The Legation called attention to the many efforts of the Communist regime to mislead the Hungarian public and called on us to expose the true aims of Communism (for example, Telegram 457 of June 19 and Telegram 3 of July 2).Neither printed. (Ibid., 764.00/6–1956 and 964.61/7–256, respectively) During the two months immediately preceding the insurrection in Hungary, the Legation frequently recommended the exploitation of the demands of the intellectual groups for more freedom. In doing so, Hungarian Service output constantly kept in mind the recommendation that the intent of their reporting these demands should not be to encourage these intellectuals further, but to make their attitudes known to the Hungarian public at large, and that treatment of these matters should be phrased so as to make them intelligible to the workers and peasants. The mission in Budapest had probably the outstanding record among Iron Curtain missions in monitoring our output. Under approved arrangement, until the uprising there was a weekly exchange of “official-informal” communications between the Hungarian Service Chiefs in Washington and Munich and officers of the Legation in Budapest in which programming was discussed in detail. In addition to this weekly review of Hungarian output the mission in despatch form at various intervals submitted official monitoring reports and review of scripts. The three recent—most at hand are dated January 26, May 9, and July 27, 1956.They are all ibid., 511.644. The pertinent parts thereof by despatch number and date are quoted below. Legdes 272 of January 26, 1956 “In regard to tone and content, the monitors’ evaluation of the broadcasts is that the VOA is performing creditably. The general approach is sober and dignified.” Legdes 432 of May 9, 1956 “ . . . Ellipsis in the source text. VOA Washington’s coverage of de-Stalinization, in the opinion of the monitors, has been well handled. Broadcasts on theatrical and literary life in the United States have been good. This aspect of VOA broadcasting will deserve continuing care and attention as the writers’ revolt continues and writers express their open discontent with the straitjacket in which Hungarian literature has been placed.” Legdes 30 of July 27, 1956 “The VOA Washington scripts, embracing as they do the period of the Petofi Club activities and the ‘resignation’ of Matyas Rakosi, treat a critical phase of Hungary’s recent history. Judged by this background the scripts are distinguished by the fine balance which VOA Washington maintained during this period. A perusal of the scripts gives the feeling that a regular listener to these broadcasts would receive the impression that the flow of world events was toward greater freedoms and that in abetting this flow the Hungarian people were playing their traditional liberty-loving role. Highly commendable is the series of programs on human rights. Coming at the present, this series emphasizes the fact that at least some Hungarian Communists are rediscovering basic ideas of freedom already beyond the realm of exploratory debate in the West, and which as such are ingrained elements in the outlook of the majority of Hungarians. Cross satellite reporting has in the judgment of the drafting officerAnton Nyerges. been effectively handled. The sensational Polish events plus the more sober Hungarian developments were handled in a manner that was well calculated to support the indigenous pressures toward greater freedom. The reporting of cultural life in the West has been good and has very likely supported the cultural agitation which has marked the general restiveness in Hungary in recent months. A noticeable decline in the handling of purely Hungarian news has on the whole been judicious programming policy. Before trends are pushed further in the direction, however, consideration should be given to two factors: 1) people like Tibor Dery and Tibor Tardos,Déry and Tardos were later sentenced to 2–4 years imprisonment in November 1957 for their role in the rebellion. who spearheaded the recent Petofi Club affair are undoubtedly gratified and influenced by Western interest in their activities and should whenever possible be given full publicity, if not to their persons, then to their activities; 2) although the Hungarian press has undoubtedly shown a trend toward liberalizing its publication of domestic news, VOA can still furnish an important service in a field into which the Hungarians are moving with hesitancy and caution.A paragraph was here omitted from despatch 30, which dealt with VOA Washington programs. The VOA Munich scripts available at the time this despatch was written were a limited number of selected manuscripts received at this post for the period indicated above. These selections included a half dozen or more commentaries by Laszlo Boros.Boros, after a career as an editor in Hungary, France, and the United States, became editor-in-chief of the Hungarian VOA unit in Munich in May 1952. As the only ‘personality’ developed by the Hungarian VOA, Mr. Boros performs a valuable service in the field of propaganda broadcasts to Hungary. His commentaries are generally marked by an imaginativeness which observes a delicate balance between undue caution on one hand and excessive freedom on the other.” 201. Memorandum for the Record by the Counselor of the Department of State (MacArthur)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/11–2156. Secret. Washington, November 21, 1956. SUBJECT Notes on the OCB Luncheon, November 21, 1956 [Here follows discussion of item 1.] 2. Radio Free Europe Mr. Allen Dulles spoke with considerable heat about the attacks against Radio Free Europe. He was annoyed at the recent telegram from Bucharest which he said seemed to accept the Communist line that RFE was responsible for uprising and slaughter in Hungary and which he also said carried with it a criticism of U.S. policy.Presumably reference is to telegram 324 from Budapest, Document 198. Almost the entire luncheon period was taken up with the discussion of this item. Mr. William Jackson and Mr. MacArthur mentioned that the President was concerned about reports that RFE might have gone further than U.S. policy in some of its broadcasts and suggested that the OCB take a look generally at the situation. Mr. MacArthur said that he believed that the existing procedure should be examined with respect to the carrying out of political guidance to RFE. He said that he was not an expert in these matters and did not know what the present procedures were, but understood that there were so many broadcasts in so many languages emanating from RFE that it was impossible to screen them all in advance. Mr. Allen Dulles said that he thought they had a good system, but it was quite true that all scripts could not be cleared in advance since timeliness was of the essence. He said that it was not possible to be 100 percent sure in every case that the guidance was being carried out, but he felt certain that it was. He said that most of the people who had been critical of RFE had yet to come up with a single bit of evidence in support of their criticism. He felt that a more aggressive stance toward the criticism should be taken. The point was made that since RFE was a private organization, the government could not very well jump to its defense without implying that RFE was a government organization. . . . Mr. Dulles produced a copy of a recent statement made by former Ambassador Joseph Grew regarding RFE policy which all considered an excellent statement.As head of the National Committee for Free Europe, Grew had been instrumental in the establishment of RFE and was chairman of the board of directors which ran the station. On November 30, The New York Times quoted him as having said earlier that: “It has never been the policy or practice of Radio Free Europe to incite rebellion; instead it has been the policy to keep the hope of ultimate freedom alive and to encourage the captive people to seek expanding freedom by peaceful means.” All present deplored that it had not gotten any publicity in the press or otherwise and all agreed that it was desirable to have the statement publicized although no specific suggestions were made as to how this might be done. Mr. Dulles said that the head of RFEW.J. Convery Egan. was contemplating writing a letter to the President containing much the same material as Mr. Grew’s statement, which might be made public. After some discussion, it was, I understood, agreed that it would be undesirable to involve the President publicly in the RFE operation and that such a letter should not be sent. Mr. Dulles promised to send to Mr. Hoover or Mr. MacArthur copies of the Grew press statement and the draft letter which originally had been suggested might be sent to the White House, as well as a copy of the report which he submitted to the President last evening, I believe, regarding the recent RFE operations with respect to Hungary.See Document 199. [Here follows discussion of the remaining agenda items.] DMacA 202. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in AustriaSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–2656. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Horner; approved by Beam; and cleared in substance with Freers and Murphy. Repeated to Paris, Bonn, Rome, and Munich. Washington, November 26, 1956—6:41 p.m. 2047. Field aware of considerable volume criticism much of it either uninformed or extremely vague of part US information media may have played in recent Hungarian events. Charges have been made media held out promises of US aid to patriots and indulged in inflammatory reporting thereby causing needless loss of life to patriots. In present circumstances it seems to Dept highly undesirable there be conducted any formalized or widespread system interrogations of refugees, since that could lead to charge US heartlessly exploiting misery these people.On November 21, at the 50th meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Alfred V. Boerner of USIA mentioned a proposal to conduct a survey of refugees to determine their sources of news. Both Beam and Comstock opposed the idea. (Ibid., 100.4–OCB/11–2156) As an alternative Dept arranging for temporary assignment Vienna and Salzburg four FSOs with Eastern European experience. (Travel Orders for Keppel, Valdes, Nickels and RecknagelJohn Keppel was Second Secretary of the Embassy in Rome; Philip H. Valdes held that same position in Paris and also Vice Consul; Horace J. Nickels was Consul at Munich; Thomas M. Recknagel was Second Secretary of the Embassy in Bonn. telegraphed separately). Officers should operate as part of normal visa-issuing machinery but basic reason assignment is enable Dept gather impressions and factual data on US media in period preceding and following October 23. Dept interested in obtaining answers questions such as following: a. Do refugees consider US radio and pamphlet campaign over period years preceding October 23 had as purpose instigation armed revolt? b. What differences if any were noted as between US and other Western media and as between US media? c. During period October 23–November 15 were there any specific broadcasts that could be termed inflammatory? d. Were commentaries regarded as more influential in above respects than selection straight news items, including statements by prominent Western leaders? e. Were any concrete promises of material aid made by any US or other Western media? As suggested earlier Dept hopes answers these and related questions backed by supporting data can be gathered by Officers discreetly in course normal duties, and that refugees do not gain impression any special effort being made conduct interrogation. Dept has selected four officers because their backgrounds and demonstrated ability gives reason to believe useful data for future will be forthcoming. Dept attaches particular importance to suggestions from officers, who should not confine their thinking to any particular media (Voice, RFE, RL, etc) nor to questions listed. Non-urgent information obtained should be submitted by letter to Higgs, and should include all subjects normally within competence peripheral reporting officers such as current info on political situation in Hungary etc. Urgent matters can be reported by telegram through established Departmental channels. Further background info respecting project (to be referred to as “Operation Lookout”) will be conveyed by letter from Higgs to Amb. Thompson. Hoover 203. Special National Intelligence EstimateSource: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Secret. Regarding National Intelligence Estimates, see footnote 1, Document 11. Washington, November 27, 1956. SNIE 12–3–56 PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN SOVIET-SATELLITE RELATIONSAccording to a note on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. “Concurred in by the Intelligence Advisory Committee on 27 November 1956. Concurring were the Special Assistant, Intelligence, Department of State; the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Director of Naval Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, USAF; and the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff. The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the IAC, and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.” The Problem To examine the implications of current developments in Poland and Hungary for Soviet policy and future relations with the Eastern European Satellites. Conclusions 1. Recent developments in Poland and Hungary have brought to the fore a basic problem of Soviet leadership—that of revising its system of control over the Satellites. We believe that the Soviet leadership is subject to contradictory pressures on this problem, and is still undecided as to the best solution. We cannot predict with confidence what course will be adopted. 2. Given the vital character of the interests involved, the Soviet leaders will not seriously consider abdicating their dominant position in Eastern Europe. At the other end of the scale, a full-blown return to the extremes of Stalinist rule is highly unlikely. Thus, the major courses from which the Soviet leaders will have to choose are likely to be the following: (A) a determined policy of firm Soviet repression, but attempting to avoid the extremes of Stalinism; (B) a systematic redefinition of Soviet-Satellite relations based on lesser controls and anticipatory concessions to nationalist sentiment; (C) continuation of the present course of expediency, involving shifts between conciliation and repression. 3. For a considerable time at least, the Soviet leaders will probably continue with Course C, which is essentially a postponement of clear decision. It is possible that at any time the situation in Poland, or a change in the Soviet leadership, will lead to a firm adoption of Course A. We believe, however, that in the long run the forces at work, both within and without the Soviet empire, will probably cause the Soviet leaders to accept Course B as the basic pattern for their relations with the Satellite countries.The Special Assistant, Intelligence, Department of State, and the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, consider that there is insufficient evidence available at present to warrant the estimate that “in the long run, the forces at work both within and without the Soviet empire” will cause the USSR to follow a policy of voluntarily loosening its control over the Satellites and using Poland as a model for the other East European Satellites. [Footnote in the source text.] Regardless of which alternative is chosen, the USSR is not likely to be able to create regimes which are politically stable and economically productive and at the same time subject to close Soviet control. Introduction 4. The current crisis in Soviet relations with Poland and Hungary is a manifestation of the basic problem which has plagued the Soviet leaders since the death of Stalin. They have sought, by repudiating the extremes of Stalinism and relaxing terroristic controls, to gain popular support and to stimulate party cadres and populations to work more productively. At the same time, they have sought to insure that this process would not lead to indiscipline and unacceptable demands for reform. It was easier to satisfy both of these conflicting goals in the USSR than in the Satellites, where Communist authority was less securely established and where, particularly in Hungary and Poland, Communist leaders had to contend with traditions of intense nationalism and a rise in popular expectations, particularly among the youth. 5. Soviet leaders evidently failed to recognize the strength of anti-Soviet feeling within some of the Satellite Communist parties. They do not seem to have foreseen that the reduction of terror and the rehabilitation of Tito would not only stimulate intraparty criticism but would also involve non-Communists and lead to the expression of anti-Soviet and anti-Communist sentiments. This process led to a breakdown of party unity in Hungary and Poland and an acceleration of the reform movement to a point where Soviet interests were endangered, acutely so in Hungary. Immediate Problems Hungary 6. By the beginning of November, the USSR faced in Hungary a direct choice between wholesale repression and the emergence of an anti-Soviet, anti-Communist state. The latter would have seriously weakened the Soviet strategic position in Eastern Europe, damaged the prestige of the world Communist movement, and created an unacceptable precedent for other Satellites. Under these circumstances, we believe that the diversion provided by the attack on Egypt, while convenient, did not affect the character or the timing of the Soviet resort to military repression in Hungary. 7. In the immediate future, the USSR will face the bitter hostility of the Hungarian people and the probability of considerable disorder within Hungary. The depleted Hungarian party will almost certainly have to rely heavily on direct Soviet support for the formidable tasks of restoring order and undertaking reconstruction. This will, in turn, prevent the claims to independence of any Hungarian government from being accepted by the populace. 8. Once open resistance in Hungary is subdued, the USSR will seek to reconstitute a regime which does not depend obviously on direct Soviet military support. It may estimate that the emergence of such a regime will be facilitated by: (a) a state of physical and psychological exhaustion among Hungarians, (b) disillusionment because support from the West or the UN did not measure up to Hungarian hopes, and (c) economic and limited political concessions, and the introduction of more acceptable personalities into the government. 9. However, for some time to come the USSR is likely to feel that local Communist forces are so weak and unreliable that a loosening of the Soviet hold would risk a new Hungarian attempt to leave the Bloc. The resistance has proven long-lived and determined. Evidence of substantial deportations to the USSR points to the growing likelihood that emergency military measures may have to be supplemented by more permanent and far-reaching repressive measures if the authority of a puppet government is to be established in Hungary. At present, there is no firm basis for estimating the prospects for continued effective resistance in Hungary. We believe that the USSR will not succeed during the next few months in reconstituting a local Communist authority able to govern without the presence of Soviet forces in substantially larger numbers than before the outbreak. 10. If the USSR should conclude that it was unable to find any body of indigenous Hungarians able both to establish effective rule over the Hungarian people and to satisfy minimum Soviet requirements, it might be forced to administer the country for a protracted period by military occupation. Such a situation would constitute a clear defeat for the whole policy of relaxation in the Satellites, would pose a latent threat to the uneasy equilibrium in Poland, and would compromise the Bloc’s international position. Poland 11. Poland avoided the fate of Hungary in October because the regime’s reform elements were stronger and acted before pressures got out of hand. All the interested parties, i.e., the USSR, the restive population, and factions within the Polish Communist party, were able to accept Gomulka and his program. To the Soviet Union, Gomulka offered a chance without violence of preserving its military position, retaining a major voice in Polish foreign policy, and maintaining in Poland the basic features of “socialism”—one-party rule and a nationalized economy. From the people he was able to gain credence for his promises of internal reform and a greater degree of sovereignty for Poland. To the Polish party, he offered its only means of reducing factionalism, regaining some measure of efficient leadership and authority, and running its own affairs with increased freedom from direct Soviet domination. 12. Despite Gomulka’s considerable initial prestige, there are important elements of instability in this compromise. In internal affairs, there are already signs that his regime has come into conflict with disgruntled workers and peasants and particularly with students and intellectuals. Recent events stimulated many expectations—for a removal of Soviet influence, improved living standards, greater freedom, and broader contact with the West—which seem almost certain to be disappointed. Economic problems are acute and anti-Soviet feelings are high. 13. The USSR has a number of reasons to be suspicious of Polish prospects. The Soviet leaders have probably reconciled themselves only with great difficulty to such measures as the removal of RokossovskyFollowing his departure from Poland, he was named a Deputy Defense Minister. and his colleagues, Polish feelers for Western credits, the retreat from collectivization, and the exposure of socialism’s economic failures. In addition, they must be deeply concerned over the present unruliness of the Polish party and population, as expressed, for example, in the continued independent line of the Polish press and radio, spontaneous de-collectivization, and the appearance of organizations outside effective Communist discipline. Polish divergence from the USSR in a UN votePoland had supported Resolution 1004 (ES–II) and draft resolution A/3325 while the Soviet Union had abstained and then had abstained on Resolution 1128 (XI) on November 21, which the Soviets opposed. See Documents 167, 180, and 206. and signs that the Poles are associating themselves with Tito’s campaign against “Stalinism” must extend this concern. Although substantial agreement was apparently reached in the recent Moscow talks,The Embassy commented on the Polish-Soviet declaration of November 18 in telegram 708 from Warsaw, November 21. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.4861/11–2156) the USSR might decide, if the disturbing trends within Poland are not more effectively checked, that Gomulka lacks either the will or the capability to impose the necessary discipline within the party and the country. 14. It appears clear from the Hungarian example that the USSR would intervene forcibly to prevent a change in Poland’s international orientation, and at least in part for that reason, the Poles are unlikely to demand such a change in the near future. It is not clear what steps short of this might induce the USSR to intervene forcibly in Poland. Movements of Soviet forces have had the effect of threatening such intervention during the past month. Because of Poland’s strategic importance, the USSR would probably intervene with force in Poland before deterioration went as far as it did in Hungary. 15. If the Soviet leaders do not intervene by force or by threat of force, they will at least attempt to work gradually within the Polish party to restore the influence of elements thought to be more reliable from the Soviet point of view. They are almost certainly apprehensive that the Gomulka regime will strive for a degree of national independence unacceptable to them. They probably believe that, over the long run, the present and possible future developments in Poland will give rise to serious dangers to Soviet control in other Satellites. For example, widespread de-collectivization in Poland would be seen by them as detrimental to approved policies in the other Satellites. Other Satellites 16. The same basic tension between Soviet requirements and popular demands is present in the other Eastern European Satellites, though in varying and presently less acute forms. Divisions within the other Satellite Communist parties have not developed to the same degree, nor were there good candidates in these parties for the role of Gomulka. Moreover, some of the other Satellites lack a large and vigorous intelligentsia having traditional links with the West. In Czechoslovakia, where a comparable body of students and writers did show some restiveness last May,See footnote 3, Document 137. traditions of greater caution and accommodation with the existing power seem to have prevailed. 17. Nevertheless, within all these Satellites (and particularly in Rumania) anti-Soviet feeling has almost certainly been increased in the wake of the Hungarian repression. The harshness of Soviet repression and lack of Western military support for the Hungarians will discourage armed rebellion, but will probably not prevent anti-Soviet agitation and vigorous expressions of discontent. Much will depend on whether Moscow gives a clear line of direction, since the preservation of Communist party unity and discipline is the first requirement for the stability of these regimes. One important obstacle to extensive further reforms will be the apprehensions of most present Satellite party leaders that such reforms would undermine their own political positions. Effects on Soviet Policy for the Satellites 18. In revising foreign and internal policies in the post-Stalin period, the Soviet leaders appear not to have had any clear picture of what the effects would be in the Satellites. They apparently felt that a series of controlled reforms and cautious accommodations to local pressures could be undertaken without endangering vital Soviet interests or causing reactions which would require a return to police terror. A difficult reappraisal of Soviet-Satellite relations has, however, almost certainly been necessitated by the serious setback to Soviet prestige in Hungary and by the continued difficulties in evolving a satisfactory and workable formula for both Poland and Hungary. The chances for important shifts in Soviet policy, leadership, or both have markedly increased in view of the serious pressures that are almost certainly now being felt in the Kremlin. 19. On the one hand, events in Hungary have almost certainly led many Stalin-installed leaders in the other Satellites to urge Moscow to adopt a harder line. Such a line of policy almost certainly has strong advocates in the Soviet party. Support for this view within the Soviet leadership itself can be inferred not only from Molotov’s known opposition to the rehabilitation of Tito, but also from Pravda’s denunciation of the Polish reform movement at the moment of Gomulka’s accession to power, and from the publication of an anti-Titoist Albanian speech in Pravda on the eve of the Gomulka visit to Moscow. 20. On the other hand, an appreciable number of Communist leaders, including some elements of the Soviet leadership, probably believe that the recent difficulties in Poland and Hungary were basically the result not of the new Soviet policies in the post-Stalin period but rather of hesitancy in moving toward a clearly defined new form of association with the Satellites which would be less degrading to them. This line has been expounded explicitly by Tito and the Poles, and appears to have received some support from the Chinese Communists. Moreover, although the desire for greater liberalization on the part of the Satellite populations and the support which they receive from the leaders of many uncommitted states constitutes a less direct form of pressure on the Soviet leadership, Soviet foreign policy may be obliged to take more account of these factors in the present world situation. Alternative Courses 21. Despite these contradictory pressures, there will almost certainly be a consensus among the Soviet leaders that vital Soviet interests demand preservation of Soviet hegemony in the Satellite area. They will almost certainly continue to believe that the USSR’s military security requires the forward deployment of Soviet forces there, secure lines of communication to these forces, and utilization of the area for Soviet air defense. Loss of control over the Satellites might find Western power, including a revived Germany, pressing against the Soviet frontiers. A defection of the area from the “socialist camp” would also be seen as a major setback to the Communist cause world wide, and would seriously compromise the effectiveness of Soviet foreign policy in Asia and the Middle East. Economic losses would be a factor of considerable, though not critical importance. 22. Given the vital character of the interests involved, the Soviet leaders will not seriously consider abdicating their dominant position in Eastern Europe. At the other end of the scale, a full-blown return to the extremes of Stalinist rule is highly unlikely. Thus, the major courses of action from which the Soviet leaders will have to choose in dealing with their current difficulties are likely to be the following: (A) A determined policy of firm Soviet repression, but attempting to avoid the extremes of Stalinism. Such a policy would probably involve strengthening the position of the Satellite leaders most subservient to Moscow, imposing a freeze on further concessions to Satellite independence, and attempting either to intimidate Gomulka into modifying his programs or to overthrow his regime in Poland. This policy would require increased dependence on either the Soviet military or the secret police, while at the same time it would increase latent resistance; it would impede any increase in Satellite productive efforts, would weaken the Soviet campaign to increase political and economic influence outside the Bloc, and might lead to a renewed break with Tito. It might require changes in the Soviet leadership. (B) A deliberate and systematic redefinition of Soviet-Satellite relations based on lesser controls and anticipatory concessions to nationalist sentiment. Such a policy would involve acceptance of Gomulka’s Poland as a model for other Satellites; extensive changes in the leadership of other Satellite Communist parties; and a systematic effort gradually to reconstitute Soviet-Satellite relations on the basis of economic interdependence, broad ideological identification, and common strategic interests. Such a policy of loosening—even if gradual and long-term in focus—would weaken the position of entrenched leaders who are loyal to Moscow and often irreplaceable; would probably encourage nationalist elements to over-reach the bounds which the USSR can tolerate; and might create conditions under which some of the Satellites would eventually attempt to dissociate themselves from the Bloc. (C) Continuation of the present course of expediency, involving shifts between conciliation and repression. Such a course, which would be essentially a policy of postponing clear decisions, would seek to stabilize the situation in the Satellites, conceding within broad limits to pressures for change when they become dominant within a Satellite party, but reserving the power and intention to intervene forcibly if the international alignment of any Eastern European state appeared in doubt. Such a course would sanction local variants within the Satellite empire. It would probably not solve the basic problem of reconciling Soviet control with the development of stable and productive regimes in the Satellite area. 23. Basically, Soviet policy during the past few months appears to have followed the third course of maintaining an uneasy balance between conciliation and repression. This policy could continue indefinitely. On the other hand, the recent agreement with Gomulka, and even the promises made by the Kadar regime in Hungary, indicate that there must be tendencies within the Soviet leadership to move toward a systematic policy of concession (Course B). 24. However, it is not certain that the practical arguments for a policy of conciliation will prevail over deep-seated tendencies in certain Soviet party and military leaders to fall back on measures of repression when confronted with adversity. Western pressures on the USSR in the wake of the Hungarian uprising and Tito’s public attempts to influence Soviet policySee footnote 5, Document 194. may make a policy of conciliation psychologically difficult for the Soviet leadership. 25. We believe that for the present the Soviet leaders are unable or unwilling to exercise a clear option for either a systematic policy of repression (Course A) or of further concessions (Course B). Therefore, they are most likely to continue an indecisive course (Course C). It is possible at any time that the situation in Poland or a change within the Soviet leadership would lead to the adoption of Course A. In the long run, the forces at work both within and without the Soviet empire will probably cause the Soviet leaders to accept Course B as the basic pattern for their relations with the Satellite countries.The Special Assistant, Intelligence, Department of State, and the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, consider that there is insufficient evidence available at present to warrant the estimate that “in the long run, the forces at work both within and without the Soviet empire” will cause the USSR to follow a policy of voluntarily loosening its control over the Satellites and using Poland as a model for the other East European Satellites. [Footnote in the source text.] Even in this case, the USSR will, when it thinks necessary, insist on a voice in policy-making commensurate with its relative military and economic strength within the Bloc. 26. Regardless of which alternative is chosen, the USSR will almost certainly continue to offer various economic inducements to the Satellites, and will attempt to strengthen Bloc economic ties. There is also likely to be increased intra-bloc consultation on a wide range of policy matters. However, any one of the alternative Soviet policies will be confronted with serious practical problems. A policy of conciliation will be handicapped in most Satellites by the difficulty of keeping reform within prescribed limits. A program of repression through puppet regimes will incur some of the disadvantages of Stalinism and will be faced in many areas with the acute problem of finding enough reliable and efficient indigenous party administrators to conduct such a program. A policy of continued improvisation between the two will suffer the disadvantages of each and will encourage and exacerbate intra-Communist friction. Thus over the long run, whatever path is chosen by the USSR in dealing with its Satellites, it is not likely to be able to create regimes which are stable and productive and at the same time subject to close Soviet control. 204. Notes on the 53d Meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, November 30, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/11–3056. Top Secret. Drafted by Kelsey. Washington, November 30, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman Defense—Colonel Oscar R. Schaaf Defense—Mr. Roger Ernst CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell Office of Spec. Asst. to the President—Mr. Oren M. Stephens OCB—Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Edward L. Freers State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. John E. Horner State—Mr. Ralph S. Collins State—Mr. James S. Sutterlin State—Mr. Robert A. Clark CIA—Mr. Arthur M. Cox USIA—Mr. Alfred V. Boerner USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey OCB Staff—Mr. Warren A. Kelsey 1. Possibility of Employing Recent Hungarian Refugees in Labor Service Organization.This was a force of German and non-German resident civilians recruited through local German or French labor offices for the purpose of providing internal security for U.S. installations in those countries and augmenting U.S. technical services troop units in their performance of noncombatant technical duties. The overall strength of the Labor Service Organization on October 31, 1956, was 18,351. (Ibid., OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Escapees, Refugees–Hungarian) Mr. Beam stated that a suggestion had been made, apparently by the German Foreign Office, that up to 1,000 Hungarian refugees be enlisted in the LSO in Germany in order to alleviate the refugee problem. Our Embassy in Bonn says that the Germans consider there are two possible drawbacks: (1) possible unfavorable propaganda, and (2) possible misuse of the organization by the Hungarians.Telegram 2015 from Bonn, November 27, noted that Germany’s official position in 1955 had been to limit enlistment in the LSO to refugees domiciled in the Federal Republic for at least a year so as to preclude a surge of refugees from other countries. (Ibid., Central Files, 764.00/11–2756) The Department had instructed the Embassy in BonnIn telegram 1486 to Bonn, November 30. (Ibid.) to hold off for the time being but had an open mind on the subject. Mr. Ernst said that the Defense Department was favorably disposed toward the idea. He understood that the German units in the LSO were being disbanded and the Hungarians could fill the gap. There were certain budgetary problems but these presumably could be met if we decided we wanted to do it. The possible drawbacks were valid points but the enlistment plan would not have to be widely publicized. The plan would appeal to Hungarian freedom fighters who wished to remain in Europe. Mr. Campbell suggested that the budgetary problem might be met by the German Army since Germany was taking a certain number of refugees anyway. Mr. Beam mentioned that the idea was more provocative if carried out by the Germans. Mr. Sutterlin said that if the objections had any validity, why proceed with the plan since the Federal Republic could find employment for refugees outside of the LSO. In reply to this Mr. Beam said a telegram had been drafted pointing out that an effort to find jobs in the German economy seemed preferable, also pointing out that since it was understood the LSO was being curtailed on budgetary grounds, Poles who were being discharged from it would resent the hiring of the Hungarians. The draft also pointed out the propaganda aspects, including the fact that the existence of Hungarian LSO units would give the Soviets an opportunity to claim the revolt had been inspired or supported by the U.S. Mr. Revey said that the USIA definitely felt the idea would result in a major propaganda loss and offered few gains to offset this loss. Mr. Beam said the Department was also inclined to think the idea might be more trouble than it was worth. He also pointed out that these recruits would be charged against the total number of refugees the Germans would admit. Mr. Comstock mentioned two NSC papers, one of which (NSC 5435/1)Entitled “Expansion in the Labor Service Organization in Germany,” dated October 18, 1954. (Ibid., S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 5435 Series) provides that the LSO be expanded by 1,000 places of which at least 500 were to be former Soviet citizens. It was established NSC policy to increase the LSO. Mr. Campbell and Mr. Beam mentioned that they had heard that other elements of the German Government would not go along with the Foreign Office’s support for the idea. At this point Mr. Boerner entered and said he thought the whole idea was “terrible.” With reference to the NSC paper, he contrasted it to the recent statement by the President that we did not want to make military allies of the Hungarians.See Document 149. This was followed by a discussion whether the LSO was a para-military organization. Replying to Mr. Boerner’s statement that the plan seemed to confirm those who claimed that we were stirring up trouble, Colonel Schaaf said he was not sure that was entirely bad. Mr. Cox mentioned that Mr. Voorhees had stated in a meeting at the White House that our public posture on the question was to be completely humanitarian. He also said that his information was that the suggestion had originally come from USAREUR, not the Germans. Referring to the pressure to expand the LSO, Mr. Collins suggested that this had arisen when there was an over-supply of labor in West Germany contrary to the present situation. Mr. Beam suggested that the State Department go ahead and draft a telegram turning down the idea and that the views of Defense should be obtained. Colonel Schaaf said Defense was not disposed to make an issue of it but asked whether the decision could be deferred. Mr. Beam said not more than about a week. The Department would draft a telegram and pass it to the Army Department. Mr. Comstock mentioned that it should go to the Secretary of Defense’s office.The OCB took up the question on December 19. Gordon Gray informed Hoover that the Department of Defense favored the project. The Acting Secretary, for his part, pointed out the various reasons why the Department of State found the proposal inadvisable. A decision was made to take no action, but to come back to the matter after 4 to 6 months. (Memorandum from Richards to Beam, December 19; Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Escapees, Refugees–Hungarian) 2. UN Situation.See Document 206. Mr. Freers said he had had a report that the Secretary General had not yet got a reply from the government of Hungary to his request of November 28 for the admission of observers,On November 21, Hammarskjöld, who had returned from his Middle East trip, affirmed his continued willingness to go to Budapest. (A/PV.586, p. 170) On November 27, he received a letter from the Hungarian Foreign Minister, which indicated that Hungary was giving serious consideration to his visit. In light of the resolutions passed on November 21, Hammarskjöld on November 28 asked the Hungarian and Soviet Delegations to comment on the admission of observers since he had to report on that matter to the Assembly. He also raised the question of his trip to Budapest. The Soviet reply, dated November 29, concluded that “allegations of the deportation of Hungarian citizens to the USSR are based on slanderous rumours circulated by certain groups for the purpose of misleading public opinion.” The Soviet answer was incorporated as an Annex to “Implementation of the United Nations Resolutions on Hungary: Report of the U.N. Secretary-General, November 30, 1956.” (U.N. doc. A/3403) but that he would circulate such a reply as soon as he received one. A group already appointed was examining material but it was essential to get direct observation. At this stage the Secretary General was merely drawing attention to the need of observers going to Hungary. This need would be more relevant as the investigation proceeded. Mr. Beam said the Department had been canvassing delegations on the possibility of another resolution requesting the observers to go to Europe, where governments which could do so would help them in their task by supplying information. A later resolution was being considered to condemn the Soviets and Hungary for non-compliance with UN resolutions on troop withdrawals and deportations. It was not desired to put this resolution forward now for fear of inspiring a condemnatory resolution against the British and the French. Our UN delegation, he said, thinks this is as far as it is possible to go in the UN at present. Mr. Cox inquired whether the Secretary General needed a UN resolution to decide to send the observers to Europe, to which Mr. Beam said that he did not but that such a resolution would strengthen his hand. The idea had been suggested to him, although the Indian member of the observers’ group did not want to go to Europe unless the group was admitted to Hungary. Mr. Cox mentioned the RFE White Book,See footnote 10, Document 171. and the statements by two Hungarian youths who claimed to have been deported to the Soviet Union and returned, as useful material for the UN group. 3. Alternative Actions in Event of Continued Soviet Defiance of UN. Mr. Beam said his office was still working on this problem and hoped to have a paper for the committee next Monday or Tuesday. 4. Hungarian Refugees. Mr. Boerner said that the White House would announce the next day that the U.S. would accept a total of 21,500 refugees of which 6,500 would be under regular immigration procedures and the rest parolees.For text of the announcement, see Department of State Bulletin, December 10, 1956, p. 913. The announcement also said that the movement of refugees from Hungary was to be speeded up. Mr. Comstock inquired whether this meant an airlift, in reply to which it was said that the statement merely mentioned “the most expeditious means.” Mr. Sutterlin inquired whether it would apply only to refugees in Austria, to which Mr. Freers answered that it would not jeopardize chances of those elsewhere. Mr. Freers mentioned a suggestion that, since the Hungrian Olympic team was returning home through the U.S., a track meet be held in the U.S. for the benefit of the refugees. This presented problems whether the athletes were for or against the Kadar Government. Mr. Cox said that this sounded like a good idea provided only defectors from the Kadar regime arrived in the U.S. to put on a track meet. 6. Deportation. Mr. Boerner mentioned a book in which Stalin was quoted as saying in a conversation after the war with MicolajczykStanislaw Mikolajczyk, Premier of the Polish Government in-exile in London, 1943-1944, and a member of the postwar Polish Government until he fled Poland in 1947. that “the Hungarian problem is only one of boxcars.” He suggested that Micolajczyk be induced to repeat the quotation and that it be exploited. 7. Trade With Poland. Mr. Freers summarized a recently received telegram reporting a conversation with Polish officials in which they made clear they were serious in their desire for American credits.In telegram 745 from Warsaw November 29, Ambassador Jacobs reported on a meeting he had had with Winiewicz, in which the latter indicated he had heard nothing in regard to U.S. aid and presumed the matter was being studied. He noted that Polish experts in the fields of finance and foreign trade were prepared to proceed to the United States to discuss the U.S. offer. He also stressed his government’s unwillingness to accept U.S. advisers or controllers. (Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/11–2956) 8. Hungarian Attitudes Towards the U.S. Mr. Clark,Robert A. Clark, Jr. who had recently returned from the Legation at Budapest, was asked by Mr. Burris to give his impressions of the nature and character of American broadcasting to Hungary which he had heard. Mr. Clark said that he had not been in the political or economic sections of the Legation, but as far as the Hungarians were concerned the statement by Anna Kethly criticizing RFE reflected their feelings. The Hungarians had inferred that if they rebelled the UN and the U.S. would help them with arms and ammunition. Some were bitter, others merely discouraged, the general attitude was in-between. This, he said, was based on conversations with Hungarians by members of the Legation staff who could speak Hungarian. Mr. Cox mentioned that he had met these same people in Munich last August and that they were not critical of RFE then. Mr. Clark said that the Hungarian disappointment arose from a general feeling that since we were fostering liberty we would help the revolt. Mr. Cox said that this seemed to mean that the problem arose from the whole public posture of the U.S., and Mr. Boerner inquired whether it was wrong to foster liberty. Mr. Clark said no but some bitter remarks were being made. Colonel Schaaf said that this seemed to be more because of the fact that we were ineffective than because of anything RFE had broadcast. Warren A. KelseyOCB Staff Representative 205. Notes on the 55th Meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, December 6, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/12–656. Top Secret. Drafted by Kelsey. Washington, December 6, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman State—Mr. Edward L. Freers Defense—Colonel Oscar R. Schaaf Defense—Mr. Roger Ernst CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey OCB—Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Robert O. Blake State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. John E. Horner State—Mr. Ralph S. Collins State—Mr. William Nunley OCB—Mr. Warren A. Kelsey 1. Human Rights Day Proclamation. Mr. Nunley submitted to the Committee a draft proclamation of Human Rights Day prepared in the State Department for issuance by the President.Not found. The President did, however, issue a statement on “Human Rights Day in the Light of Recent Events in Hungary,” on December 10. It stated, in part: “The recent outbreak of brutality in Hungary has moved free peoples everywhere to reactions of horror and revulsion. Our hearts are filled with sorrow. Our deepest sympathy goes out to the courageous, liberty-loving people of Hungary.” For full text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1956, pp. 1119–1121. He asked the committee’s opinion whether the proclamation’s references to Hungary could be considered inflammatory. Mr. Blake said he thought it was not inflammatory but that he thought one phrase looked a little bit like urging the Hungarians to keep on fighting. . . . Mr. Cox said the broadcasting of the proclamation by the RFE would raise the same policy question raised by previous RFE broadcasts. Mr. Campbell mentioned that the policy is to maintain pressure against the USSR on the Hungarian question in the UN and elsewhere. . . . Colonel Schaaf expressed the view that the proclamation would certainly not incite the Hungarians to revolt. The discussion concluded with the decision that certain phrases should be deleted from the draft. 2. UN and Hungary.See the editorial note, infra. Mr. Beam said that State Department was drafting a condemnatory resolution, of which the first part was directed against the Soviets and the second part against the Hungarian Government. The draft is to be circulated among other delegations over the weekend.December 8 and 9. The resolution further provided for the suspension but not the revocation of the credentials of the present Hungarian Government. Mr. Blake asked whether they could speak in the UN under this suspension to which Mr. Beam said that he thought they could. Mr. Cox asked what the suspension accomplished, to which Mr. Beam replied that it was a form of censure of the Hungarian Government. Mr. Beam said he thought that the UN Fact-Finding Group might well activate itself now and appeal to the nations of the world for material on the Hungarian situation, for example, from diplomatic reports from Budapest. Straightforward, objective, eye-witness accounts were desired. In answer to a question from Mr. Cox, Mr. Beam said that the function of the observers was to get material and for the fact-finders to interpret it. There was a possibility that the observers might soon go to Europe, but the Austrian Government was getting cold feet about admitting them. Mr. Cox asked why, in view of the fact they had taken a rather hard line against accusations they were violating their neutrality. Mr. Beam said it was possible the observers might still be admitted to Austria. Mr. Ernst said that Austria should not be allowed to overrule the UN on considerations of interference with internal affairs of other countries. Mr. Beam said the Austrians had from the beginning made it clear that they did not want the observers to come to Austria if they were not going on to Hungary.On December 8, Austria informed the Secretary-General of its willingness to admit observers. (U.N. doc. A/3435/Add.1) Czechoslovakia, Romania, and Yugoslavia declined to do so. Reverting to the question of the credentials of the Hungarian delegation, Mr. Cox inquired why we were not going further and pressing for outright expulsion of the delegation. Mr. Beam said that it was desirable to have Hungarian representatives there to hear the speeches and resolutions made on the subject; Mr. Blake said that if the delegation was expelled the Hungarian Government would give even less cooperation to the UN; and Mr. Freers said that the logical next step would be a breaking of diplomatic relations which was undesirable, especially since we needed to keep our Legation in Budapest. Mr. Beam added that the UN itself was dealing with the Kadar Government on the question of relief. Colonel Schaaf questioned whether all this offsets the desirability of disciplining the Hungarian Government for its defiance of the UN. Mr. Blake mentioned that a logical implication of expelling the present Hungarian Government from the UN would also be the expulsion of the USSR. Mr. Campbell mentioned that failure to expel the present Hungarian Government undermined our arguments against the admission of Red China. Mr. Revey said we might want to lift the suspension some time—how and when would we do it? Mr. Beam said that it could be done if they admitted the observers. Mr. Campbell said that more than that would be required after a condemnatory resolution. Mr. Cox said that he thought expelling the Kadar Government’s representatives would be a blow to the Soviet Union which was the real culprit. Colonel Schaaf asked whether, if the UN expelled the Hungarian representatives, this necessarily meant that Hungary would break diplomatic relations with the U.S. Mr. Blake inquired whether it was thought that expulsion would really help anything, to which Mr. Cox replied he thought so since Hungarian refugees were of the opinion that the Kadar Government should not be recognized. 3. Paper on Possible Further Actions in View of Soviet Defiance of the UN. The committee then discussed a draft of the above-mentioned paper, which had been circulated at the last meeting.The draft was not found attached to the notes of the 54th meeting by Kelsey, December 4. (Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/12–456) With regard to Para. 16a,Of NSC 5616/2, Document 196. Mr. Campbell pointed out that the NSC paper called for action in the UN and elsewhere, whereas this draft referred only to UN action. Mr. Beam agreed that the draft should be reworded to take care of this discrepancy. Colonel Schaaf inquired whether this was to be a report or an outline plan of operations to which the reply was that it was the former. With reference to the question of UN action, Mr. Ernst inquired how much support would be forthcoming in the UN for a resolution ordering the Secretary-General to present himself at the Hungarian border or to fly directly into Budapest with advance notice he was coming. Mr. Beam said there would not be many votes for such a resolution. On Para. 16b, Mr. Campbell raised several questions, inquiring whether anything in the Hungarian Peace Treaty gave us the right to take any action in view of the absence of law and order. He also said that evolutionary measures would not bring about free elections and that the paper might make that comment. In reply Mr. Blake said that we have pressed for free elections ever since 1945 without thinking that our urging would actually produce such elections and that we shouldn’t stop now. Mr. Beam said that the Kadar Government had indicated it would agree to some kind of elections but that “anti-Socialists” would be excluded. He thought that the paper might include references to the peace treaty provisions for free elections. He then asked for comments on Para. 16c(1) concerning a possible embargo. Mr. Comstock said the paper seemed to be saying that the Battle Act was not effective but asked whether this had been cleared with the Department’s economic people. Mr. Freers said it had not been. Mr. Ernst said that even if the effects of the embargo were limited it would create some difficulties for the Soviets to which Mr. Blake said that the balance of difficulties might be in the other direction. Mr. Comstock said that the vital point was that general participation could not be counted on. Mr. Beam said he would have the Department’s economists go into this paragraph. On Para. 16c(2), a new discussion arose over the desirability of expelling the Kadar Government’s representatives from the UN. Mr. Campbell said he thought we were all agreed that relations should not be broken with the USSR but that they might be broken with the Kadar Government. Mr. Beam said he thought the State Department disagreed with him there. Mr. Trivers suggested that the right of the Kadar Government’s representatives to vote and speak in the UN might be suspended. Mr. Beam said that he thought this might be involved in the suspension of credentials. He furthermore said he thought the Kadar regime, bad as it was, wanted to get the Russians off its neck and this purpose would not be served by such a rupture. Colonel Schaaf asked whether the expulsion of the Hungarians might not serve as a warning to the Soviets that it could also happen to them, to which Mr. Beam answered in the negative. Colonel Schaaf again made the point that the UN loses prestige if its members defy it. Mr. Cox said that for a long time the U.S. had maintained diplomatic relations with Hungary but had voted against its admission to the UN, why then should Hungary’s expulsion from the UN entail a rupture of relations with the U.S.? Mr. Freers said that it was a political judgment that this was likely to happen in view of the evident fact that the present Hungarian government would like to get rid of our Legation in Budapest. Colonel Schaaf and Mr. Cox expressed doubt whether the presence of the Legation in Hungary was any deterrent to the Soviets or the Kadar regime. Others present disagreed with this opinion. (At this point Mr. Beam left and Mr. Freers took the chair). Mr. Ernst commented that Para. 16c(2) seemed to come down too heavily on the repercussions of severance of diplomatic relations. Mr. Freers replied that the reference to severance of diplomatic relations was a general one and that severance with the USSR now would be an extreme action. He said, however, that the wording could be softened. There was still another discussion on the desirability of expelling the Hungarian UN representatives, with Mr. Cox doubting whether this would lead to the expulsion of our Legation from Budapest or that the presence of our Legation there served as a deterrent to the Soviets. Mr. Freers said that it would be necessary to check on what the suspension of credentials involved and whether or not it suspended the right to vote. On Para. 17 Mr. Cox said he disagreed with the policy assumption implicit in the statement that a demand for Hungarian neutrality would lead to a Soviet demand for the withdrawal of American troops from Western Europe. He said he thought the proposed courses of action should not be influenced by counter-proposals the Soviets might make. After some discussion this sentence was deleted and it was agreed to substitute one to the effect that the chances of obtaining Hungarian neutrality were to be explored through UN or diplomatic channels. On Para. 18 Mr. Campbell said that we should not talk about economic aid to Hungary now until the conditions of Soviet withdrawal and free elections had been fulfilled. Mr. Freers said there was some advantage to involving ECE, a UN organ, in economic aid since this would be more acceptable to the Soviets. After discussion it was agreed to leave sub-paragraph ii out and make sub-paragraph iii conditional on fulfillment of sub-paragraph i. Colonel Schaaf once again urged the desirability of expelling the Hungarian representatives from the UN and after another brief discussion on this the meeting closed. Warren A. KelseyOCB Staff Representative 206. Editorial Note On December 2, the United States, together with 13 other nations, submitted draft resolution A/3413 for consideration by the General Assembly. It stated in the operative paragraphs that the General Assembly: “1. Reiterates its call upon the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Hungarian authorities to comply with the above resolutions and to permit United Nations observers to enter the territory of Hungary, to travel freely therein, and to report their findings to the Secretary-General; “2. Requests the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Hungarian authorities to communicate to the Secretary-General not later than 7 December 1956 their consent to receive United Nations observers; “3. Recommends that in the meantime the Secretary-General arrange for the immediate dispatch to Hungary and other countries as appropriate of observers named by him pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 1004 (ES-II); “4. Requests all Governments of Member States to cooperate with the representatives named by the Secretary-General by extending such assistance and providing such facilities as may be necessary for the effective discharge of their responsibilities.” The Hungarian Government informed the Secretary-General the next day that “permission for United Nations observers to enter the territory of Hungary would violate the sovereignty of Hungary and would be contrary to the principles of the United Nations Charter.” It welcomed the opportunity, however, for negotiations with him in Rome or New York where he would “get satisfactory personal information of the situation in Hungary” and it held out the possibility of direct negotiations in Budapest “at a later date appropriate for both parties.” (A/3414) Ambassador Lodge described this offer as “most unsatisfactory.” Speaking on December 3, Lodge emphasized the need for information gathered by “impartial observers on the scene.” In support of the 14-power draft resolution, he asserted “we are confronted by a demonstration of complete contempt for the provisions of the charter and a callous disregard for human decency. It certainly cannot be said that we have proceeded too hastily or that we have not given the Soviet Union and the Hungarian authorities every opportunity to abide by their obligations as members of the United Nations. “The time has come for one final appeal, but we must set a deadline—a terminal date—for their response. We cannot permit ourselves to be fobbed off, to be stalled. We cannot permit the urgent recommendations of the General Assembly to be utterly disregarded.” (A/PV.604, pages 459–461) At the seventh meeting of the United States Delegation on the morning of December 4, Ambassador Wadsworth raised the question of the December 7 deadline incorporated in draft resolution A/3413. He suggested that “if we said to the Soviets ‘you do this by December 7 or else,’ the effect would ‘die like a poached egg.’” It was the sense of the delegation that the Department of State be asked “to examine the potential effects of sanctions” if the deadline was not met. (US/A/M(SR)/56, December 11; Department of State, IO Files) The Assembly met three times on December 4 to consider the 14-power draft resolution. Hammarskjöld announced that as a result of a meeting he held with Horvath after the second session the Hungarian Representative would suggest to his government that the Secretary-General be welcomed to Budapest on December 16. To prepare the way, Hammarskjöld designated the United Nations Under-Secretary in charge of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Philippe de Seynes, to proceed to Hungary one week ahead of him. Resolution 1130(XI) was adopted shortly thereafter by a vote of 54 to 10 (Hungary and the Soviet Union), with 14 abstentions. (A/PV.608) That same evening, Dragon Protitch, Under-Secretary for Political and Security Council Affairs, told William Saunders of the United States Delegation that it had “been a mistake to rely so heavily on the Secretary-General in the Hungarian situation. He said the Assembly should have created its own committee of observers or investigators. “He said that it was one thing to rely on the Secretary-General in a case such as the Middle East where the UN was dealing with decent people subjected to public opinion pressures and another thing to rely on him in a situation such as the Hungarian involving the Soviet Union. “He asked what one could expect, for example, for the Secretary-General to do if he were permitted to go to Hungary. Even if he was able to obtain information from Kadar himself, he obviously would find it very difficult to use it without compromising his ‘neutral’ position.” (Memorandum of conversation by Saunders, US/A/UNNO, December 4; Department of State, IO Files) On December 12, the Hungarian Government informed the Secretary-General that December 16 was not an appropriate date for a visit by him. It promised to “set forth a proposal” on this matter “at a later date.” (U.N. doc. A/3435/Add.6) 207. Notes on the 56th Meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, December 11, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/12–1156. Top Secret. Drafted by Kelsey. Washington, December 11, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman State—Mr. Edward L. Freers Defense—Colonel Kenneth K. Hansen Defense—Mr. Roger Ernst CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey OCB—Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Robert O. Blake State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. John E. Horner State—Mr. Ralph S. Collins State—Mr. Boris H. Klosson CIA—Mr. Arthur Cox OCB—Mr. Warren A. Kelsey 1. American Doctors for Hungary. Mr. Beam said that Dean Rusk, President of the Rockefeller Foundation, planned to leave for Hungary with two doctors to set up an American medical center. The State Department thought that he did not have much chance of getting in but that it was a good move nevertheless and their passports had accordingly been validated for Hungary. 2. Credentials of Hungarian UN Delegation. Mr. Beam reported that the Hungarian delegation had walked out of the UN.At the 615th Plenary Meeting of the U.N. General Assembly on December 11, Horvath denounced the efforts of certain members to interfere in the domestic affairs of Hungary and claimed that his government and its representatives had been “disgracefully offended” in a manner incompatible with Hungarian sovereignty and the “national honour of the Hungarian people.” Hungary therefore would not participate in the work of the Assembly “so long as the discussion of the Hungarian question does not proceed in the spirit of the United Nations Charter.” (A/PV.615, p. 621) It was uncertain whether their credentials were to be suspended. Our friends in the UN, including the co-sponsors of our resolution, did not want to expel the Hungarian delegation.In Delga 280 from USUN, December 6, Lodge reported that “co-sponsors’ reaction was negative to U.S. suggestion GA might suspend Rule 29 and refuse permit Hungarian delegation participate in proceedings in retaliation non-acceptance SYG visit and non-admission observers.” (Department of State, Central Files, 320.5764/12–656) At a meeting in the Department the following day, Dulles approved instructions to Lodge “that he should work to get the largest possible vote on a resolution condemning the Russians for their actions in Hungary and that the idea of trying to deprive the Hungarian Delegation of a vote probably involved too many risks; hence this part of the resolution could be dropped if to do so would help to get votes for the rest of the resolution.” (Memorandum of conversation by Joseph N. Greene, Jr., December 7; ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199) A two-thirds majority for expulsion could not be obtained and in view of the situation with regard to Communist China, we wanted to maintain the principle that a two-thirds majority was necessary to decide on the credentials of a delegation. The best that probably could be done was to suspend approval of the credentials. Mr. Cox inquired what this meant and Mr. Beam said that in effect it meant an expression of disapproval. Mr. Blake mentioned that there is a kind of suspension involving loss of the right to vote but Mr. Beam said that we did not want to go that far at present. 3. UN Resolutions on Hungary. Mr. Beam said that two resolutions on the Hungarian question were now before the UN: our condemnatory resolutionReference is to draft Resolution A/3436/Rev.2, which in its final form, had 20 sponsors. and an Indian resolution which while not condemnatory had some good things in it.Ceylon, India, and Indonesia proposed certain amendments to draft Resolution A/3436/Rev.2 (A/L.216), which were not acceptable to its sponsors. Together with Burma, they submitted a draft resolution of their own. (A/3437) On December 12, the General Assembly passed the U.S.-supported draft resolution by a vote of 55 to 8, with 13 abstentions, as Resolution 1131 (XI). The Indians have come far to meet the Western point of view on Hungary recently. Both groups backing these resolutions were proceeding independently, but if it appeared that ours would not get a large majority we might reconsider, try to get some amendments to the Indian resolution, and back it in order to ensure an overwhelming majority. Mr. Cox inquired whether the Indian resolution condemned the Soviet Union and the Hungarian Government, to which Mr. Beam answered that it did not in words but did by implication. He went on to explain that we might back the Indian resolution as a stop-gap measure and move for a condemnatory resolution later. Mr. Freers made the point that the Indian resolution puts the Indians on record as wanting UN personnel in Hungary. 4. Presentation of Credentials of American Minister to Hungary. Mr. Beam reported that the Minister Wailes had again been approached by the Hungarians who inquired when he was going to present his credentials. Mr. Wailes had suggested to the Department that a decision on the presentation be postponed since he did not think the Hungarians would press the issue now. We would at least wait a few days. Mr. Cox inquired whether a decision had been firmly made that he was not to present his credentials to the present government. Mr. Beam answered that the Department of State considered presentation inadvisable.On December 19, Csatordai informed Barnes that he found it hard to understand the delay in the presentation of Wailes’ credentials. Barnes responded that unusual conditions had brought that situation about and that when the Legation received definite instructions, he would be informed. (Telegram 461 from Budapest, December 19; Department of State, Central Files, 123–Wailes, Edward T.) 5. Possible Withdrawal of Ambassadors. Colonel Hansen referred to an article by Constantine BrownForeign affairs writer for the Washington Evening Star. suggesting the withdrawal of our Ambassador in Moscow as a sign of our disapproval of the actions of the Soviet government on the precedent of such actions as our withdrawal of the American Ambassador from Berlin in 1938. He inquired whether any thought had been given to doing this. Mr. Beam replied that he had been in Berlin in 1938 and that he thought the withdrawal of our Ambassador then had been a grave mistake since it meant we lost all chance of influencing the German Government. Over the last few years the Department had come to the conclusion that such withdrawals did more harm than good and that half-way measures between full maintenance of diplomatic relations and complete rupture were inadvisable. [Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.] 16. Trade with Poland. On subject of Polish aid Mr. Trivers said that the Department of State had decided to try to get the CFEP to change its policy against the sale of surplus agricultural commodities to the Soviet bloc at world market prices.On December 4, Thorsten V. Kalijarvi recommended to Hoover that CFEP approval be sought for a change of policy to permit the export of surplus agricultural commodities to the Soviet satellites at the world market price in dollars. (Memorandum from Beam to Hoover, December 10; Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks—Economic Analyses) At the OCB meeting the next day, the issue of implementation of the President’s wishes regarding aid to Poland was discussed. (Preliminary by Richards, December 5; ibid., OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Minutes) On December 10, Polish Foreign Minister Adam Rapacki took up the aid and trade questions with Ambassador Jacobs and reiterated his government’s positions. (Telegram 810 from Warsaw, December 11; ibid., Central Files, 748.5–MSP/12–1156) A general reversal, not merely one in the particular case of Poland, was desired. Moreover, an attempt was being made to get Departmental approval to a ruling that Poland was a “friendly” nation under the terms of PL 480, but this was difficult because of the definition of friendly as meaning “not controlled or dominated by the USSR.” Mr. Beam commented that the recent Polish Government concessions to the Catholic Church might be helpful in obtaining such a ruling.These concessions were spelled out in a statement published in Trybuna Ludu by the Joint Commission of Church and Government on December 8. A number of principles were established in regard to education. (Enclosure 1 to despatch 414 from Warsaw, April 2, 1957; ibid., 848.413/3–2257) Mr. Trivers said a memorandum was being drawn up defending this proposal and pointing out that if this was not done we could not carry out our promise of aid to Poland, since the Battle Act had no loop holes. If this were done the Poles could be supplied with grains, cotton, and perhaps fats and oils. Mr. Klosson mentioned that the Poles were anxious to get coal mining machinery and were negotiating with the French for it. [Here follows discussion of an unrelated subject.] Warren A. KelseyOCB Staff Representative 208. Notes on the Meeting of the Operations Coordinating Board, Washington, December 12, 1956Source: Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430. Top Secret. Drafted by Richards. Washington, December 12, 1956 [Here follows discussion of items 1–4; see footnote 2, Document 213.] 5. Aid to Poland. At the OCB meeting Mr. Stassen raised the question of aid to Poland.See footnote 8, supra. He stated that the President had given clear-cut instructions that everything possible should be done. In spite of this, it appeared that nothing was being done. In his view, the Embassy had transmitted a request from the Poles for aid. The President had said “give aid”; yet the matter was being stalled by technicalities. The Chairman replied that the matter was more complicated than it might appear. There were problems such as the Battle Act. Certain legal findings would be required before aid could be extended. Decisions in this matter were not the sole responsibility of State but would require concurrence of various agencies. The U.S. was actively discussing the matter with the Polish Government, but the Polish Foreign Office was not being completely helpful because it is under Russian domination. Mr. Hollister stated that he did not consider that he had received a clear-cut request for aid from the Polish Government and that until this was received he could not proceed. He felt that the telegram from the Embassy was not adequate.See footnote 8, supra. Furthermore, there would have to be careful determination as to the source of funds. He questioned the possibility of the use of the special Presidential fund. In any case, commitments in connection with Hungarian refugees had already over-commited this fund. The Chairman suggested that it might be helpful to have a report prepared for the Board on the status of the matter. The working group should prepare such a paper in collaboration with E. Representatives of Commerce, Agriculture, Treasury should be asked to participate. Mr. Staats said that he thought such a report could be made available to the Board for its meeting next week.At the Acting Secretary’s Staff Meeting on December 13, L was requested “to prepare a staff study examining the legal and legislative background which might affect a policy determination that Poland could be considered a friendly country not under the domination of the Soviet Union for the purposes of Title I of PL–480.” (Notes by Grant E. Mouser, December 14; ibid., EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks—Preparations) Also on December 13, Kalijarvi sent a memorandum to Randall recommending “that United States policy should allow surplus agricultural commodities to be exported to Eastern European countries when political developments, in the opinion of the Secretary of State, indicate that it is in our national interest for these commodities to be exported for dollars at world market prices.” The prompt approval of the Council on Foreign Economic Policy was sought. (Ibid., FOA–ICA Files: Lot 64 A 293, CFEP 528—Authorities & Programs for the Disposal of Surplus Agricultural Products Abroad) Action: E—Mr. Kalijarvi EE—Mr. Trivers 209. Circular Instruction From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular PostsSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/12–1256. Official Use Only. Washington, December 12, 1956. CA–4859 SUBJECT U.S. Reaction to Events in Hungary Joint State–USIA Message. For Personal Attention Chief of Mission and Principal Officer. It has been reported by some of our Missions that especially in Western Europe there has been a lack of understanding by Governments, the press, and the general community regarding United States reaction to the recent events in Hungary. This is said to include an underestimation of the United States efforts in the United Nations and elsewhere to prevent or end the Soviet suppression and violence directed against the Hungarian people. It has been suggested that the United States was so preoccupied with events in the Middle East that it failed to grasp the significance of developments in Hungary. It would be appreciated if Chiefs of Mission and Principal Officers would give this matter their personal attention and this should be supplemented by efforts on the part of other members of the staff, especially the Public Affairs officers and USIA representatives, to get across the story of the vigorous reaction of your Government and the substantial efforts it has made incident to tragic events in Hungary. It should be remembered, of course, that events in Hungary happened with extraordinary speed, symptomatic of spontaneous public upheavals, but throughout the development we remained in as close touch with the situation as was humanly possible to do. [Here follows a summary of United States actions in the Hungarian situation.] Chiefs of Mission, Principal Officers and their staffs, of course, should work closely with USIA in keeping this information, as well as future actions and statements by the United States Government on the developing Hungarian situation, before the public. In this task, all media should be used and where practical, special reviews or roundups should be developed and exploited. In close collaboration with the posts, USIA should make appropriate contacts with government officials, leaders of public opinion, press and other media people to ensure that the widest possible audience get a clearer picture of the attitudes and actions of the American people and the American Government towards the situation in Hungary. It is realized, of course, that there are many countries where the problems here set forth do not exist. There are also, no doubt, situations where official and public attitudes will militate against full exploitation of the United States position. It is left to the discretion of the Chiefs of Mission, Principal Officers, and USIA representatives how the situations in the various countries can best be met. The following should be implicit in efforts to publicize and create an understanding of the United States role in the Hungarian situation: (1) That the United States has from the beginning and will continue to work with and through the United Nations on this problem. (2) That the primary concern of the United States is for the welfare and safety of the Hungarian people and that suffering and bloodshed in their struggle for freedom and self-determination be kept at the minimum. (3) That we will continue to focus critical world opinion on the tragic events in Hungary so that their struggle for freedom will be seen as the struggle of people everywhere who are and wish to remain free. (4) That the United States will continue to pursue vigorously all peaceful means to free the Hungarians from their brutal communist bondage. Hoover 210. Notes on the 57th Meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, December 13, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/12–1356. Top Secret. Drafted by Kelsey. Washington, December 13, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman State—Mr. Edward L. Freers Defense—Colonel Kenneth K. Hansen CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell USIA—Mr. Alfred V. Boerner OCB—Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Robert O. Blake State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. Ralph S. Collins CIA—Mr. Arthur M. Cox OCB Staff—Mr. Warren A. Kelsey [Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.] 6. UN and Hungary. Mr. Cox referred to a Soviet resolution in the UN condemning alleged American intervention in Hungary by such means as RFE and balloons and asked whether there was any guidance from our UN people on the prospects of this resolution.Reference is to the “Complaint by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics of intervention by the United States of America in the domestic affairs of Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and its subversive activity against those states,” submitted for inclusion on the General Assembly agenda on December 12. This was accomplished on December 14 and the item was assigned to the Special Political Committee “for consideration and report.” Though denying the accusation, the United States did not oppose its inclusion on the agenda. (A/PV.620) Several persons expressed the view that we should allow the resolution to come to a vote since we could easily turn it against the Soviets. Mr. Cox also inquired about the current situation with regard to the UN fact-finders, to which Mr. Beam replied that a telegram had been sent the previous night to our UN delegation instructing it to urge Hammarskjold to activate the group.Gadel 63 to USUN, December 13, urged the delegation to impress upon the Secretary-General the importance the United States attached to this matter. (Department of State, Central Files, 320.5764/12–1356) Mr. Blake mentioned that on a recent visit to New York he had found that the Hungarian situation was completely dominating the minds of UN delegates, including the Indians. Mr. Beam commented that Nehru’s report to the Indian legislature on Hungary should have some good things in it.Nehru’s statements on Hungary, made on the eve of his trip to the United States on December 14, were summarized in telegram 1685 from New Delhi, December 15. (Ibid., 764.00/12–1556) Warren A. KelseyAssistant OCB Staff Representative 211. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, December 14, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/12–1456. Top Secret. Drafted by Pedersen. New York, December 14, 1956 SUBJECT Hungary PARTICIPANTS Mr. V. V. Kuznetsov, First Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, USSR Mr. M. M. Potrubach, USSR Senator Hubert H. Humphrey, US Delegation Mr. Richard Pedersen, USUN Following is a complete chronological summary of conversation between Senator Humphrey and Mr. Kuznetsov on Hungary, which began with Kuznetsov’s remark at the end of a conversation on Security Council enlargement:On this occasion, Humphrey emphasized that he was speaking as an individual and not as a representative of the U.S. Government, and Kuznetsov stressed that his comments were unofficial. (Delga 354 from USUN, December 15; ibid., 764.00/12–1556) Kuznetsov said he was not very pleased things had turned out this way between our two countries. He had spent a couple of years in the United States in the 1930’s and had met lots of people—scientists, workers, etc. He had the highest respect for American people. There were no reasons for the USSR and the US not to be friendly. This was a problem we would have to work on. Humphrey said there was much good will among American people for the people of the USSR. Recent visits and exchanges of delegations had shown this. It was unfortunate that recent events had disrupted progress toward more friendly relations. Perhaps Kuznetsov had noted friendly comment about the USSR in the US press until recently. Unfortunately the situation in Central Europe needed to be reconciled. He had a feeling that maybe there was some desire on the part of others that this was also the case. Kuznetsov said the USSR was also not happy about the situation in Europe. Many problems might be solved if there were certain approach and desire to reach solutions. He recognized there were different approaches and opinions about these questions. This should not stop us from talking and meeting about them. Maybe we could reach something. If we did not meet we could never understand one another and get closer. It was a tragedy there was so little exchange of opinions. Some people wanted a divided world but the world could not be divided now. This was impossible. The US and the USSR must fight against this. Senator Humphrey said that problems had to be met in a spirit of responsibility. He pointed out that he was a member of opposition party and did not share many of Eisenhower’s views on domestic policy. But the President was a man of peace. He had shown this by his actions and his willingness to sit around the table with the Soviets last year.At Geneva in July 1955. Kuznetsov said the USSR had the highest respect for Eisenhower. He was very popular in the USSR among the people themselves. The slightest step of the US officially or unofficially, “I assure you”, toward better understanding of situations or expanding of relations will be met with sincere desire on the part of the Soviet people. We would do our utmost to meet this. Unfortunately some developments have prevented this. Humphrey said that tragic developments in Hungary had had much to do with this. He was talking now not as a representative of the Government but as a citizen of the United States, and as a Senator. He was not unmindful that the USSR was concerned about friendly states on its borders. There had been a year and a half of progress on better relations between the US and the USSR, including advancements on peaceful uses of atomic energy, exchanges of scientists and students. Then came the Hungarian tragedy. He can’t help believe there must be some who want to get this resolved. This cannot be done by force on either side. Hungarian people have to have a responsible Government; they have to live. Great responsibilities rest on our two countries on such problems. Kuznetsov said he was glad Humphrey had touched on this question. Maybe there was not enough time to discuss it in detail but he was glad to give some opinions. In a short time he could not say much but he would give brief comments. With respect to the previous situation in Hungary and concerning present Hungarian events, he thought the question had to be looked at from several sides. The problem was difficult, complicated and delicate. General Assembly discussion showed delegations accusing the USSR would not listen to other sides of the question. It was like a discussion of deaf people who would not listen to each other. If we analyze the preceding situation in Hungary and subsequent events we can then try to find certain recommendations which would be useful, to the Hungarian people first of all. The matter was not so simple as some people made out. It happened that the US and the USSR were most active on this question. The US put it before General Assembly at least once a week or sometimes less. Perhaps some other delegations were glad that USSR and US relations were becoming more severe; they want to put us more apart. They try to play on this and put both delegations on the spot. I am glad you touched on this. It would be a good idea to find time to discuss it further without an official meeting and records. Humphrey said he thought this might do a great deal of good. He was the type of person who wanted to seek answers rather than headlines. You had said this was a difficult problem and it is. You do understand that the American people are very much concerned about the Hungarian situation. There is considerable friendship among the American people and the Soviet people. This can be destroyed by the failures of their Governments. If we cannot handle a problem such as that in Hungary, what would happen if the situation broke out in Germany? (Kuznetsov exclaimed “yes, yes”). Humphrey said he was Chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Disarmament. Disarmament Committee had handled every USSR proposal seriously. We had looked into every means for approach to disarmament. At least there might be some approach if only on a piecemeal basis. Kuznetsov said we have to start somewhere. Maybe we can start on small things. Humphrey said maybe unofficial conversations on the Hungarian situation might help in relations. At least we could put forward views to each other on a quiet basis. Kuznetsov said he would appreciate conversations on this and also on disarmament. Humphrey said there was some chance of making advances on disarmament. Kuznetsov said they also thought we might get something, even at this session. Humphrey said the disarmament problem was much conditioned by a solution to the Middle Eastern and Central European questions. Kuznetsov said in international affairs he recognized that all questions were linked together but he thought a start could be made on some without others. Many political problems would have to wait for a considerable time for solution. But if we put them together this would put progress on disarmament in a difficult position. He did not think, for example, that the German problem could be solved very soon, at least not this year. But we could do something right away on disarmament. We should not wait for a solution of other international problems. We must break the vicious circle. If people want to delay they can always find reasons. To swim one must start sometime and jump into water. You could talk about swimming for a long time and never learn. You have to jump. Humphrey said that that was true but you also sometimes had to know how deep the water was and how cold. He regretted that sometimes we got to the point where we could not visit. Maybe we could get together again on an informal basis as well as on official business (referring to the enlargement of the Security Council). He wanted Kuznetsov to know that any move the USSR made to rectify the situation in Hungary without endangering Soviet security would be a great relief to the people of the world. People were looking for the UN to work reasonably well, and whether the great powers would uphold the Charter. I really feel when the USSR violates the Charter it is of benefit to the USSR and everyone for the UN to do something about it. We may disagree on many questions, but in the Senate we often hope to disagree without being disagreeable. Kuznetsov said he understood. Kuznetsov said the USSR wants to solve the Hungarian problem. This depended not only on the USSR. Others could make a contribution. One of the things to do was to bring a stop to interference. There was considerable propaganda and groups of people who wanted to intervene. Humphrey said, “Do you really believe that type of thing you speak of made that much difference in Hungary?” Kuznetsov said he could not speak of details, but take the radio station of Free Europe. He could not repeat many things they had said but they had been broadcasting day and night and had instigated people to take hostile position toward the present regimes. Take for example the hundred million dollars and additional money Congress had allocated for subversive activities.Reference is to the Kersten Amendment (so-named after Republican Congressman Charles J. Kersten of Wisconsin) to Public Law 165, the Mutual Security Act of 1951. (65 Stat. 373) This does not create happy feelings and implies that the US does not want to have closer relations with the USSR. The USSR distinguished between official policy and attitudes of people. Some actions of the US Government showed the USSR must deal with another point of view from that of the people, a view which was a hostile attitude toward the USSR and people’s democracies. Maybe he was mistaken. Maybe the US did not intend to change the system and “liberate” people from the “communist yoke”. Humphrey said he had not quite realized that we were as successful as Kuznetsov seemed to think. He also pointed out that as far as the hundred million dollars was concerned much of it had never even been spent. He said the problem of Hungary was serious and that something had to be done about it. Other problems had been settled including that of the Berlin Airlift. Kuznetsov said we are not happy about Hungarian situation. Humphrey noted that not only had some problems been settled through UN but India had helped on some problems such as China,India served as an intermediary in securing the release of U.S. airmen imprisoned in China; see volumes II and III. and that individuals could sometimes be of assistance. Kuznetsov said yes sometimes individuals could help very much. Humphrey said USSR had lost great good will in US overnight. President had been building good will between Soviet and American peoples in sense that he was restrained in attitude and an agent of peace and understanding. This all went down the drain with the Hungarian situation. It would be of advantage to both to see a change. Kuznetsov said USSR appreciated position of the President on some problems. These were sincere feelings of himself and Soviet people. Some problems and actions had created unhappy feelings. Many things needed to be discussed unofficially and frankly. Recently US had officially cancelled program for exchange of technical and cultural delegations. Maybe this was due to the influence of some groups but it was not a friendly step. Take US position on foreign trade of USSR. USSR had shown it could live and do quite well without foreign trade but the way US considers and announces its attitude toward trade relations creates unhappy feelings. Closer trade relations would be better for both countries. I was in the iron and steel business before I became a diplomat and I know you are ahead of us on these matters. Still we are doing something. Perhaps we can learn from each other. I have been to China and you might say it is very backward, but I found it is still possible to learn something from them, even in questions of industry. China had some very backward installations, old blast furnaces that you see only in text books. Still they had the most modern equipment also. When one nation separates itself from others this is not good. Humphrey said US certainly did not want to isolate itself. There had been many references to an iron curtain, both coming in and going out. There had been slight opening of this and US had wanted it open even more. This went pretty well until recently. The closing off of exchanges took place because you did something. This was in response to something for which the American people held the USSR responsible. Kuznetsov said that general attitude in USSR after war was that US policy was to isolate it, that we did not want to develop economic relations, expand trade, exchange experiences. We have been trying utmost in last few years to bring people to USSR. We had allowed congressmen and senators to come and even Hearst.Newspaper editor William Randolph Hearst, Jr. visited the Soviet Union in January 1955. Many people said things we did not like when they left but we continued to allow them to come. We made some steps and we expect the same from the US. Humphrey said these exchanges were going quite well but this new problem had now arisen. Kuznetsov said he regarded important part his function in General Assembly to explain to American people real policy of USSR. He said US press gave greatly distorted view of USSR and that attitude toward it had become more hostile in recent months. Humphrey said he sort of had impression USSR press gave pretty bad picture of US. Kuznetsov replied immediately not nearly so bad as US press of USSR (he gave an impression of sincerity on this point and was joined spontaneously by his adviser with a similar remark). Kuznetsov said he had noticed big difference in US press attitude between this year and last, that it was more hostile than before. He said US press makes USSR look like “horror”. Humphrey said we should deal with these problems as fellow human beings. He thought it was urgent responsibility of USSR to do something about Central Europe. He did not speak as judge. He simply felt that sometimes certain countries, like individuals, could be irresponsible but at least two countries have greater responsibilities than others—US and USSR. Kuznetsov said you are right there. Humphrey said he hoped we were never too proud to talk with you. Kuznetsov said we should talk more. As we were going toward the door, Humphrey said he had been interested in proposal that SYG visit Moscow because he thought this might help find way to solve the Hungarian problem. He asked Kuznetsov what his feeling was. Kuznetsov said (with feeling) this was “wrongest” thing that could be done. SYG was always welcome in Moscow but not on this question. Humphrey said he was glad he had asked question because frankly he had been of opposite opinion, that SYG’s trip might have proved very useful.Lodge informed Hoover and Wilcox in Delga 354, cited in footnote 2 above, that further bilateral conversations with Kuznetsov were possible. 212. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/12–1456. Secret. Repeated to Vienna. Budapest, December 14, 1956—5 p.m. 443. Department pass other posts as desired. Re Hungary’s political future and long-term economic problems, following some thoughts course US should endeavor follow here in coming months. Thus far unable discern in Soviet actions any indication of future policy other than probable complete domination of Hungarian puppet government. (In time, this domination would be increasingly indirect.) Dramatic developments here and Poland, however, give evidence deep current anti-Soviet feeling, which will continue and potentialities of which perhaps greater than previously realized. Despite military control, this current can have intense eroding effect on all Soviet efforts at political and ideological control. Furthermore, possible that attitude non-Soviet world can, over period time, have greater effect than evident thus far. Believe two areas where US role can perhaps be positive: Search for eventual political compromise reduce present weight Soviet repression, and consideration grant economic assistance beyond $20 million.The President authorized this sum on November 2. On political side, while attainment free Hungary must remain our basic objective, clear that we should give serious consideration to effort achieve short-term lesser aims, attainment of which would set stage for next step. Problem facing West at present is attainment some concession from Soviets in Hungary despite their continuing unwillingness compromise basic strategic position. Thus, appears from here most unlikely Soviets near future will accept any compromise involving troop removal. To Soviets dangers already demonstrated in nationalistic Communist such as Nagy so large as argue strongly against their present acceptance any leader not clearly under their control. However, one reason for Soviet fear Nagy in past, and this fear certainly strengthened in recent weeks, has probably been unclear picture in Soviet mind re Western plans or desiderata with regard free Hungary. Soviets may in fact be victims own propaganda and we know many Hungarians (including allegedly Anna Kethly) have in past voiced similar doubts. Need for public clarification US position this regard had been felt prior revolution and Legation had intended raise question with Department. Thus, particularly in view mounting internal political and economic problems here, 1) If immediate withdrawal Soviet troops not involved; 2) If Soviets satisfied that US not desirous return land (and perhaps industries) to former holders and not interested in establishment any particular type government except non-satellite; and 3) If ultra-close bonds to West, such as NATO membership, are disavowed, Conceivable to Legation Soviets might (at some time yet unclear) be willing consider some type compromise which would be at least not involve immediate loss military position here but which would remove some responsibility for future political and economic problems. On Western side, advantages such compromise would be humanitarian one of facilitating economic recovery and hope that pressures on Soviets slowly relinquish hold here would be such that in time they might be persuaded to take step which they now obviously unwilling to take. As Department aware, Legation prior to revolution believed Soviets had probably given serious consideration to growing Hungarian demand for freedomSee Document 86. (in August—Department) and if so had decided not to crack down and stifle these, thus reconciling themselves to gradual loss influence here. This conclusion was not firm one before revolution and less so now; on other hand, pressures on Soviets accept loss influence now greater than ever before. Only type compromise which we thus far able envisage would involve following points: 1. Some type “interim” coalition government, which would be made as broad as possible, and which would be expected continue for some time; at moment we have no clear ideas as how inclusive a coalition would be acceptable. 2. Some agreement from USSR limiting interference in internal affairs and limiting activity USSR troops in Hungary defense USSR and selves (this connection I am favorably impressed by Ambassador Thompson’s ideas on bases agreement for Soviet troops—Vienna 1322).In telegram 1322, November 15, Thompson commented that the base agreement “might give Soviets way out their present dilemma if in fact they desire solution. It would enable them maintain Warsaw Pact system, ensure Hungary not used as base against them and would diminish threat to north-south communications satellite system. Unable hazard opinion whether this would in Soviet eyes constitute greater hazard further explosions in satellite empire than institution flagrantly repressive regime but would think in view obvious Soviet need to save face before world if they are to carry on pretense their declared aims, might appeal to them.” (Department of State, Central Files, 661.64/11–1556) 3. Postponement further political problems and question final withdrawal Soviet troops. While every effort should of course be made establish final date and condition for troop withdrawal, we far from optimistic this could be achieved, and it might have to be left open for future. 4. Statement by US clarifying its position on (A) NATO membership and Communist thesis West desires use Hungary as base against Soviets, and (B) return of land to former holders and extreme capitalistic aims. Might also include statement re return nationalized industries to former holders, since primary US objection to nationalization has always been failure Hungarian Government make proper compensation. We aware of recent statements by Secretary and others this connection, such as Secretary’s Dallas speech November 4,The correct date is October 27; see Document 128. but believe restatement in more explicit terms would be necessary. Whether statement should refer to hope of eventual free and neutral Hungary, Legation cannot now advise. As indicated Vienna’s 1322, some type UN or big power approval such arrangement would undoubtedly have to be announced in order obtain Hungarian popular support. This type solution would create regime neither neutral nor satellite nor NATO nor independent; but hope would be that it would place Hungary in position where liberalizing forces both within and without country could slowly become operative once more. Concerning economic assistance, now very clear that despite all relief activities, real and continuing suffering can be minimized only by fairly large-scale assistance in foodstuffs and fuel, for which payment cannot be made in immediate future. Recent Hungarian history demonstrates that West’s interests do not run counter economic welfare individual Hungarians. Anti-Soviet feeling (or at least outward expression that feeling) has increased, not decreased as standard living rose slightly recent years and each economic concession by Communist government has been answered by greater demands. Perhaps most important criteria in deciding such aid would be whether actually benefits individual Hungarian and whether he aware it came from US. I therefore increasingly favor some effort provide Hungary considerable assistance in foodstuffs and fuel in coming months. Vienna’s Toica 159Not found. received after preparation foregoing. Legation comment on timing, method handling, psychological impact in event work slow-down continues, etc., follows. Wailes 213. Memorandum From the Acting Secretary of State to the President’s Press Secretary (Hagerty)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/12–1556. Secret. Drafted by Lightner. Washington, December 15, 1956. SUBJECT Suggested Reply to Question to be Raised at Presidential Press Conference on RFE Broadcasts At the OCB meeting on December 12 it was decided to ask you to arrange for a question to be asked at a Presidential press conference that would enable the President to clarify his attitude toward recent criticism with respect to the broadcasts by Radio Free Europe (RFE) to Hungary. The suggested question and answer are enclosed.At its meeting on December 5, the OCB agreed on establishment of an ad hoc working group to agree on possible courses of action to promote better understanding of U.S. actions in East Europe, including U.S. broadcasting operations. Lightner served as chairman of the Working Group which included representatives from USIA, CIA, and OCB. On December 7, the group recommended to the OCB that U.S. policy be clarified in a Presidential speech and at the President’s news conferences with a question concerning “private U.S. broadcasting to Eastern Europe.” (Memorandum of meeting by Comstock, December 11; Ibid., P Files: Lot 61 D 318, Eastern Europe—Informational Activities) A first draft of the question and answer printed here is ibid. At its meeting on December 12, the OCB approved the Working Group’s recommendations, but decided that the Department of State should refer the matter to the White House. (Ibid., OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Preliminary Notes) Lightner sent the enclosure printed here to Hoover on December 13; Hoover hand delivered it to Hagerty on December 15. (Ibid., P Files: Lot 61 D 318, Eastern Europe—Informational Activities) The need for such clarification arises from the criticisms that have been voiced in the American and foreign press, alleging that RFE has incited the Hungarian patriots to revolt by promising outside assistance which could not be, and was not, made available. The President, in his statement of November 14,See footnote 3, Document 185. made clear that “the United States doesn’t now, and never has, advocated open rebellion by an undefended populace against force over which they could not possibly prevail”. This statement was helpful in offsetting similar criticisms that have been made with respect to the broadcasts on the Government’s official radio, the Voice of America. However, the President’s statement does not cover RFE broadcasts, which cannot publicly be related to United States policy because our public position toward RFE is that it is a privately operated station. The OCB, therefore, is of the opinion that a statement by the President along the lines of the enclosed would help to clarify the matter. It is recognized that it may be necessary to plant the question with one of the correspondents, but it is understood that this is something that you might be able to arrange without embarrassment.No such question was asked at any of the President’s news conferences. Herbert Hoover Jr.Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature. [Enclosure] SUGGESTED MATERIAL FOR PRESIDENTIAL PRESS CONFERENCE Question: It has been alleged that the Hungarian rebellion was caused by Western radio broadcasts, particularly those of RFE. It is claimed the radio incited the people to revolt and prolonged the fighting by promising outside military assistance. Some comment in the Western press here and abroad has expressed the fear that there may be some truth in those charges. Would you care to comment? Answer: The Hungarian revolution began, as I understand it, with a peaceful demonstration in Budapest Square. It was turned into an armed rebellion by the firing of the secret police on the students and workers. There has been no more courageous example of the spontaneous uprising of an entire people against foreign oppression. The Nagy Government of Hungary, before it was crushed by Soviet tanks, flatly denied the Soviet accusation of foreign incitement, and the Hungarian people by their continued resistance against overwhelming odds have demonstrated that this revolution springs from their own hearts and is sustained by their own unconquerable belief in human freedom. It would do the Hungarian people an injustice to suggest otherwise. As for the role of RFE, I have seen statements by responsible leaders of that organization, such as Joseph Grew and othe rs, indicating that they have always guarded against inciting to violence and against making promises that could not be fulfilled. The free world certainly must not mislead these people with false promises but equally we must not allow them to be misled by the totalitarian suppression of all truth. The message that freedom exists and what it means has been carried in broadcasts from the free world to the captive peoples, who otherwise would hear only what their police-state masters want them to hear. The very fact that freedom exists anywhere will, of course, encourage those who are deprived of it to strive for their own liberty and independence. 214. Despatch From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/12–1856. Secret. Drafted by Nyerges and Christopher A. Squire. Budapest, December 18, 1956. No. 247 SUBJECT Comments on Media Policy and Media Treatment of Current Hungarian Events Although the problems presented by VOA and RFE radio programs to Hungary are complex, it would seem that a look at our past and present media policy is now called for (1) because of the new situation in which Hungary finds itself, and (2) because of some criticism that US media played an inciting role in the revolution by excessively encouraging hope of active Western aid. The latter problem is of interest primarily in so far as its discussion casts light on our future programming. First of all, it should be pointed out that a thorough reading of VOA and RFE scripts over the past year would probably produce few specific examples of seriously ill-advised statements inciting to revolt or holding forth unwarranted hope of Western aid. However, such a review would, by and large, prove little. We are still faced with the fact that the Hungarians for the most part did interpret our broadcasts in a manner probably never intended or foreseen. The problem that arises is intellectually an intriguing one and involves the whole question of how we as a nation succeed or fail in communicating with other peoples of the world. In the Hungarian case we failed apparently to communicate properly, not because of any isolated statements or misstatements but because the broad contours of our expression meant one thing to the speaker and another to the listener. Obviously one facet of United States policy is the desire to see East European states regain their freedom. But the media represented this facet somewhat more clearly than it presented our other facet of how to go about the problem; particularly, the media did not and could not anticipate the events which arose and prepare the population for the reaction of the West. Our isolation from so many of the Hungarian people naturally contributed heavily toward the failure of our intelligence to gauge correctly the temper of the Hungarians. Logically, on the basis of our limited knowledge, it seemed proper to follow a program policy of sustaining a long-range resistance to Communist ideology. Our media apparently imagined the need for such sustenance to be far greater than it in fact was. Thus what seemed to us as a defense move of holding the line turned out to imply something far more to a people whose collective intensity of hatred for the Communists was not fully realized by the United States. Had our intelligence, especially among the youth, been able to operate more effectively, we would probably have been able to flash even more warning signals to the media than we did. The Legation does not have any strongly positive recommendations for media policy at present. It would seem, however, that in the exigency of the present Hungarian situation the media should of necessity be cautious and wait for Western policy makers to find some way out of the dilemma which Hungary’s single-handed fight against Communism presents to the anti-Communist world. Such caution, however, should not go so far as to impose a restraint on the media giving the Hungarian revolutionaries all the moral support possible. Actually our actions have now made it clear to the Hungarians that we do not intend to intervene with any sort of armed aid. Thus there is now little chance of misunderstanding on this score. On the basis of past experience our caution should rather extend to restraint from giving the appearance that we are inciting overt acts of resistance, which are in some degree inevitable anyway. Future developments in Hungary will of course be the important determinant in the development of a new media policy, when the situation here has become more stable. Actually, in the period preceding October 23, VOA was adjusting itself to a line which probably would have saved it from any criticism of implying active US aid to a satellite revolt. RFE, however, continued to pursue a stronger line, and when Hungarians charge us with not having come to their aid they in general refer to RFE “promises.” These promises, the Legation is sure, were never literally made. For the moment and until some kind of settlement of the Hungarian situation is achieved, the Legation doubts the wisdom of any drastic curtailment or alteration of RFE programs. Such curtailment, especially in number of broadcasting hours, would be widely interpreted as withdrawal of US interest from this area at a time when we can ill afford such an interpretation. But looking farther into the future, the Legation finds it difficult to conceive of a US policy toward Hungary, once the present crisis is passed, which would justify the continuation of RFE exactly along its present lines. If our policy toward Hungary continues to be one of holding a line of ideological defense, it is on the surface obvious that the long daily hours of anti-Soviet broadcasts by RFE to Hungary is a questionable expenditure of money and effort. The Hungarians have proved beyond any doubt that they want no kind of settlement with Communism, not even a compromise settlement that may eventually be forced on them because the anti-Communist world at the moment lacks the power to force a Soviet withdrawal farther eastward. Thus, assuming our future policy toward Hungary is a negative one, the Legation would recommend a drastic curtailment in RFE’s broadcasting hours. If, on the other hand, we believe that the Hungarian rebellion is a positive factor which may contribute toward affecting the Communist system on a world-wide scale, but is not sufficiently positive to bring us to risk in any degree a third world war, we might continue RFE much along its present lines if its broad contours of expression make it amply clear that we regard the Hungarian situation as a small tessera in a vast mosaic and that we are by no means inclined to give it exaggerated importance in our world policies. In the period before the Hungarian revolution (as at present) the Legation monitored RFE broadcasts only casually and occasionally. The Legation thus cannot evaluate RFE on the basis of the broadcasts themselves. The Legation bases its attitudes toward the RFE problem largely on Hungarian reactions to and interpretations of these broadcasts, as learned from conversations in the nearly two months since the revolution began. These conversations with Hungarians, incidentally, have been wider than at any time in the pre-revolutionary period, and although Hungarian criticisms of RFE may be emotional, they should be given the most careful consideration and accepted at face value if they are not contravened by some overriding dictation of our own self interest. As for the current situation, below are listed a number of concrete suggestions as to how the Legation believes it might be handled by the media. These suggestions are presented in individually written memoranda as appendices, which to some extent overlap but in general appear to supplement each other. The Department is requested to send processed copies of this despatch to MRC and PRU Munich; PAD and PRU Vienna; and to the United States Information Agency. Edward T. Wailes Enclosure 1 MEMORANDUMDrafted by Barnes. SUBJECT Suggestions for Media Treatment of Current Hungarian Events Positive themes: 1. Believe factual news, foreign and domestic but particularly former, should receive highest priority. 2. Suggest special emphasis on news concerning reactions to the Soviet-Hungarian war in other countries, especially the neutralist areas; and including when possible reactions of specific groups such as labor, religious organizations, etc.; as long as such reactions are anti-Soviet in character. 3. Believe commentary as such on the news should not be overplayed. To the extent commentary is used, a number of specific points are suggested below for possible exploitation: a. The fact that one major casualty of the Soviet-Hungarian war has been Soviet-style Communism as an ideology or a way of life, a thing for men to live by or trust in. What is left is Soviet Communism as stark, aggressive imperialism. b. A balance sheet of profits and losses to the Soviets from their Hungarian adventure might be drawn up (similar to that in Legtel 294),Telegram 294 from Budapest, November 15, described Soviet propaganda efforts to conceal the nature of their intervention in Hungary. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/11–1556) with heavy emphasis (though avoiding exaggeration to point of improbability) on the losses and their permanence. c. Might stress repeatedly that Soviet aggression in Hungary, and especially such events as the Nagy kidnapping, have brought about a situation where, until the Soviets withdraw from Hungary physically and leave the nation independent, no volume of promises, protestations, arguments, etc. concerning eventual withdrawal, or for that matter on any other subject, will be accorded the least confidence, trust or credence anywhere in the civilized world. d. Stress the contradiction of Soviet aggression with the hypocritically espoused principles of the BandungReference is to the Afro-Asian Conference, attended by 29 nations in April 1955 at Bandung, Indonesia. and BelgradeSee Document 15. declarations . . . . 6. It would be well to do all possible to convince the listener that U.S. policy is in no way directed toward restoring the large landowner class, nor is it interested in prescribing any social, economic or political structure. Negative themes: 1. Probably preferable not to overplay the mistakes of the Hungarian government and Party as exemplified in the pre-Hungarian-Soviet war period. 2. Doubtful whether advantageous to emphasize attacks on Hungarian “traitors” by name, since except in the case of top leaders we have too little insight into the thinking of these people. 3. It would seem unnecessary to overplay the more obvious elements of internal Hungarian news, to the extent this means simple repetition of what most Hungarians already know. 4. It would seem advisable to tailor presentation to avoid in every way possible the impression of broadcasts being “just propaganda”, something the satellite listening audience is by now allergic to. In this connection unsupported diatribe is probably counter-productive. Enclosure 2 MEMORANDUMDrafted by Squire. SUBJECT Suggestions for Media Guidance General tone, background. Budapest is a city of mourning, with black flags and armbands much in evidence. If restaurants are open, music is considered in bad taste. Five main theaters were ordered to open again December 15. But the workers refused to comply, donated the theaters’ supply of heating coal to hospitals instead. At the moment there is more unity among city worker, peasant, intelligentsia and bureaucrat than ever in recent history. The populace is Hungarian first, then social democrat, communist, socialist, small holder adherent only second. The Legation has found very little resentment against Americans. But there is disappointment that the United States and the West did not come actively to Hungary’s aid. Specific Suggestions. During recent weeks, particularly during the general strike period, more people have had more time to listen to Western broadcasts, for news, than ever before. Straight news coverage should continue to receive highest priority. Editorial roundups of free world reaction to Hungary’s plight highly interesting to Hungarians. All steps taken by free world to implement their anger at Soviets, their steps to help Hungary, high priority. Particularly important is the attitude of the so-called neutral nations and leaders of India, Burma, Indonesia, which Hungarians feel carry greatest weight with Soviets. ICFTU effort to boycott delivery of goods to the Soviet Union has been acclaimed as the most significant news here. This constituted real and tangible immediate support, by worker for worker. Internal Hungarian news is important, since communication within the country is bad. Only the Hungarian radio covers the country as an internal medium. Needless to say its reports are biased and incomplete. The Legation feels that media should take no open stand for, or against, the general strike, or the fleeing of Hungarians to the West. With about 1 percent of the total Hungarian population in Austria since the last few weeks, the Legation does not feel U.S. interests here best served by either encouraging or discouraging exodus. In this respect any large volume of taped interviews with refugees might tend, through emphasis, to be interpreted as sign of U.S. blessing. Accent should be on “Care I received from Aid to Refugee Centers,” and not on “How I Escaped from Russian Atrocities.” Media, in Legation’s opinion, should be particularly wary of all exile politician statements. Extremely few were on the scene during the revolution. Cross-reporting of events in other satellites to Hungary continues to be useful. Aid to Hungary by U.S. through Red Cross etc. should be stressed, but not overemphasized. A theme well worth continued exploitation is that it was the workers, the workers’ districts that bore the brunt of the fighting. Soviet claims of Hungary being a “workers’ paradise” are untenable even to the Soviets. Soviet guided tour for Gheorgiu Dej, Siroky and other satellite leaders through rubble-strewn workers’ districts must have caused serious doubts in their minds too. 215. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of StateSource: Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks: Basic Preliminary Documents, #1. Confidential. The memorandum is a copy of the progress report submitted to the OCB on December 19. In its original form, it was sent to the OCB by Staats on December 17 and was considered by the CFEP on December 18. (Ibid., US/Polish Talks: Preparations) Washington, December 19, 1956. SUBJECT United States Economic Aid to Poland The purpose of this memorandum is to outline the actions and Plans developed since Ambassador Jacobs at Warsaw was informed on November 29See footnote 13, Document 204. that the Polish Government would like to send three economic experts to Washington in the near future to discuss trade and credit matters. United States statutes and policies established over a number of years impose a variety of limitations and discriminations in economic relations with the Polish Government. Some of these limiting factors are indicated below: Considerable preparatory work was required to lay a basis for discussions which can foster our objectives and offer promise of arrangements which are practical and which are acceptable from the Polish standpoint. In accordance with NSC 5616/2 (paragraph 11),Document 196. the Department of State and the other interested agencies have concentrated first on lines of action which could be taken under existing legislation. The Council of Foreign Economic Policy on December 18 recommended approval of the Department of State proposal that United States export policy be modified to allow dollar sales of surplus agricultural commodities on a selective basis to Eastern European bloc countries at world market prices.The CFEP agreed at its 50th meeting on December 18. (Minutes of the meeting by Cullen; Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks: Preparations) The Interagency Committee on Agricultural Surplus Disposal had earlier recommended approval of State’s proposal. The Department of State believes it would be desirable for this changed policy to be discussed with Congressional leaders before it is placed in operation; this consultation, however, need not result in delay in meeting with a Polish delegation. The Treasury Department was informed that the Department of State would concur in a decision to purchase Polish gold.On December 11, Hoover wrote Under Secretary of the Treasury William Randolph Burgess to indicate that since “we are now prepared to make a distinction between Poland and the Soviet Bloc” the Department of State would concur in the decision of the Department of the Treasury to buy Polish gold. (Ibid., Central Files, 848.13/12–1156) Except perhaps for triangular sales transactions, the Battle Act prohibits the use of Mutual Security Program funds other than under the authority of Section 401(a), and that section limits the use of such funds to a maximum of $30,000,000 in any one country. State has established that some funds are not yet committed under Section 401(b) of the Mutual Security Act. The amount of such uncommitted authority and funds is limited. The use of these funds of course would be at the expense of other actual or potential requirements. It would be desirable to draw on them only for the most compelling needs and in the absence of other readily available sources of funds. Any resort to Section 401 funds should be confidential as public knowledge might be embarrassing to Poland to an extent which could preclude an arrangement. The Battle Act also precludes an extension of credit by the Export-Import Bank or the Commodity Credit Corporation. The restrictions imposed by the Battle Act on these available sources of loan financing are significant, since Poland has expressed an interest in short-term credits for the purchase of such products as cotton, grain, fats and oils, fertilizer, and various types of machinery. Polish officials have made clear that they do not desire emergency types of relief or gift transactions in agricultural products. Poland is not prepared at this time to enter into any arrangement which has the appearance of involving political interference. Consideration is being given to a reexamination of the statutes and determinations under which short-term credit extended by United States Government lending institutions has been deemed to constitute foreign aid within the meaning of the Battle Act. Preliminary indications are that difficulties will be encountered in modifying existing policy on this subject. The Secretary of State has determined, and will explain to Congressional leaders that Poland is a “friendly nation” under the definition of Section 107 of Public Law 480, that is, that Poland is not now “dominated or controlled by” the U.S.S.R. This finding opens the way for the sale of surplus agricultural products for Polish currency or for barter transactions. Two important limiting factors, however, continue to apply to the use of Title I of PL 480 to meet the Polish situation. Authorizations under Title I of Public Law 480 are approaching exhaustion and steps are being taken to establish priorities on progress already submitted by other governments. Additional Title I authorization will be sought from Congress early in the legislative year. The provisions of the Battle Act would presently prevent any loan to Poland of foreign currency accruing through sales under Title I of P.L. 480; but this currency might be held by the United States for U.S. uses including procurement of items in Poland needed for U.S. purposes elsewhere. The Section 107 determination regarding Poland also furnishes a basis for later consideration of making a similar determination under the Trade Agreements Act,P.L. 86, enacted June 21, 1955; 69 Stat. 162. with a consequent reduction in the rates of import duty applicable to Polish products. The position of the Department of State is that the necessary preparations under existing legislation and policies are rapidly approaching completion and that in accordance with paragraph 11(a) of NSC 5616/2 the Polish delegation could be received at an early date. The United States might be in a position at that time to negotiate concerning a significant number of the products having special interest for Poland, even if these were chiefly agricultural products and relatively limited selected types of machinery and other products which Poland has mentioned. Without new legislation, however, the ability of the United States to extend credit on machinery and other products would be very limited. Some changes in export licensing policy would also be required, depending upon the types of machinery involved. As regards paragraph 11(b) of NSC 5616/2, the Department of State has taken appropriate steps to encourage the reorientation of Polish trade toward the West, especially West Germany, France and the United Kingdom. France, according to reports, has concluded a trade agreement with Poland involving the supply of two large electric generators to Poland. State has indicated to the French its support of an exception being made to the COCOM restrictions on the export of such equipment to the bloc countries. West Germany recently concluded a $70 million trade agreement with Poland. Economic difficulties have thus far hampered, and may prevent, the U.K. in extending credits to Poland. State has also had preliminary discussions with a German group which might be able to participate in a triangular form of arrangement which could involve Export Import Bank loans to West Germany for U.S. commodities. These would be re-exported to Poland under West German credits. The legality and feasibility of this arrangement is in doubt and is being explored. The Department of State also believes it advisable for all possibilities of direct bilateral arrangements to be explored before turning to such indirect arrangements involving a third country. The overcoming of the remaining obstacles in achieving closer economic relations with Poland would leave a need for new legislation if operations of any considerable size prove to be desirable in the furnishing of non-agricultural products on a credit basis. It may become necessary, for example, to meet the objectives of paragraph 11(c) of NSC 5616/2, to recommend more flexible statutory authority, such as a larger fund similar to the present Section 401 of the Mutual Security Act. It may also be appropriate to examine the existing legislation and particularly the regulations under the Battle Act with a view to putting the Executive Branch in a position to exploit promptly and effectively opportunities to advance United States interests. In view of the urgency of the matter, the present plan is to seek a sufficient basis within the possibilities and limits of existing legislation for initial detailed discussions with Poland. State has in mind that these discussions could proceed bit by bit, with opportunities to review at each stage the scope and form of operations to be considered in subsequent stages.At the December 19 OCB meeting, this memorandum was discussed and a few minor corrections made. (Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Minutes—Preliminary Notes) At his December 19 Staff Meeting, Dulles instructed the Bureau of Congressional Relations to brief members of Congress “in a manner which will preserve the President’s Constitutional authority for the conduct of foreign affairs without consulting Congress at every step.” (Ibid., Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75) Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations Robert C. Hill sent identical letters to the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, the House Committee on Agriculture, and to the ranking minority members of these committees. Copies were also sent to the Departments of Agriculture, Defense, and Treasury, and to the CFEP and ICA. (Letter from Hill to James P. Richards, December 28; ibid., Central Files, 411.4841/12–2856) 216. Notes on the 58th Meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, December 19, 1956Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/12–1956. Top Secret. Drafted by Kelsey. Washington, December 19, 1956 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman State—Mr. Edward L. Freers Defense—Colonel Kenneth K. Hansen Defense—Mr. Roger Ernst CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey OCB—Mr. Warren A. Kelsey, Asst. Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Robert M. McKisson State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. Nathaniel J. Davis Defense—Colonel Erik W. Ritzau 1. Aid to Poland. Mr. Beam reported that some progress had been made in normalizing economic relations with Poland. The CFEP had reversed its policy against the sale of surplus commodities to Soviet bloc countries for dollars,See footnote 4, supra. and a tentative determination had been made that for purposes of Titles I and II of PL 480 Poland could be regarded as “friendly” and not under control or domination of the international communist conspiracy. The Department had started consulting leading members of Congress on these steps and the decision about Poland’s “friendliness” was subject to review.See footnote 9, supra. The Department of State was not altogether happy about this decision but thought on balance that it should be made. Mr. Campbell inquired whether the reversal of CFEP policy applied to Poland only, to which Mr. Beam answered that it applied to the Iron Curtain countries except the Soviet Union on a selective basis, but that Poland was the only one of these countries to which it was applicable at present. He said that next week we might have something to tell the Poles on economic aid and that there was much pressure in the OCB to move ahead in the matter. Mr. Burris inquired whether arrangements had been considered under which other European countries might help Poland by means of triangular trade arrangements. Mr. Beam said that we were not much in favor of that now. Mr. Burris said that such arrangements might save the Poles from endangering their relations with the USSR by seeming to get too close to the United States. Mr. Beam said that there was little danger of this since the Poles were getting comparatively slim pickings from us. On the other hand, we did not want to discourage other Western Countries from trading with Poland; the French and Germans had something along these lines in mind although the British had decided that they could not afford it. 2. Hungary. Mr. Beam reported that UN action on Hungary had slowed down. The Secretary General was not eager to send observers to Austria or other European countries if they could not go to Hungary and the observers themselves were not eager to go. A suggestion had been made that the Secretary General’s role on Hungary be turned over to a watchdog committee to be chosen by the General Assembly. We were considering this idea, which had some advantages in that it would help to preserve the Secretary General’s neutral status in the Near Eastern problem. Mr. Revey said that he had been asked to bring to the Committee’s attention a recent article by Roscoe Drummond suggesting the appointment of Western diplomatic representatives in Budapest as observers.The article appeared in The Washington Post on December 18. Mr. Beam answered that we have instructed our UN delegation to get the fact-finding group to request material from diplomatic sources in Budapest.Not further identified. The group had not done anything yet but the proposed new committee might. Mr. Revey asked whether Hammarskjold himself might designate the diplomats as observers, to which Mr. Beam replied that Hammarskjold wanted to fade out of the picture. Mr. Beam said that the rest of Drummond’s article was good, particularly the emphasis on the fact that the Hungarian revolt had been one of workers and intellectuals against communism, and he suggested that our propaganda might make use of the article. Mr. Campbell said that a publication was being prepared making a comparison between photographs of demonstrating crowds in the October 1917 Russian revolution and in the Hungarian revolt; there was a remarkable similarity in some of the scenes. Mr. Revey said he had some reservations about this; first, it prejudged the Czarist regime (Mr. Beam commented that the Czarist regime had long since been well judged) and, second, Eastern Europeans might not like it, since they might consider their own revolutions different from the Russian one. Mr. Campbell said that the intention was to make an impression on the type of person who had been impressed by the book Ten Days That Shook the World. Mr. Beam said he thought it might have a good effect on those who still considered themselves Marxists such as the German Social Democrats. Mr. Burris said that Mr. Lightner was impressed by the idea and hoped that USIA was using it. Mr. Campbell said that this was a long-range project especially suitable for use during the 40th anniversary of the 1917 revolution. Mr. Beam said he did not see how we could lose on this project and Colonel Hansen also supported the idea. Mr. Freers said that it would be a good idea to contrast the present policy of countries which had been colonial empires in the 19th century with the colonialism characteristic of the Soviet Union today. Turning to the Soviet UN resolution indicting the United States for “interference” in Hungary, Mr. Beam said that it was last on the agenda and would probably come to a vote in February. The Department had set up a working group to gather material to refute the charges.This was the so-called “Walmsley group.” Regarding the Soviet accusation, see footnote 2, Document 210. 3. Possible Public Accounting for Kersten Fund Expenditures. Mr. Campbell suggested that, if possible, a public accounting of expenditures under the Kersten amendment might be made in order to refute the charges that these funds were being used for subversive purposes.See footnote 4, Document 211. He added that the CIA was not getting any funds under this amendment. Mr. Beam said that the idea might be useful, especially since some of these funds would probably be used for aid to Poland. He inquired who administered these funds and said the idea would be looked into. Mr. Campbell said Anna Kethly was back in the United States and had revived her efforts to appear before the UN General Assembly or some other UN organ. He added that an attempt was being made to fix on an organizational basis propaganda efforts concerning Hungary by such means as setting up committees for the exposure of Soviet imperialism. Mr. Revey inquired about the progress of plans to send Hungarian refugees students to various parts of the world to address student organizations. Mr. Campbell said that this plan was going ahead slowly because of the screening problem. 4. Policy Toward Satellites. Mr. Beam said that the Secretary’s statement appearing in the press that morningDulles spoke in response to a question at his December 18 press conference. For text, see Department of State Bulletin, January 7, 1957, pp. 3–4. seemed to fix our policy toward the satellites in favor of an evolutionary process, and that the question then arose what we would do in case of another Hungary. If a real revolt arose in Poland or East Germany Europe could hardly stand another attack such as had occurred against Hungary. Mr. Ernst said that the Department of Defense was also puzzling over that problem. Defense assumed that our ability to control or influence events was limited and that the question therefore was what we did if such a revolt actually happened. It was inclined to think that the best course would be prompt UN intercession or intervention. Mr. Revey said USIA planned not to give too much play to the Secretary’s statement except as immediate reassurance against any American desire to incite revolt. Mr. Revey asked for comments on the Polish-Soviet agreement on the stationing of Soviet troops in Poland. Mr. Beam answered that the Department was analyzing it and comparing it with our own status of forces agreement, and that guidance would be forthcoming.The agreement on the legal status of Soviet troops in Poland, signed in Warsaw on December 17, reaffirmed Polish internal sovereignty and recognized Poland’s legal jurisdiction over Soviet troops, personnel, and family members. The USIA Guidance on this agreement is in News Policy Note 1227–1130, December 27. (Department of State USIA/IOP/C Files: Lot 70 D 398, Poland) Mr. Beam asked Mr. Boerner how he interpreted the Secretary’s statement. Mr. Boerner said that the USIA was not going to try to knock over any apple carts but it was sometimes a problem how to avoid that in a particular situation. Speculation whether we were going to negotiate with the Soviets was appearing in the press and real policy guidance rather than improvisation was needed. Mr. Beam said that Chalmers Roberts had recently expressed a correct opinion when he wrote that the thing to do now was to take matters easily and do nothing to help the Russians out of the dilemma they were in in Eastern Europe. Negotiations now would be unrealistic. Colonel Hansen inquired whether the BBC was coordinating with us on output to Eastern Europe to which Mr. Boerner replied that they were also taking a cautious line. 5. Congressional Interest in Allegedly Inflammatory Broadcasts. Mr. Boerner pointed to the likelihood that the new Congress would do a lot of investigating of the allegations about the inflammatory nature of American broadcasts to Hungary. He read portions of a letter the USIA had received from Senator HumphreyNot found in USIA files. in which the Senator asked for texts of sample VOA broadcasts to Hungary, including one of the Voice’s “most inflammatory” broadcasts, one of its “least inflammatory” and one of an “average” broadcast. Mr. Freers said he thought the thing to say was that we meant the same as the Secretary had meant in his recent statement. Mr. Boerner expressed doubts whether the agency would get off so easily. Mr. Beam commented that realization of our impotence to act in Hungary had had a sobering effect on public opinion about Eastern Europe. Mr. McKisson pointed out that the Soviets also had a tough problem in Eastern Europe and that we need not strain ourselves to do anything about it. Mr. Boerner commented that it was hard to stick by some of the Government’s decisions on the Hungarian problem; for example, the original idea had been that as many nations as possible should receive Hungarian refugees but that the refugee matter was more and more becoming an American operation as a result of public criticism that too little was being done for the refugees. Warren A. KelseyAssistant OCB Staff Representative 217. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United NationsSource: Department of States, Central Files, 764.00/12–1556. Top Secret. Drafted by D.M. Bane and J.J. Sisco; approved by Wilcox; and cleared by G, EE, in draft with EUR, and in substance by L/UNA. Washington, December 21, 1956—7:46 p.m. 459. Re: Delga 354.See footnote 2, Document 211. It would appear from Humphrey–Kuznetsov conversation that Soviets might possibly like to find some way out of their present situation in Hungary. There have also been expressions of view by YugoslavOn December 17, Srdja Prica, the Yugoslav Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, expressed the view to Ambassador Riddleberger that continued U.N. pressure on the Soviet Union was unhelpful and that an abandonment of such tactics might lead the Soviets to “revise present harsh measures.” (Department of State, Central Files, 768.11/12–1856) and Polish representatives, that continued UN public pressure on Soviets might prove counter-productive. In view Soviet non-compliance to date and public posture we have taken on Hungarian question, US might find it difficult enter into negotiations of any kind with Kuznetsov since such step could be interpreted as weakening our firm stand against Soviet actions in Hungary. At same time, we would wish to take every feasible step to encourage and help bring about situation enabling Soviets to move toward solution in Hungary consistent with US objectives in Eastern Europe. While Department doubts that further conversation with Kuznetsov will be fruitful, nevertheless there would appear to be no serious disadvantage to us if we attempt ascertain discreetly and quietly Soviet intentions with respect to Hungary. We believe that we should listen to and at least consider what the Soviets may have to say to us privately on Hungary. Consequently, if appropriate occasion arises, suggest US Delegation indicate to Kuznetsov that we would be interested in hearing Soviet views re Hungary. Dulles 218. Notes of a Meeting With the President, White House, Washington, December 26, 1956, 11 a.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Prepared by Ann C. Whitman. The meeting took place in the President’s office. Washington, December 26, 1956, 11 a.m. PRESENT The Vice President; Loy W. Henderson, Deputy Undersecretary of State; John B. Hollister, Director, ICA; William P. Rogers, Deputy Attorney General; Tracy VoorheesOn December 12, President Eisenhower announced the establishment of the President’s Committee for Hungarian Refugee Relief chaired by Tracy S. Voorhees. He was charged with seeing to it that the voluntary agencies worked effectively with each other and with the government agencies involved in the relief effort. William Hallam Tuck was designated to act for the committee in Austria in a liaison capacity with Ambassador Thompson. Voorhees had earlier been appointed on November 28 to be the President’s representative concerning resettlement activities and refugee relief. STAFF MEMBERS Persons, Murray Snyder and Goodpaster The Vice President reported on his trip to Austria in connection with the Hungarian refugee problem.Dulles spoke with Nixon on December 7 regarding a trip to Austria. Nixon suggested various ways of dramatizing the mission including having Mrs. Eisenhower or Mrs. Nixon go over on the Presidential plane to pick up a planeload of women and children. He later stated, however, that he did not wish to go if it appeared like a “grandstand play.” (Memorandum of telephone conversation by Bernau, December 7; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations) In his memoirs, Nixon stated that the President recalled him to Washington on December 13 and asked him to meet with Dulles who informed him that it had been decided to have him undertake the mission to Austria (Operation Mercy). (RN: Memoirs of Richard Nixon; p. 182) The announcement of the Vice President’s trip to Austria as the President’s personal representative was made on December 12. He departed on December 18 and returned on December 24. Subsequently, on December 27, he visited the refugee facility at Camp Kilmer. For text of his January 1, 1957, “Report to the President on Hungarian Refugees,” see Department of State Bulletin, January 21, 1957, pp. 94–99. On that trip he was accompanied by Mr. Hollister and Mr. Rogers. His first point was that the U.S. should not continue to speak of the numbers of refugees it is admitting. The British and French take credit for an unlimited number, though actually they do have limitation. He came back to this point a number of times. The Vice President is going to prepare a brief summary report for the leaders’ meetings next Monday and Tuesday.Following Nixon’s report and his meeting with Congressional leaders on January 1, the President announced that, pending Congressional action, the Attorney General would continue to parole Hungarian refugees into the United States. (Telegram 3045 to Vienna, January 3; Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/1–357) Under his general comments, the Vice President first stressed that despite the confusion, generally speaking a very good job is being done for the refugees. There are some big camps, some smaller ones, some people housed in schoolhouses and barracks, and Salzburg and Munich and other places have taken some. The Salzburg camp is probably the best one. He praised particularly the work Ambassador Thompson, in Austria, of the Immigration people, and talked at some length about the voluntary efforts of service people at various spots along the way to provide packages and extraordinarily thoughtful things for the Hungarians. The President asked Colonel Goodpaster to prepare for him a letter to General Max Taylor commending the service people and wives. He also said parenthetically that the situation at Camp Kilmer had greatly improved from the early first days. The President also suggested that if the Vice President spoke again on television, he should put in a word about the service people. The Vice President’s next general comment was about the high calibre of the refugees. They are young, in most cases the people “had” to leave the country—i.e. the leadership type—to avoid deportation. The President recalled that Marshal Zhukov had once said if you got rid of the leaders of a country, you could do anything you wanted to. About the security problem, the Vice President minimised the danger, particularly because there are so many people coming out that everyone is known to a lot of the others and it is hard in that way to slip into them a person who might be planted for spying purposes. However, some of the Congressional leaders are worrying about that. The President thinks such danger is almost zero—and said the Communists did not have to go to such elaborate means as would be necessary in this case, in order to get “spies” into our country. The Vice President said the other countries regard these particular refugees as tremendous assets, rather than liabilities—pointed out that Holland, overcrowded as it is, had taken 300 and wanted more. Germany is taking 10% of all that come over—they are experts in handling refugees. The Hungarians are productive people—later in the discussion the President pointed out what a tremendous thing it would be for the Mid East people to take in some of these industrious people. The Vice President next went to the size of the problem, though there are so many imponderables it is difficult to be accurate. Approximately 151,000 have come out to date, of these 70,000 are still in Austria—80,000 having moved on into other countries. We have taken about 14,000—and have processed remaining 7,000 that at present we may take. The transportation of these 7,000 will require until January 10th. They are still coming out at rate of 800 a day, and no one can say for how long that will go on. There is feeling that the Russians are soon going to have a major decision to make—one that might start the tide going back (if any change in government in Hungary)—or the Russians may clamp down on exodus. The President had been advised that it would be cheaper to keep these people in Austria, the U.S. paying the costs, but the Vice President emphatically disagreed. Back to the figures, there are about 63,000 in Austria as yet unplaced, of which 10,000 will be taken by other countries. Austria has said that they can absorb 30,000 (but there is a joker in that, since they put as a condition the money to build housing facilities—and, it was later said, any houses that might be built would undoubtedly go to the local politicos rather than the refugees). At any rate that would leave about 20,000 odd thousand for whom places must be found, plus the 800 a day coming in. The Vice President pointed out the danger in leaving people too long in refugee camps because of morale problem. The President said that the danger was really based on the nature of the people, that the Latvians and Estonians, etc., had, during the war, conducted model camps—because of their very nature. But the Hungarians are volatile and impulsive—and the camps would be breeding grounds for Communist propaganda. An additional problem is that a number of the refugees have gone to other countries, with the promise that they will be brought to America as soon as possible (however, the other countries will take replacements). The President said Britain should work out an arrangement with the Commonwealth—Australia, however, is taking 4,000. The President said he had asked Nehru to take a certain token number, despite India’s overcrowded condition.Nehru visited the United States between December 16 and 20, 1956. The ones in Italy must be taken out as soon as possible. The President suggested to Mr. Henderson that the State Department should work with the Latin American nations to try to get them to take a certain number each—they are in general underpopulated and can use the skills the Hungarians have. The question is where do we go from there? The President suggested that, pending action on the part of Congress, processing be continued on a temporary basis—and at the same time the refugees be processed by other countries, with the explanation given to them that the United States cannot at the moment definitely guarantee them entry. Bill Rogers said that the Attorney General was not willing to guarantee more “parolees” without at least an understanding with the Congressional leaders that such action would be approved by Congress. The President pointed out that he did not want to stop processing, particularly since if we do, the pick of the refugees will go to other countries. It was agreed that the matter should be presented to the bipartisan meeting of Congress, rather than to the Republicans alone. Mr. Rogers suggested that something on the order of “suspension deportation” arrangements can be worked out. The President brought up what he had heard was lack of response to the Red Cross appeal. The Vice President said appeal had picked up, and it was agreed that the money would probably come in in the quantity necessary. The President hopes it does, because that would indicate the people of the country are behind the movement—and if so, Congress will go along. The Vice President emphasized that it is important that the United States not drag its feet—that it stay in the forefront of the moment, that we continue to take applications at current rate. The President said we could take the applications—could say that we will take our “full share” or “decent share” of refugees. He pointed out that what we were talking about was really a small number of those that might come in, if, for instance, Poland and Czechoslovakia should have upheavals similar to the Hungarian one. He also said we have got to have every country in the world feel some responsibility. The United Nations ought to pass a Resolution commending each nation for its readiness to open its doors. The Vice President suggested that Cabot Lodge might make as a primary order of business the urging of the Ambassadors to the United Nations that their countries accept this responsibility. There was some question as to how quickly Congress would act (in matter of increasing number of people the US could take)—the Vice President said two months; it was hoped not that long. The President said, incidentally, that he was willing to see Congressman WalterDemocratic Congressman Francis E. Walter of Pennsylvania was a member of the Joint Committee on Immigration and Nationality Policy. if that would be helpful in enlisting his energetic cooperation. The Vice President urged that here was an opportunity to get needed flexibility into our Immigration laws. He pointed out also the seeming injustice to the 10,000 Eastern European refugees who are anxious to come to this country—who crawled under barbed wire to come out—and who have been long in camps, mainly in Germany. The Justice Department is going to recommend such flexibility. Turning to the economic side—there was discussion of the amounts needed (which of course depends on the number that will continue to come out) and whether Congress should be asked for a special appropriation. Hollister spoke about the magnitude of the problem and said, with money available in ICA, he could absorb some $60-65 million of the cost, assuming that Mid East projects for which money was appropriated did not materialize. However, the President said that he hoped that at least part of that money would be used for the Mid East. It was agreed that the U.S. was going to have to shoulder the burden of the major part of the financing. A payment of some $5 million has been made to the UN, but it was questioned whether other members of the UN had put in their share.On December 15, in response to General Assembly Resolution 1007 (ES–II), the President declared that the United States would make $4 million available to the United Nations to assist Hungarian refugees. This was in addition to the earlier $1 million contribution. See Department of State Bulletin, January 9, 1957, p. 9. If they do not, President agrees money should go direct to Austria. Mr. Hollister pointed out there were three distinct projects: general refugee problem; refugees coming to this country; and the situation in Hungary itself. There are the private agencies; there is the International Red Cross; and there are the other red cross teams operating in Austria. He recommended a “dictator” under Ambassador Thompson to handle the details of payments, etc. Hollister hopes to make as many payments as possible in commodities and in a deal that will utilize some shillings he has in reserve. Hollister told the President of the “bill” the Austrian government presented them, for expenses for people already there, for anticipated people, and, again, for the housing they hope to build with American funds. The Vice President thought it would be well to ask the Congress for $30-40 million for the purpose—he is inclined to think it would be a good idea to let the Congress see this refugee problem in its entirety—as a single package. The President may want to discuss this with Congressional leaders. Tracy Voorhees presented two or three points. To prevent piling up of refugees at Camp Kilmer, it may be necessary for the government to provide transportation and other assistance to some of the private charities, specifically Catholic Charities. Secondly, he has contracted with a public relations firm, to be paid for independently, a program for creating a “suction effort” throught the country. So far it has been a “retail” job. He hopes this suction effort will prevent later repercussions about placement of refugees. There is needed also some way of “dividing” up the refugees among the voluntary agencies. We ought to have something to say about which agencies will be the sponsoring agencies. About the transportation from abroad, he said the Pentagon wanted it all contracted for. The President has little patience with the grumblings of the services. At the conclusion Mr. Voorhees told the President of the reception his letter to the refugees had had at Camp Kilmer.In his letter, which was undated, the President welcomed the Hungarians to American soil and concluded: “We realize that you ardently hope for a time when all Hungarians can enjoy the blessings of individual freedom in their Hungarian mother-country. We join in that hope. And we give you this present assurance—if, when that day dawns once more, you should choose to go back to your native homes in Hungary, America will do its best in helping you to return.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File) 219. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/12–2656. Top Secret. Moscow, December 26, 1956—10 p.m. 1550. Informal discussions of nature indicated Deptel 764Same as Delga 354 from USUN; see footnote 2, Document 211. at UN can of course be useful as shown by confidential Malik/Jessup talks in 1949 which led to raising of Berlin blockade.For documentation on the negotiations between the Soviet Representative at the United Nations, Yakov A. Malik, and U.S. Ambassador at Large, Philip C. Jessup, see Foreign Relations, 1949, vol. III, pp. 694 ff. However, problem in that instance was specific and there was, as it turned out, coincidence of interest on both sides to end blockade. There is, however, nothing in Hung situation on which I can see any such community of interests, since on every point Sov position and Western attitude appear diametrically opposed. It is conceivable something in security field might be discussed were it not for fact that nature Hung system and govt in Sov eyes inseparable from security question. On nature of regime Hungary, Sovs have been completely consistent in all publicity and in their actions in emphasizing determination to maintain Communist regime which could only be done with strong Sov support, including presence Sov forces. I have seen or heard nothing here which would indicate any Sov willingness to consider a coalition govt as suggested Budapest’s 443 to Dept rptd Moscow as Deptel 735.Document 212. On contrary, series of authoritative arts Sov press have made it plain that only Communist party based on dictatorship proletariat would be acceptable and Kadar’s action in Hungary, which of course Sov directed, makes this determination completely clear. On other hand, Sovs would have every interest in trying to take attention off Hungary and might be prepared to this end to discuss in abstractions and generalities Hung situation, and conceivably, if situation there permits, the conclusion of an arrangement with Kadar along lines of recent Sov/Polish agreement on status of forces,See footnote 9, Document 216. which would confine Sov troops to specific garrison points under Warsaw treaty. I see no possibility whatsoever of Sovs withdrawing their troops completely from Hungary until and if Kadar or regime similar to it were regarded as sufficiently in control of situation as to warrant even consideration of withdrawal. If informal discussions on our part are conducted solely as means of endeavoring ascertain what Sov Union has in mind as eventual solution in Hungary, I can see advantage, but if they are attempting to work out any agreement, however informal, between U.S. and USSR I believe they would be subject to all the dangers and disadvantages outlined in Embtel 1199,Document 188. of making U.S. accessory after the fact. Kuznetsov is certainly one of most agreeable and quiet spoken Sov officials, but he is likewise staunch Bolshevik and his “unofficial” approach is of course highly official but with added advantage that he does not have any decisive voice in Sov policy determination. I do not see from our point of view any solution on Hungary alone and only possibility, which in itself is extremely remote, would be as part of general European settlement involving of course reunification of Germany. Any really constructive and concrete views Dept has on this subject, including Hungary, which it is desired to bring informally to attention Sov Govt I believe could best be done here more effectively than through Kuznetsov at UN solely for reason that it could be brought to people who have ultimate decision in these matters.On January 11, Lodge requested instructions on a response to questions from Kuznetsov regarding the Hungarian situation. He was not discouraged from talking with Kuznetsov but was cautioned there was nothing he could say other than the sentiments already expressed in U.N. resolutions and his own speeches. (Delga 483 from USUN, January 11, 1957, and Gadel to USUN, January 14; both Department of State, Central Files, 320.5764/1–1157) Bohlen 220. Letter From the Secretary of State to the Secretary of Agriculture (Benson)Source: Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks—Preparations. Secret. Attached to a memorandum from Kalijarvi to the Secretary dated December 27, 1956, on which the following notation appeared: “/s/JFD 1–3–57.” Drafted by the Acting Chief of the International Resources Division, William H. Bray, and concurred in by representatives of E, U/MSA, L, H, and EUR. Washington, January 3, 1957. Dear Ezra: The President on November 19, 1956 approved a statement of policy recommended by the National Security Council in regard to Poland.NSC 5616/2, Document 196. That statement of policy set forth certain courses of action to be undertaken by the United States. One course of action called on the Executive Branch to be prepared to make available at Polish request economic and technical assistance in moderate amounts sufficient to give the Poles an alternative to complete dependence on Moscow. The premise to this course of action is that the current situation with respect to Poland is not fundamentally altered. Pursuant to the NSC statement of policy in regard to Poland as approved by the President and in accordance with the provisions of Section 107 of Public Law 480, I have determined that Poland is not now dominated or controlled by the USSR or by a foreign organization controlling the world Communist movement and hence Poland is eligible for Title I and Title III Public Law 480 transactions. The Department is informing the Chairmen of the interested Congressional committees of this determinationSee footnote 9, Document 215. as well as the recent action taken by the Council on Foreign Economic Policy to modify United States policy so as to allow surplus agricultural commodities to be exported for dollars at world market prices to Eastern European countries (except the Soviet Union) on a selective basis in the national interest.See footnote 4, Ibid. In making this determination, I found that the factors for and against such a decision were closely matched and that the decision itself was an extremely close one. My decision on this matter was significantly influenced by the requirements of one of the major United States policy objectives in regard to Poland, namely to provide sufficient positive incentives to induce Poland to continue to resist domination by the USSR. A reorientation and strengthening of Polish relations with the West will assist in the achievement of that objective. It will of course be necessary for us to proceed carefully in our negotiations with the Polish Government, and to review and evaluate each specific action taken by us to assist that government in resisting domination by the USSR, before proceeding to further actions. This finding is subject to reappraisal and also we will have to keep in mind that the situation could readily change so I would feel required to alter the determination I am now making. I am confident that the staffs of our two agencies will take full account of these policy considerations as specific Public Law 480 transactions with Poland are considered. Sincerely yours, John Foster DullesPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 221. Notes on the 59th Meeting of the Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems, Washington, January 4, 1957Source: Department of State, Central Files, 100.4–OCB/1–457. Top Secret. Drafted by Kelsey. Washington, January 4, 1957 MEMBERS PRESENT State—Mr. Jacob D. Beam, Chairman State—Mr. Edward L. Freers Defense—Colonel Kenneth K. Hansen Defense—Mr. Roger Ernst CIA—Mr. Laughlin Campbell USIA—Mr. Alfred V. Boerner OCB—Mr. Paul B. Comstock, Staff Representative OTHERS PRESENT State—Mr. Robert O. Blake State—Mr. Howard Trivers State—Mr. Philip Burris State—Mr. Ralph S. Collins State—Mr. Robert M. McKisson State—Mr. Boris H. Klosson State—Mr. William A. McFadden Defense—Colonel Erik W. Ritzau CIA—Mr. Arthur M. Cox USIA—Mr. E. Lewis Revey OCB—Mr. Warren A. Kelsey 1. Hungary and the UN—Mr. Beam said that not much had happened on the Hungarian question since the committee’s last meeting.See Document 216. The State Department, he said, had gone along with the move to form a special “Watch-Dog Committee” in the UN, but the British thought that this would be another ineffectual resolution and proposed that: (a) the Secretary-General be pressed to go to Hungary, (b) the UN make an official report on Hungarian events based on reports of chiefs of mission in Budapest, and (c) diplomats in Budapest be appointed UN observers.Gadel 81 to USUN, December 29, contained the text of a possible U.S. draft resolution concerning the establishment of a U.N. factfinding committee of governments “for investigation and continuing observation”. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/12–2556) Barbara Salt, Counselor of the British Embassy, asked Walmsley on December 31 about the possibility of using representatives from the various Missions in Budapest for investigating and observing the situation in Hungary. Walmsley indicated U.S. reservations on this point because of the possibility of retaliation. (Memorandum of conversation by David M. Bane, December 31; ibid., 764.00/12–3156) The Secretary General had drafted a second report to the General Assembly and had shown us a copy of the draft which in essence tried to get him out of the Hungarian picture.The text of the draft report was transmitted in Delga 422, January 3, 1957. Hammarskjöld provided the text to the U.S. Delegation on a confidential basis. (Ibid., 320/1–357) The report recommended that the General Assembly establish a special ad hoc committee which would take over the activities of the group of investigators established by the Secretary-General. The report was issued on January 5. (A/3485) The draft report cites a letter from the observers’ group which considers that its usefulness is at an end and also proposes the formation of the new “Watch-Dog Committee.”The letter, dated December 15, from Lall, Lleras, and Gundersen to Hammarskjöld, suggested that the investigation be suspended. The Department had not formulated its position on this report yet. There had been no further moves in connection with the credentials of the Hungarian representatives in the UNSalt and Walmsley agreed in their December 31 conversation (see footnote 3 above) that Western Missions in Hungary might be compelled to close if the Hungarian Delegation’s credentials were rejected. Because of the impact on Hungarian morale, it was not worth the risk. although there was some sentiment in favor of having them expelled from the ILO in view of some members’ bitterness at the suppression of the Hungarian revolt. The legality of this was questionable while Hungarian representatives remained in other UN organs. There was nothing new on the question of when and whether our Minister in Budapest would present his credentials, Mr. Beam concluded. Mr. Cox asked what the new UN committee would do. Mr. Beam said that it was to follow events and invite governments to provide information on Hungary. He read from the committee’s proposed terms of reference. Mr. Cox inquired what group would hear Anna Kethly and other prominent refugees. Mr. McKisson said that there was some thought this new committee might hear such refugees. Another idea was for one of the regular committees or sub-committees to do so. The Scandinavian countries supported the move to have Kethly heard but would take no action on General KiralyMajor General Béla Király had commanded the Hungarian forces in the last stage of the revolution. and the others although they would support a move from some other nation to have them all heard. Mr. Cox asked what other nation would take the lead in this matter and Mr. McKisson said that we might. Mr. Cox asked whether there was any reason why we shouldn’t, to which Mr. McKisson replied that we did not want to seem to bear out the Soviet allegations of American involvement in the revolt. Mr. Boerner asked what our reactions were to the Secretary General’s report. Mr. Beam said that the Department had not formulated its position yet but there was not much in the report and, moreover, it was somewhat contradictory in that it said that the observers’ group could not function but nevertheless proposed the formation of another group to perform almost the same functions. Mr. McKisson commented that some of the British proposals would be useful even if the new committee were formed. Mr. Beam noted that until now the British and French had been reluctant for diplomats in Budapest to function as UN observers because of the precedent this might set for Cyprus and Algeria. 2. Aid to Hungary—Mr. Boerner inquired whether there were any new thoughts on the subject of aid to Hungary. In reply Mr. McKisson said that reports had been received on Hungary’s long-term relief needs, and the question had arisen whether relief on a large scale might develop into economic aid. A paper was being drawn up on this problem. It was desired to keep aid on a relief basis, going directly to the people through the Red Cross. Mr. McKisson also mentioned that a UN resolution soliciting contributions from member governments for Hungarian reliefGeneral Assembly Resolution 1007 (ES–II), November 9, 1956. had met little response because members had preferred to make their contributions to the Red Cross. The Secretary General accordingly wanted us to contribute funds and supplies to the UN which would pass them on to the Red Cross, thereby at least technically insuring compliance with the resolution. There were some difficulties in this, he said, but they were not insuperable. 3. Soviet Indictment of U.S. on Hungary—Mr. Campbell inquired about the status of our plans to meet the Soviet indictment of the U.S. in the UN.See footnote 2, Document 210. Mr. McKisson replied that a group was working on this which had had only one meeting so far but was shortly to have another. He asked whether CIA was also working on this to which Mr. Cox replied they were but were hampered by a lack of terms of reference. Mr. McKisson said that Mr. Walmsley was preparing terms of reference and that there was some thought these terms might also go back to the Soviet part in causing the revolt, but our legal people were dubious about this. Mr. Campbell suggested that we might do this even apart from our UN tactics. Mr. Blake mentioned that the Soviet accusation is at the bottom of the political committee’s agenda, to which Mr. Beam replied that the political committee would adjourn after the third week in February. Mr. Blake said he had heard there was a possibility the committee might never get to this agenda item. Mr. Boerner mentioned a disagreement whether we should adopt tactics of brushing aside the Soviet accusation or take it seriously. Mr. Burris said that this question was being considered. Mr. McKisson said there also was a question whether we should take depositions from eyewitnesses of the revolt; if so we would have to start soon. Mr. Campbell said there was a need to know our basic strategy before information could be collected and Mr. McKisson replied that all of these problems were being considered. Mr. Burris said there was much material in the Polish, Hungarian and Yugoslav press which would be useful in refuting the Soviet charges and Mr. Beam mentioned a book on the “Hungarian Tragedy” by a British Daily Worker correspondent who had resigned in protest against suppression of the revolt.Peter Fryer of the London Daily Worker. Mr. McKisson mentioned that the delay in getting a copy of the Hungarian White BookEllenforradalmi Erök a Magyar Oktoberi Esményekben, 4 vols. (Budapest, 1957–1958). from our Legation in Budapest was troublesome, since the White Book would probably be a guide to the tactics the Soviets intended to adopt. Mr. Beam suggested that our Legation should also get in on the planning on meeting the Soviet indictment. 4. Hungarian Refugees—Mr. Campbell inquired whether many foreign correspondents were seeing the Hungarian refugees in Camp Kilmer, to which Mr. Burns replied the refugees had perfect freedom to come and go and therefore did not stay in camp much. Mr. Beam mentioned that he had heard that in the Austrian camps the refugees had no newspapers or recreation facilities. 5. Polish Aid—Mr. Beam said that progress was being made slowly on this matter. Mr. Freers said that the Commerce Department would issue a press release the next day announcing that licenses would be issued for the private sale of agricultural commodities to Poland at world market prices. Mr. Trivers said that the achievements so far amounted to two things: the CFEP reversal of policy on the sale of agricultural commodities to the satellites, and the “friendly nation” decision.See footnotes 5 and 9, Document 215. The next problem was to find funds. Mr. Burris made the point that the Department of Commerce’s release was only about trade, not aid. Mr. Freers said that the “friendly nation” decision was sure to become public knowledge since the newspaper correspondents knew that it was a legal requirement. Mr. Beam said that there had been no unfavorable reactions yet and Mr. Freers said that the Poles in the U.S. would take a generally favorable attitude, especially in view of the church-state agreement in Poland.See footnote 9, Document 207. Mr. Boerner mentioned that moreover the Hungarian situation had had a calming effect on Polish-Americans. [Here follows discussion of possible future Polish crises, a Hungarian revolutionary council, and Stalinism.] Warren A. KelseyOCB Staff Representative 222. Telegram from the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/1–557. Confidential; Priority. Warsaw, January 5, 1957—10 a.m. 908. Embtel 907.Telegram 907, January 5, briefly summarized developments in Poland during 1956. (Ibid., 748.00/1–557) Part II of III on developments in Poland. Question stability Gomulka regime has two aspects: Stability Gomulka or Gomulka-type leadership within PZPR, and stability PZPR control over Polish population Following factors seen threatening stability regime in both aspects: 1. Basic unpopularity regime which is not freely elected. Regardless whether PZPR expediently dilutes imitation of Soviets by adopting some policies conciliatory to Polish population, regime does not have legitimate, freely-voted consent of those governed. On this account it is congenitally unstable. 2. Limited degree and narrow bases of Gomulka’s personal popularity outside party. His national standing appears based largely on idea he suffered in past for his defiance of Soviet dictation and hope that he still dares defy. In internal policy his conciliatory view on agriculture collectivization appears to be only position enjoying widespread popular appeal. Extent to which Gomulka personally promoting regime policies conciliatory to Church, and extent to which population associates him with these policies, is subject about which little evidence yet available. To date indications re popular attitude towards “worker self-government” suggest experiment arouses no great enthusiasm, high hopes, or particular association with Gomulka personally. Other Polish figures of any stature are known to have been associated with discredited and disliked policies. Most commonly reported attitude this subject is “Let’s try anything, we’ve nothing to lose.” Embassy impression is that Poles attitude toward Gomulka one of some hopeful expectancy, but less enthusiasm and optimism than has been projected by western press. 3. Narrowness of Gomulka base within party. Return of Gomulka to power in PZPR does not mean he had large clique loyal supporters with whom he fought his way back up to party leadership. Weight evidence is that group central committee members composed various currents and individuals decided bring Gomulka back because his prestige as “victim of Stalinism” would be helpful to party in conducting its program of controlled liberalization. Communist functionaries whose jobs now threatened by Gomulka house-cleaning constitute important opposition. Doubt concerning Gomulka’s control over party will continue at least until results party congress in March become known. 4. Dimness of prospects for significant degree improvement in Poland’s economic plight. Poles will be asked to work hardest ever but will continue receive subsistence level standard living, drab second-rate goods at high prices, few luxuries. Recent statements by Gomulka and Cyrankiewicz that only miners may expect pay increases, continued high prices for consumers’ goods, increases in some cases, and fear of confiscation meager savings by devaluation zloty, all reveal lack confidence that present regime can improve situation substantially. This continuing absence of substantial improvement in ten years Communist rule will add to popular dissatisfaction with Communist economic experimentation and renew yearning for change. 5. Volatility and anti-Communist attitude Polish population. Unrest exemplified in recent demonstrations in Bydgoszcz and Szczecin show danger that local demonstration leading to bloodshed could spark chain of violence leading to Soviet intervention “in interests Soviet security”. Disaffected nationalists or Stalinists might try to exploit such situation. 6. Breakdown of PZPR authority at grass-roots level. On basis deduction from regime exhortations and also from independent reports Embassy believes Communists at local level probably having great difficulty exercising authority or influence. Embassy believes above unstabilizing factors can for a while at least be kept under control by following stabilizing factors: 1. Restraining influence of fear of Soviet repression as in Hungary, where Soviets demonstrated willingness use armed force to crush opposition and western powers showed unwillingness counter with military force on behalf freedom fighters. Effect is to persuade Poles that despite vuluerability and internal weakness of present Polish Communist regime, forcible efforts to topple it not likely to produce good results. Impression of Poles that intensity of Soviet concern for eastern Europe outweighs western interest felt even before Hungarian experience. 2. Regime willingness soft-pedal Marxist-Leninist doctrine or adapt practices to “modern conditions” by introducing limited concessions, especially re collectivization, pledging cut down role of secret police, giving more freedom to church, etc, as listed Embtels 323Document 89. and 892.Document 63. 3. Pacifying role of Cardinal Wyszynski and Catholic Church on behalf order and “national unity”, following regime decision make concessions to church advantage. 4. Indications that important proportion decision-making or influence-wielding “intelligentsia” prefer Gomulka and “liberalization” over hard-core Communists favoring subservience Moscow. At same time both pro-and anti-Communist intellectuals appreciate Soviet capabilities for repressing Polish attempts establish truly democratic system. 5. Fear and hatred of Germans among all segments affords solid ground for Gomulka and pro-Soviet groups alike to play upon this feeling, as occasions require, for keeping alive need for Soviet alliance and “friendship”. The two groups approach this problem from different angles but results are the same. Comments on Gomulka regime internal and external policies in Part II next message. Department pass other posts as desired. Jacobs 223. Telegram From the Embassy in Poland to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/1–557. Confidential; Priority. Warsaw, January 5, 1957—10 a.m. 909. Embtels 907,See footnote 2, supra. 908.Supra. Part III of III on developments in Poland. Re Gomulka regime internal policies, Polish Communists emphatically stress they have no intention letting “socialist democratization” lead by phases to western-style democracy. Forthcoming parliamentary (Sejm) election January 20 organized on single-list basis denying population right to free vote whether it favors PZPR leadership over other freely organized and competing parties. By presenting about seven candidates for every four posts, regime offers voters limited choice in personalities all of which have been nominated by “national front” machinery on basis their demonstrated or professed support for PZPR policies and programs as outlined at last two meetings Party Central Committee. Issues such as ratification or approval of the Polish-Soviet economic or military agreements; economic or labor policies, agricultural or tax measures, western aid, relations with Hungary, have not yet been presented to the electorate. Election questions about which western observers here most interested at present are (a) extent to which voters may approve Communist and pro-Communist unknowns over “big-name” Communists and (b) extent to which voters will be permitted to scratch ticket, abstain from voting, or be forced to vote. Either (a) and (b) may result in protest against regime. Evidently regime hopes its concessions particularly on collectivization and to the church, together with its show of resistance to Soviet dictation, will enable it to coax reasonably satisfactory performance out of voters. Regime cannot effectively deny population right privately to cherish anti-Communist or anti-Socialist views but continues to deny right to express them or to translate them into action. Openly stating that it does not believe in freedom for such views, regime reinforces its restrictions by implying that debate on such questions as desirability Soviet garrisons in Poland or events in Hungary invites Soviet armed intervention as in Hungary. Having cut away this much freedom, regime willing permit limited freedom in other respects. For example, recent trends indicate regime becoming much less restrictive in passport policy. Immigration policies other countries and foreign exchange problems now compete with regime passport policy for blame in hindering free travel Polish citizens. Although press remains under regime control, slanting and suppression appear diminished from year ago. Western broadcasts heard with negligible interference. Whether existing interference Soviet, Czech or Polish origin not fully established. Entertainment and human interest given more space in press, radio and theater. Regime sensitivity to press criticism especially with police state connotations, illustrated by refusal grant visas to certain US correspondents. Future developments in regime internal policy promise to reflect not only relative influence supporters conservative “nationalist” policies and exponents “progressive” policies of bolder measure liberalization, but will also reflect developments within Soviet leadership, and in relations between Soviets and Yugoslavs, Chinese, Hungarians, and other orbit countries. Similarly, Polish external relations will be affected by important considerations outside Poland and beyond scope this assessment. In present international climate Polish regime may be expected seek avoid startling changes in previous pattern beyond those made in October. In past year regime drew increasingly close to Yugoslavia and optimistically professed to have found Chinese Communist and Indian support. Present evidence suggests Chinese Communists more anxious to promote solidarity between Chinese and Soviet parties than to support Polish insubordination. Embassy believes regime will seek cautiously and without effusiveness to improve relations with US, Great Britain and France. Polish note of October 8See footnote 2, Document 92. offered discuss all pending problems with US. Embassy summarizes assessment present situation in Poland as follows: 1. Soviet military, political and economic domination over Poland has been slightly weakened, but Soviet influence over Polish internal and external affairs remains substantial, with an estimated 47,000 Soviet troops stationed by agreement in Poland. 2. Gomulka leadership within PZPR not yet firmly established but prospects appear at present better than those of more conservative or radical elements in party leadership. Party Congress scheduled March 1957 will be crucial event. 3. Economic planning is being re-examined, with prospect more experimentation in decentralization, increased scope for private initiative in agriculture and small-scale artisan production, without renunciation of collectivization goal or of continued nationalization of industry. Increased friction with Soviet-bloc economic partners presaged by financially hard-pressed regime seeks sell and buy, in West or East, where most favorable terms (including credits) can be obtained, [sic] Regime appears desire both increased trade with West and credits, partly in interest real improvement in standard living and partly on psychological grounds, to show population it has enough interest in people’s welfare to seek “non-political” aid any quarter. 4. Release of CardinalStefan Cardinal Wyszynski. and related regime decisions showing conciliatory attitude towards church, represent events great importance. Regime attitude and church concurrence re necessity calm combine to exercise stabilizing effect on internal order. 5. Despite departure Marshal Rokossowski and some senior Soviet advisers, armed forces continue heavily dependent Soviet research, doctrine and, in event sustained operations, logistic support. Possible reductions in size, also gradual reversion to Polish military traditions presaged in present draft conscription law. Poznan and October events indicate Polish troops unlikely fight own people once mass revolt under way, but would probably serve regime in suppressing initial outbreaks. Polish soldier basically nationalistic, opposed both Germans and Russians. Gomulka’s statement that Poland needs Soviet troops (in view of menace of West Germany) is not far removed from stating that he wants them. 6. Large majority Poles including youth and many intelligentsia remain disaffected from Communist regime, approving only some of Gomulka’s policies and these only as partially satisfactory. Fear Soviet intervention (Hungarian experience) appears strongest force inhibiting organized or overt resistance to regime. However, as evidenced particularly by Bydgoszcz and Szczecin demonstrations in November and December, there exists in Poland strong under-current of unrest which is easily provoked by signs and symbols of hated Communist authority. This explosive situation bears careful watching as it may (a) spontaneously for minor causes and without warning erupt or (b) be provoked to erupt by Moscow or pro-Moscow elements and used as excuse to clamp down on Gomulka and further liberalization. Department pass other posts as desired. Jacobs 224. Editorial Note When the United Nations General Assembly resumed deliberations on January 9, it had before it a draft resolution sponsored by the United States and 23 other nations (in final form A/3487/Rev.1). It bore a close resemblance to the text suggested by the Department of State in Gadel 81 to USUN, December 29. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/12–256) Over the course of four meetings on January 9 and 10, the Assembly debated the proposal, which was opposed by the Soviet Union. Resolution 1132(XI) was adopted at the 636th meeting by a vote of 59 to 8, with 10 abstentions. In the resolution, the General Assembly resolved to establish a Special Committee, composed of representatives of Australia, Ceylon, Denmark, Tunisia, and Uruguay, “to investigate, and to establish and maintain direct observation in Hungary and elsewhere.” The Committee’s findings would be reported to the General Assembly at its 11th session. The Soviet Union and Hungary were also called upon to cooperate with the Committee and to allow it to enter Hungarian territory and travel freely within. On January 11, the Permanent Mission of Hungary addressed a note verbale to Hammarskjöld transmitting a statement of the Government of Hungary dated January 10. In very strong terms, the Kádár government denounced Resolution 1132(XI) as “unprecedented gross interference” and indicated that it considered “suchlike resolutions” inadmissible violations of Hungarian sovereignty. The note continued: “The Hungarian Government considers it highly regrettable that certain western Powers, which have continuously given active support to Hungarian counter-revolutionary forces at home and abroad, and cause serious harm through the irresponsible incitation of ‘Radio Free Europe’ and ‘The Voice of America, as well as through their other activity, infringing the most elementary rules of international law, are still not satisfied with these attempts at interference, being indifferent to the immeasurable suffering caused to the Hungarian people and to the fact that their counter-revolutionary machinations are irrevocably driving the country into poverty.” In conclusion, it rejected the idea that a “committee of any kind has the right to conduct investigations into the Hungarian question by collecting testimony from unauthorized and biased persons and to establish observation in Hungary in order to obtain information.” It demanded that the “so-called Hungarian question” be deleted from the General Assembly agenda. (A/3493) 225. Memorandum From George T. Lister of the Office of Eastern European Affairs to the Public Affairs Adviser of the Office (Collins)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 748.00/1–1157. Confidential. Washington, January 11, 1957. SUBJECT Polish Elections of January 20 It is clear that, although the Polish elections will provide voters with some very slight choice, in contrast to none at all in the past, the elections will certainly not be free. However, in view of Poland’s present difficult international position, and Gomulka’s difficult position within Poland, the Department does not wish to make an issue of this matter, at least this time, or to attack the present Polish regime on these grounds. Under these circumstances it is hoped that it will be possible to avoid making any direct official comment on the elections whatsoever. However, if pressed for specific comment on the subject, it is recommended that official spokesmen simply reply along the lines that available information indicates that, while Polish voters had somewhat more choice than in the past, the elections were far from what is generally considered in the United States to be free. It is also recommended that VOA broadcasts to Poland refrain from direct comment on the elections and limit themselves to a small number of carefully chosen Free World press reports indicating, among other things, that the elections were not free. VOA broadcasts to other countries might devote more time to the elections, including a description of the organization and methods of the elections, but without attacking them as controlled or praising them as an “improvement.” It is quite possible that developments in Poland prior to, during, or following the elections may be of such a serious and dramatic nature as to require modification of the foregoing recommendations.Gomulka won an overwhelming victory as the slate of government-approved candidates took 98.4 percent of the valid votes cast. An Info-Memo from Richard Friedman, Public Affairs Adviser in the Bureau of European Affairs, to Andrew H. Berding, dated January 24, contained guidance for VOA on the Polish election results. “Our general attitude,” it stated, “should be that the Polish people seem to have made their wishes clear to the extent of the choice afforded by the elections.” (Ibid., Poland Desk Files: Lot 61 D 77, General Political Affairs) 226. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 864.413/1–1857. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Budapest. Rome, January 18, 1957—2 p.m. 2971. News stories reporting alleged secret negotiations between Kadar regime and American Legation Budapest re disposition Cardinal Mindszenty have prompted Vatican official approach Embassy representative for information re truth or falsity reports. Official showed concern re fate Cardinal and Vatican Secretariat of State would appreciate being informed any plans affecting future of Cardinal. In this connection Embassy representative was told in strict confidence Holy See would pose no objection to Cardinal’s decision leave Hungary but would not attempt officially to influence Cardinal one way or other.Despatch 877 from Rome, January 3, reported that a Vatican official indicated that the Holy See preferred that the Cardinal remain in Hungary. (Ibid., 848.413/1–357) Telegram 525 from Budapest, January 10, described an approach from the AVO to a “reliable source” who was asked to contact the Legation to convey the Hungarian Government’s assurance of a guarantee of safe conduct for the Cardinal to leave the country. The motivation was supposed to have been a desire to bring about improved relations with the United States. Wailes doubted the Cardinal wished to leave and thought the Hungarian Government was content with the way things were. Moreover, he believed the Cardinal would be arrested if he left the Legation. (Ibid., 864.413/1–1057) Telegram 5 to Rome, January 21, instructed the Embassy to inform the Vatican that the Legation was not conducting negotiations with the Kádár government concerning the Cardinal. (Ibid., 864.413/1–2157) Jernegan 227. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Beam) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)Source: Department of State, Hungary Desk Files: Lot 75 D 45, Refuge for Cardinal Mindszenty. Confidential. Drafted by Sutterlin and concurred in by WE and L. Washington, January 24, 1957. SUBJECT Transmission of Communications from Cardinal Mindszenty to the Pope Background: Since Cardinal Mindszenty was granted refuge in the Legation in Budapest our position, which has been repeatedly made known to him, has been that he could not be allowed to use the Legation as a base of operations. This attitude is based on the extreme delicacy of the situation arising from the Cardinal’s presence in the Legation and our desire to do nothing which might make his position more precarious or that of the Legation more difficult. Under an informal letter to Mr. McKisson in EE Minister Wailes has transmitted to the Department six sealed letters which Cardinal Mindszenty has written in Latin to the Pope and to the Vatican Secretary of State. Mr. Wailes suggests that they be translated and if found to be “innocuous” forwarded to the Vatican. “If the letters contain matters of business, you may want to return them to me,” Mr. Wailes continues, “and direct me to tell the Cardinal that we just can’t send them to Rome”. Mr. Wailes’ letter together with its enclosures is attached.None of the letters is printed. In his January 17 letter to McKisson, Wailes stated that “little did I realize what we were letting ourselves in for when we took him in.” Discussion: The Cardinal’s letters raise a number of serious questions: 1. If these six letters are transmitted they will probably be followed by more and thus the Department’s pouch facilities would tend to become a regular channel of covert communication between the Vatican and the Cardinal. Written records of this nature if inadvertently revealed or “leaked” to the press or to the church hierarchy would cause us embarrassment and might compromise our Legation and prejudice the Cardinal’s safety. 2. Whether the current letters or any which may follow constitute “conduct of business” cannot be determined until they are translated and read. If they are read, the Department is immediately placed in the position of censoring the Cardinal’s correspondence on the basis of criteria which will be difficult to define clearly and equally difficult to justify to the Cardinal and the Vatican. 3. It must also be anticipated that if letters from the Cardinal are sent to the Pope, the Vatican will logically expect the privilege of replying via the same channel. The Department might then be faced with the necessity of scanning and possibly rejecting messages from the Pope. While the proposed transmission of the Cardinal’s letters appears inadvisable for the reasons set forth, it is not felt that the Department should prevent all contact between the Cardinal and the Pope. The Vatican has an understandable interest in Cardinal Mindszenty’s welfare and the Cardinal is bound to grow increasingly restive and resentful if denied all communication with the Vatican. A possible solution would be to accept occasional oral messages of a brief and personal nature for transmission. This would impose a natural and, in our opinion, desirable restraint on the parties concerned. It would also make it quite clear that the contents of all messages would be known to the Department but would eliminate the unpleasant connotation of censorship. Finally, by its very nature, this mode of transmission would result in fewer communications. Recommendation: 1. That the six letters in question be returned to Minister Wailes with instructions that he inform the Cardinal that in his own interest and in that of the Legation such written messages cannot be transmitted in his behalf but that the Legation would be prepared to transmit occasional brief oral messages through appropriate channels to the Vatican.Murphy initialed his approval of the recommendation. In an official–informal letter to Barnes dated March 11, McKisson enclosed the Cardinal’s unopened letters for return to him. A copy of this memorandum was also enclosed since it contained the applicable instructions should such a case come up again. In the event the Cardinal decided “to transmit a brief oral message for the Vatican,” it was to “be done via the Department and by official–informal letter from you to us.” (Department of State, Hungary Desk Files: Lot 75 D 45, Refuge for Cardinal Mindszenty, 1956–57) 228. Editorial Note On December 3, a German Foreign Office official informed Ambassador Conant that RFE had been too “energetic” in offering practical advice to the Hungarians on how to behave in a revolt situation. (Telegram 2127 from Bonn; Department of State, Central Files, 940.40/12–356) On December 20, telegram 2416 from Bonn indicated that the Embassy had been informed that the German review of RFE programs in the period from October 23 to November 10, 1956, had shown no broadcast stating that the West would furnish concrete military help. However, criticism of some programs on lesser grounds was expressed. The Embassy suggested an approach to the German Government to the effect that the airing of this subject prior to United Nations consideration of the Soviet resolution alleging United States intervention and subversion in Soviet and Satellite affairs would be playing into the hands of the Communists. Telegram 1767 to Bonn, December 22, instructed the Embassy to request the German Government to delay the report’s release. (Ibid., 940.40/12–2056) The Embassy contacted government officials as directed on December 28 to forestall the release of the report at a time when it would redound to the advantage of the Soviet Union in the United Nations. (Telegram 2489 from Bonn, December 28; ibid., 940.40/12–2856) At a subsequent meeting, the Embassy received assurances from the German State Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Walter Hallstein, that there was no plan in a “strict sense” to issue a report. But if press or Bundestag pressure increased, then the government, after consulting with the Embassy, wished to be able to issue a statement “that objection was found to certain broadcasts, and that this had been discussed with RFE which had taken corrective measures.” The Embassy had already informed the Foreign Office that RFE was 1) instituting wider prebroadcast scrutiny of programs particularly in sensitive situations; 2) curtailing the amount of programming; and 3) replacing unsatisfactory personnel and adding staff to facilitate more careful control. (Telegram 2568 from Bonn, January 5; ibid., 940.40/1–557) At the Federal Republic’s request, these points were incorporated in a January 11 letter from Condon to Professor Wilhelm Grewe, Chief of the Political Division of the Foreign Office. Condon maintained that the results of the German investigation and of RFE’s own internal probe showed that the “reproaches against RFE that it had incited the Hungarian people to revolt or had promised them military help from the West are unfounded and cannot be supported. “A few transmissions, to which you have directed our attention, were also criticized by us in retrospect as having a tone which was understandable in the situation but unnecessarily provocative. These transmissions, however, represent only a fraction of the total number of programs which were presented in the period in question. There is not the slightest evidence that these few transmissions had any influence whatsoever on the course of the historic events in Hungary. Moreover, it seems to us that it would be disrespectful of the courage and sacrifice for the cause of peace of the Hungarian people if one were to ascribe their attitude, which continues unbroken even today, to a few emotional transmissions of foreign radio stations. The tone of these transmissions was rather a spontaneous tribute which was paid to the heroism of the Hungarian patriots.” (Despatch 1204 from Bonn, January 21; ibid., 940.40/1–2157) When Chancellor Adenauer was pressed to comment at his regular news conference on January 25 on his views of the contents of the RFE broadcasts, he replied that “An examination has taken place; this examination showed that the assertions which had been voiced in the press, that the European radio station, or rather Radio Free Europe, had promised the Hungarians military aid from the West, are not in conformity with the facts. However, also some remarks were made which might give rise to misinterpretations; on this, a discussion, an exchange of ideas took place; changes in the staffing resulted from it, and I believe that for the time being the matter may be regarded as settled.” (Telegram 2849 from Bonn, January 25; ibid., 940.40/1–2557) Both the Embassy and the German Foreign Office expressed satisfaction at the way the problem had been solved. (Telegram 2855 from Bonn, January 26; ibid., 940.40/1–2657) As it turned out, 11 members of RFE’s Hungarian section were let go in the reorganization following the rebellion. (Telegram 4671 from Bonn, June 3; ibid., 940.40/6–357) 229. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Kalijarvi) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks—Basic Preliminary Documents, #1. Confidential. Drafted by W.H. Bray and James L. Colbert; also sent to Hoover and concurred in by EUR, EUR/EE, U/MSA, G, L/E, and OFD. Washington, January 31, 1957. SUBJECT Preparations for Economic Talks with Poland Problem: In the preparations for economic talks with representatives of the Polish Government, it is important to obtain your guidance on the amounts of available funds and authorities which could be utilized to meet selected priority requirements of Poland. The memorandum of conversation relating to Mr. Murphy’s meeting of January 23, 1957Not printed. (Ibid.) with the Polish Ambassador and Deputy Foreign Minister Jozef Winiewicz at the Polish Embassy indicates that this is a propitious time to initiate talks with a view to ascertaining Poland’s priority requirements and to provide guidelines to the United States in taking suitable measures for helping Poland to lessen its economic dependence on the U.S.S.R. (Tab A). Discussion: My memorandum of January 7, 1957 recommended that you approve a request by the Department to the Secretary of Agriculture for the allocation of $15 million of Title I, Public Law 480 authority and that you request the Director of the International Cooperation Administration to reserve $10 million of funds under Section 401 of the Mutual Security Act for possible use in furnishing assistance to Poland on terms to be mutually agreed on in the course of our negotiations with the Polish Government (Tab B).Kalijarvi strongly recommended the initiation of talks with the Polish Government “as soon as possible.” (Ibid.) Tabs B through F are not printed. In a memorandum dated January 10, 1957, the Under Secretary requested the advice of the Director of the International Cooperation Administration on the recommendations made in my memorandum.Hoover observed that the Secretary of State had discussed the memorandum with Hollister that morning. (Ibid., Central Files, 748.5–MSP/1–1057) The Under Secretary’s memorandum indicated that your general reaction was that the $15 million of Title I, Public Law 480 authority was of a satisfactory order of magnitude and that the $10 million of Section 401 funds should, for the present, be restricted to a token amount for the most essential needs, and should be on the order of $5 to $10 million (Tab C). The Director of the International Cooperation Administration, in a memorandum dated January 16, 1957,Hollister noted that there were “a number of problems, both of policy and operations, which need rather careful review before final decisions on the amount and composition of the aid program are made.” (Ibid., EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks—Preparations) stated that while he believed the figures suggested in my memorandum of January 7 provided a suitable range within which to begin planning, he would hesitate to agree on a specific total without a more careful review of the supply and requirements situation than has been possible to date (Tab D). The main purpose of seeking your guidance at this time is to ascertain the amount and character of funds and authorities available within which negotiations could be conducted on Poland’s economic requirements from the United States. More detailed and reliable information on Poland’s economic situation and needs would be forthcoming in the course of our talks with the Polish Government representatives. As of this time therefore the resolution of the question of the amount and character of funds available for negotiations with Poland requires essentially a political judgment. The staff members continue to believe that it would be helpful to have available $25 million in funds and authority, composed of $15 million of Title I, Public Law 480 authority (equivalent to about $10 or $11 million of purchasing power for surplus agricultural commodities at world market prices), and $10 million of Section 401 funds which would most likely be made available on a loan basis. The provisions of the Battle Act would not permit the use of Polish currency generated by the sale of surplus agricultural commodities for loans to Poland. Such currency could be used for payment of United States obligations and for other United States uses. A Public Law 480, Title I transaction would not therefore involve a loan or grant of resources to Poland. The net addition of resources to the Polish economy would come primarily by the use of Section 401 funds. Moreover, the Poles have already indicated to us that their priority requirements include several items, such as coal mining equipment, which can only be procured under Section 401 authority. In view of the limitations imposed by the Battle Act on funds and authority (except for Section 401 of the Mutual Security Act) available for extending economic help to Poland, we believe that $10 million of funds from this section should tentatively be set aside at this time for possible use by Poland. Mr. Hollister’s memorandum of January 16, 1957 also detailed a number of operating problems which might arise in the implementing stage of economic assistance furnished to Poland. Some of the listed problems would not arise if procurement is limited to the United States and the Section 401 funds are furnished on a loan basis, as we expect. Other possible problems can only be resolved in context of our talks with the Polish representatives. We have been discussing with the staffs of ICA, Commerce and other interested government agencies various problems in connection with United States aid to Poland and we will be able to continue such consultations more effectively as soon as you have provided the requested guidance as to the amount and character of funds available for Poland. A proposed reply to Mr. Hollister’s memorandum of January 16In his February 6 reply, Dulles noted that the Department of State would recommend allocation of $15 million in P.L. 480, Title I assistance to Poland and $10 million of Section 401 funds to finance Polish requirements other than U.S. surplus agricultural products. (Ibid., Central Files, 411.0041/2–657) appears in Tab E and a proposed telegram to Embassy Warsaw instructing Ambassador Jacobs to invite the Polish Government to send representatives to Washington for economic aid talks is included in Tab F for your authorization to transmit.Telegram 507 to Warsaw, February 6. (Ibid., 748.5–MSP/1–557) Recommendations: 1. That you approve a request by the Department to the Secretary of Agriculture to allocate $15 million of Title I, Public Law 480 authority for possible use in financing urgent Polish requirements for agricultural commodities in surplus supply in the United States on the condition that this amount probably will not be made available at one time but rather in installments depending upon the development of the negotiations.Dulles initialed his approval of Recommendation 1 on February 6. 2. That you sign the attached memorandum (Tab E) to Mr. Hollister, Director of the International Cooperation Administration, acknowledging his memorandum of January 16 and requesting him to reserve $10 million of funds under Section 401 of the Mutual Security Act for furnishing assistance to Poland on terms to be mutually agreed on in the course of negotiations with the Polish Government. 3. That you sign a telegram instructing Embassy Warsaw (Tab F) to invite the Polish Government to send representatives to Washington for talks involving possible arrangements under which the United States would supply certain goods and commodities needed by Poland. 230. Letter From the Minister in Romania (Thayer) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 766.00/2–657. Confidential; Official–Informal. Bucharest, February 6, 1957. Dear Mr. Secretary: It is eight months since I last wrote you of the situation in Rumania,Not found in Department of State files. and I have waited until I believed it was possible to make a reasonable estimate of the impact on this country of the dramatic events of the last few months before sending you another brief summary of my personal views. The events in Poland and Hungary of course deeply stirred the emotions of the Rumanian people who reacted in various ways. The few remaining members of the old regime were jubilant over what they termed the beginning of the downfall of Communism, and were quoting the saying of General Joffre, “La victoire est une pente roulante”. The population in general were restless—there were incidents here and there amongst students and workers—but there was no spontaneous movement of resistance, no general will to do anything that might risk arrest—there was not a vestige of any determination to revolt. Above all, there was no leadership anywhere except in the regime itself which acted quickly to prevent the spread of unrest by a combination of precautionary measures through police pressure, including student and other arrests, and attempts at pacification through token raising of wages, cultural concessions to Hungarian minorities, and improving student living conditions. After the crushing of the Hungarian revolt by Soviet troops a period of disillusionment set in. Old regime members and former bourgeois turned bitterly against the United States for not intervening with armed forces. The inert population in general found justification for their failure to act and brooded on the fact that they were forgotten by the West. The people as a whole passed through one of their many periods of depression after a few weeks of wild hope, and resumed their normal status of waiting for the next event that would send their wishful-thinking spirits soaring to the skies again. This they soon found in the President’s Middle East doctrine which has tended to raise again their hope that a Third World War will soon come and will start in this part of the world, thus liberating them. Thus, again bathed in blissful expectancy, they are able to endure the hardships of day to day living in a Communist world which every man, woman and child hates with great bitterness. Their disillusionment is gone and the United States will surely be their savior. No action on their part is necessary; they need only wait. The Communist hierarchy was frightened and disappointed by the events in Poland and Hungary. Their feeling of insecurity was apparent not only in the resumption of police pressures but in the most extravagant and almost hysterical phrases used by their representatives in proclaiming the love of the people for the socialist system, and the people’s wholehearted support of the Government in its approval of the Soviet crushing of the Hungarian counter-revolution. Their disappointment was openly expressed by a Politburo member and by Ministry representatives who had seen in the relaxed period a real chance for Rumania to acquire great material and cultural benefits from the West. However, they have never swerved in the slightest degree from their adherence to the Soviet line in every particular, and now have joined the Soviets in virulent attacks against the United States, its foreign policy, its economy and its political institutions. Many explanations can be advanced for these attacks. They are the same, probably, as those which explain similar Soviet attacks, but amongst them I like to think of the explanation that the regime is aware of the great natural admiration which the Rumanian people have for the United States and its system of “popular capitalism”, and are fearful of the consequences of this ever growing affection and esteem which always survives periods of disillusionment such as our failure to act in the case of Hungary. The smiles and waves and cries of “When are you coming” which I get when I ride around the country in the Legation car flying the American flag are even more numerous and enthusiastic today than they were six months ago. The people during the last year learned to speak out more freely, and they have not yet been scared back to their former silence. In spite of current press articles and political speeches against the United States, and in spite of greater police vigilance, I do not believe that the regime desires or intends to return to the old rigid cold war status. Former privileges to diplomats that came after GenevaReference is to the Geneva Summit meeting, July 1955. have not been peremptorily withdrawn, although warnings in connection therewith have been issued. Cultural relations are being initiated and pressed and personal relations are friendly and cordial. The Rumanian Government is as usual straddling the fence with its customary skill. It is following Soviet instructions and its own inclination to keep its people from becoming too keen on us by attacking us publicly from every angle, and at the same time is keeping the door open for such economic and cultural advantages as it may glean at an appropriate moment. Internally, the Rumanian regime is at last trying to save a disintegrating economy by a series of new moves including the raising of basic wages and the abolishing of agricultural quotas. It is too early to estimate what measure of success they will achieve in their frantic effort to create an incentive that will induce the hostile Rumanian worker and peasant to produce. If the proposals are carried out efficiently both worker and peasant stand to gain substantial benefits. The complicated problems involved, however, and the deplorable efficiency record of Rumanian bureaucracy, would seem to lend considerable weight to the attitude of incredulity and apathy on the part of the Rumanian people toward this effort. The plight of the ordinary Rumanian today is pitiful. He cannot earn for himself and his family enough to survive, and even wholesale stealing on the part of all members of industry, from the worker up to high officials, does not furnish him with nonexistent consumers’ goods or a decent place to live. The peasant and the worker lead lives of misery, and their willingness to endure this existence without rising in revolt is a constant source of wonder. What can the United States do in this country, where the only leadership is in the hands of a united Communist hierarchy which shows no signs of internal dissension, and where the people, though united in their hatred for their leaders and their form of Government, suffer in silence and show not the slightest will to resist? In my last letter, I remarked that due to this lack of will to resist, the Communist guard was down here possibly more than in any other country and this opened up many interesting possibilities. This, of course, is no longer true. The Soviets can be trusted to be watching Rumania, at least for the present, with the same watchful eyes that they are casting upon all the satellites. By the same token, the regime itself will be keeping close tabs on those non-Communist opportunists who, during the period of relaxation, I thought could be persuaded to bring pressure on their bosses for more reliance on the West. Before the revolts in Poland and Hungary, I advocated the use of controlled trade as a means of perhaps setting in motion pressures which the hierarchy would find hard to resist and later to control. This I no longer believe is worth-while trying under present conditions. Furthermore, as a result of recent agreements the Rumanian economy is now so tightly tied to that of the Soviet Union that any advantages they might obtain from us in trade would add directly to the efforts of the Soviet Union to surpass the Western world economically. I feel very strongly therefore that trade between the United States and Rumania should now be held to a minimum.Thayer also opposed the continuation of normal trade relations with Romania. He told Romanian officials that “far more dramatic proof” of their sincerity was required beyond what he had called for at the October 1956 negotiations. He also strongly recommended that all export licenses be deferred or disapproved for the time being. (Telegram 3201 from Bucharest, December 29, 1956; Department of State, Central Files, 766.00/12–2956) I do believe, however, that cultural exchanges between this country and the West redound overwhelmingly in favor of the West and should be encouraged and increased as much as possible. The reasons set forth in my last letter to you remain as valid today as then. We have had occasion here to see and hear the results of the impact of the United States on the trickle of Rumanian visitors who last year began to visit our country. Stories of what they have seen spread like wildfire amongst this rumor-laden population. If you had seen as I did the rising stands of thousands of Rumanians acclaiming three United States athletes marching behind the American flag at an International Track Meet in Bucharest last fall you would appreciate the adulation which these people have for our country and our people. Every Rumanian who goes to the United States and returns and every American who comes over here brings a knowledge and an understanding of the United States which contradicts every word read in the press or heard over the radio. It sustains far better than anything else possibly could the faith of the people in America and furnishes certain proof of the falsity of Rumanian propaganda. A German General is reported to have said after the last war that the bravest soldiers under his command were Rumanians. Some people believe they have what is termed great explosive courage which rises within them only when they are sparked by inspirational leadership. Such leadership certainly is not visible today. They are, however, being more and more tried by the bungling Rumanian economy, and one continues to hear from time to time prophecies that the peasants are nearing the end of their rope. Time alone will produce an answer. Meanwhile, I believe that we should concentrate on keeping up the faith of the Rumanian people in the American system through a gradual increase in cultural activity, and I sincerely hope that everything possible will be done in the months ahead to develop a comprehensive program of cultural exchanges.On February 21, Dulles thanked Thayer for his letter and assured him that his views were “receiving careful attention in the Department.” (Ibid., 766.00/2–657) With best personal regards. Sincerely yours, Robert H. Thayer 231. Despatch From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/2–657. Confidential. Drafted by Rogers and Daniel Sprecher. Budapest February 6, 1957. No. 330 REF: Legtel 589, January 24, 1957Telegram 589 reported on the “increasingly terroristic attitude and actions” of the Hungarian regime since the beginning of the new year and concluded that the regime was “moving rapidly toward Stalin–Rakosi-land, in fact is in some respects already there.” The Soviets were said to have learned from past experience that concessions were dangerous. (Ibid., 764.00/1–2457) SUBJECT Soviet Policy in Hungary; Signs for the Future [Here follows a table of contents.] A. Summary The Hungarian puppet regime has followed a consistent, but since the end of December perhaps a more intensive policy not only of removing or weakening resistance centers but also of gaining control over the country’s political and economic life. The Hungarian people are united in their hatred of the Kadar government; but despite this hatred, a number of factors, including economic pressure, fear and the activity of the regime have reduced their capacity for violent action below that of November or early December. In the absence of some substantial change in Hungary’s international environment, the prospects for a considerable period of time are for a Soviet policy of repression against a Hungarian population resisting strongly in every way open to it, but except for sporadic outbreaks, primarily through passive means. The chances for some relaxation on the part of the Soviets or their puppets appear poor in the immediate future; but over a longer period of time, increasing pressures of various kinds may bring some changes for the better, although there is little reason to believe that these will be substantial. [Here follow sections B–E, entitled “Introduction”, “Regime’s Policy”, “Population’s Reaction,” and “Conclusions.”] F. Signs for the Future For the immediate future, the attitude of the regime seems reasonably clear; to extend its controls in scope and in depth as rapidly and as far as possible. No substantial concessions seem likely until these controls have been attained. For the general population, as well as for specific groups and classes among them, there would seem to be two general courses of action possible, which in a sense, but not altogether so, are alternatives. One course is that of active, violent resistance to whatever extent possible; the other is slow passive opposition, to await a gradual softening of attitude on the part of the Russians, and to hope to be able again to force the regime along the path of gradual concessions which it took in 1953–54 and 1956. The first alternative seemed clearly to be the popular choice up to at least the middle of December and to a certain extent well into January. Since that time there has been talk of renewed opposition, including violence, on many fronts in the Spring. Considerable mention has been made of March 15, the old Hungarian National Holiday. People have talked of hidden arms and of underground organizations and of the increasing determination on the part of the people to rid the country of the Soviets or to die in the attempt. What in fact the Spring will bring is by no means clear. First priority has been given by the regime to organization of the new militia around an old secret police base, and this body is certainly more likely to maintain its loyalty to the regime in the face of public disorder than did the army in October. On the other hand, as its size increases, the chance for disloyalty grows. Nevertheless, considering the steps being taken by the regime in anticipation of trouble and the fact that additional steps will surely be taken in future, it seems that the Government will probably be able to control any outbreaks that should occur without too much difficulty, that is, without calling in Soviet forces in mass. (It can certainly handle almost any conceivable uprising by repeating the October call for assistance to the Soviets.) To make such an assessment so soon after the events of October is, of course, a difficult and dangerous task, and no judgment regarding the future attitude or actions of the Hungarian people can be considered a sure one. Nevertheless, at present, the odds seem to favor a degree of regime power sufficient to handle any situation that is very likely to arise in the Spring. The Legation has heard speculation that the regime might actually provoke uprisings later on with the intent of using these to disclose the remaining insurgent leaders, who could then be picked off with greater ease. The possibility of regime action of this nature is not thought to be very great, however; in view of its growing strength, a method of disclosing opposition leaders which would be both dangerous internally and harmful abroad would not seem warranted. Violence as discussed in preceding paragraphs has been thought of as primarily urban. The mood of the countryside will also be restive, however, and it is very likely that the regime’s control in this area will not be sufficient to prevent sporadic violence. It seems rather unlikely, however, that this could grow to very serious proportions or could achieve a wide organization except on very local levels. If, therefore, violent uprising in the cities and in the countryside will probably not be of sufficient magnitude to threaten the regime’s physical control, does this mean that the population will fall back on the longer-term tactic of passive resistance? And if so, what can they hope to achieve, in the absence of great international changes? Does past Soviet experience in Hungary dictate that the present policy of repression be continued forever? As indicated, present policy seems to point to the conclusion that the Soviets will be much more chary of concessions in the future than in the past. But can a policy of this nature continue for a year as easily as for a month, for six years as easily as for six months? Clearly, in a long-term battle of this nature, the experience and the determination of both sides has been increased. The Soviets have seen where concessions have led them; the determination of the Hungarians to win their freedom has increased. The situation is different from that of the earlier struggles for freedom in a number of regards. Those changes which argue against many concessions, even over a considerable period, seem to be the following: 1. Soviet experience in the past. 2. Increased Soviet concern over effect of Hungarian developments on Polish and East German situations. 3. Death, flight or arrest of many potential leaders of fight for concessions. 4. Increased concern for personal safety on part of Hungarian regime personnel. There are also changes, however, which argue for a gradual amelioration of Soviet control: 1. In event of gradual liberalization in Poland, increasing anomoly of Hungarian situation. 2. Some decrease in competence in regime’s leaders as compared to past. 3. Fact that at all levels of regime, anti-Soviet and pro-liberalization sentiment either exists or will exist. In some instances, this sentiment and perhaps its influence, will be strong. 4. Change in popular attitude: Increased hatred of Soviets, feeling of unity amongst population, increased determination to achieve national freedom. 5. Greater difficulty, after the 20th CongressReference is to the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. and the Hungarian Revolution have disclosed the ideological bankruptcy of Soviet communism to the world, of maintaining the ideological basis for contiued regression. 6. Growing pressure of economic consequences of Revolution and passive resistance. 7. World opinion. There remains, of course, essentially unchanged from the past, the basic difficulty of continuing a harsh line; that the pressure for concessions will be heavy, continuous and broad, and that one concession breeds another. Other questions in this connection are 1) the reaction of the Soviets to the Hungarian attitude over a period of time, in other words, in an unchanged international situation, are the Soviets more likely to relax in Hungary if the Hungarians are quiescent and work well than if they continually strain and tug at their chains and let the country go to wrack and ruin? In which direction should United States (and Western) influence bear? No definite answer can be given to these questions, but the examples of Czechoslovakia and Rumania would seem to point to a negative answer to the first. The general conclusion to which the above analysis, which is based primarily on our appraisal of local Hungarian developments, brings the Legation is that in the absence of some substantial change in Hungary’s international environment, the prospects for a considerable period of time are for a Soviet policy of repression against a Hungarian population resisting strongly in every way open to it, but, except for sporadic outbreaks, primarily through passive means. The chances for some relaxation on the part of the Soviets or their puppets appear poor in the immediate future, but over a longer period of time, increasing pressures of various kinds may bring some changes for the better, but there is little reason to believe that these will be very substantial. Although this despatch was not intended to take up exclusively events which occured during January, a chronology of some significant events in January has been prepared and is attached as Inclosure 1.Not printed. Edward T. Wailes 232. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 511.00/2–1357. Secret. Repeated to Vienna. Budapest, February 13, 1957—2 p.m. 660. As March approaches, United States media will be faced increasingly with problem of how to treat war of nerves which Hung population waging with regime and Soviet occupiers. As discussed in Weeka 6,Joint Weeka 6 from USARMA Budapest, February 8, reported the slogans in common use threatening a spring uprising. (Ibid., 764.00(W)/2–857) psychological, this war a popular whispering campaign threatening renewed uprising March 15, traditional national holiday. Legation of opinion every logical analysis of situation leads to evaluation March 15 will not bring renewal widespread open revolt. But Legation does not feel certain logical analysis is adequate, since convincing logic, alien to their rationale, may fail give enough weight to possibility of illogical behavior. In view of fact Hungarians may conceivably decide once more to take on Soviets, Legation makes following recommendations to media: (1) Any discussion of March 15 should implicitly carry message renewed outburst anywhere near scale of one in October would in eyes of Western world seem an excess, since Hungarians have already demonstrated how they feel about Soviets and Commies; (2) Media should explicitly point out so-called Eisenhower DoctrineEnunciated in the President’s Special Message to the Congress on the Situation in the Middle East, January 5, 1957. For text, see Department of State Bulletin, January 21, 1957, pp. 83–87. applies to Middle East only. After all that has happened and been said since October–November it should seem clear Hungarians should not expect Western aid in event they revolt. However, President’s Middle East speech has created some hope, apparently for most part among urban workers, that United States policy is shifting in direction of granting aid against Commie aggression for any nation which requests it. Although Legation does not view with alarm or disfavor any or all strong actions which Hungarians may take against their oppressors, it feels our media cannot be too explicit on point about our Middle East policies implying no extension to East Europe. One Legation officer has had painful task of making this ABC clear to several Hungarians (urban workers) who say they are involved in underground networks. Choices of strong action on part of Hungarians are strictly limited. Possibility of armed and open revolt certainly offers no reward of success. Possibility of terrorizing the regime by assassinating Commie officials and police offers potentially greater rewards, especially if Soviets were excluded as targets and secret terror actions were paced so as to strike fear into government supporters without provoking wholesale reprisals against innocent people. However, Hungarians, who pride themselves on a non-Balkan civilization, have never shown genius for this type action. If contrary to their past, they should, amid present adversities, develop attitude for fighting terror by terror, Legation is of opinion United States media could adopt a noncommittal attitude. But on matter of open uprising, with inevitable consequences of defeat further loss of leadership and undermining underground communications media record should be crystal clear. This clearness should not only be formal; it should take into account possibility uneducated workers may misunderstand us in way we ordinarily would not expect to be misunderstood. Toward end giving media ammunition with which make these views known without commentaries or editorializing, Legation offers suggestion that high-ranking United States figure possibly Under Secretary, make use of press conference to plant ideas (possible Legation [idea] is that March 15 is State holiday in Ohio; Hungarians in Ohio will also celebrate March 15 as traditional Hungarian national holiday): people of America and entire world will think of Hungarians on this day. Hope future March 15 this will be celebrated under conditions real freedom, not under aegis Kadar regime which seems be provoking demonstrations in Hungary this March 15 for purpose discovering leadership freedom fighters still underground in Hungary and thus making lot of heroic Hungarian people still more onerous. We caution Hungarian people that whole world knows their courage, but further actions this time might serve hinder their cause rather than help. Department please pass foregoing USIA and Munich if it concurs in views expressed.Telegram 662 to Budapest, February 28, reported on the guidance given to USIA on the March 15 anniversary: “Role of information media should be one of reporting objectively on events, though there is no objection to recalling in non-inflammatory terms significance of March 15 in Hungarian history.” (Department of State, Central Files, 511.00/2–1357) Wailes 233. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Kalijarvi) to the Acting Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 864.49/3–857. Confidential. Attached to a memorandum from Dillon to Acting Secretary Hoover dated March 8. Drafted by Bray and A.J. Macone (ITR/IRD) and Colbert (EE); concurred in by EUR, U/MSA, L/E, G, S/P, and IO. Washington, February 15, 1957. SUBJECT Need for an Expanded Relief Aid Program for the Hungarian People Problem: In light of (a) the prospective needs of the Hungarian people for large quantities of wheat and feed grains, and for other relief goods and (b) the U.S. policy of opposing the Kadar regime, what should be the U.S. policy as regards the furnishing of relief assistance on an accelerated and expanded scale to Hungary? Discussion: The Hungarian people are continuing to resist the regime imposed on them by the Soviet forces. That resistance is taking the form of strikes and other actions resulting in the disruption of production and a shortage of goods. The regime is attempting to consolidate its hold over the people and compel them to accept its domination. It is our policy not to provide assistance which will strengthen the Kadar regime. From a political viewpoint, it is important that the United States carry out an expanded relief program to the Hungarian people. It is certain that the Soviets will endeavor to exploit any economic aid to Hungary from the West for the purpose of entrenching a regime submissive to its control, and for this reason we are opposed to furnishing economic aid directly to the Hungarian Government. However, if assistance in some form is not forthcoming from the West the USSR will undoubtedly furnish enough assistance to keep the economy going and exploit the abandonment by the West as a means of exerting greater pressure on the population for cooperation with the existing regime. Expanded relief assistance from the U.S. distributed directly to the Hungarian people, whether or not the situation is entirely desperate or supplies could be obtained from the USSR, would prove that the Hungarian people have not been abandoned by us. This would hold true even if the Soviets or the Hungarian regime prevented the implementation of the program. Relief supplies are currently being provided to Hungary through the International Committee of the Red Cross, under its agreement with the Hungarian Red Cross. Supplies being furnished at present levels, however, will not meet the needs of the Hungarian people in the interim before the next harvest. A period of real hardship is in prospect for the Hungarian people. It is proposed that the present U.S. relief program be expanded to take care of the pending relief needs, provided the United States aid would help the Hungarian people as distinct from the regime and could be furnished on terms satisfactory to the United States. (Tab DTabs A–E are not printed. They deal with proposals for expanding relief assistance and the amount and timing of same, the role of the United Nations in such an effort, and the need for an understanding with friendly governments on how to respond to Hungarian economic needs. sets forth in detail the experience under the current relief program and its present status in relation to the developing situation.) The provision of supplies by the United States in a manner consistent with the need, on the one hand, and the U.S. policy of non-support of the Kadar regime, on the other, will raise problems in connection with operations within Hungary and may also involve making arrangements with European governments to supply needed commodities on a reimbursable basis in advance of shipments from the United States. It is thought that a procedure through the ICRC and/or the UN might offer a solution which would permit direct distribution to needy people with a minimum of interference by the Hungarian government. As an example of the kind of problem facing the Hungarian people there may be noted a prospective wheat deficit of about 200,000 tons. Cost of covering the entire gap in the form of flour from U.S. sources would be $33 million (at CCC cost). It is not proposed to cover this entire amount but rather to see if it is feasible, given policy and operational considerations, to supply about one-fourth of the prospective deficiency at this time. Other items will be furnished as needed to obtain a balanced relief program. A sizeable increase in the present relief program would require expansion of the facilities of ICRC. The feasibility of administering an expanded program would need to be discussed with other government agencies, the ICRC and the UN. It is contemplated that the operation of the program would be carefully phased to insure conformance to U.S. objectives at each step. At the present time representatives of the ICRC are in Washington discussing with us their program for an expanded relief effort in Hungary which includes a proposal to channel relief supplies on a commercial basis through the distribution facilities maintained by the Hungarian government.These discussions have since terminated. [Footnote in the source text.] The sales proceeds of relief supplies would be used by the Hungarian Red Cross, acting under the supervision of the ICRC, to furnish relief assistance in the form of local currency to needy Hungarians, to pay the administrative expenses of the ICRC and HRC and for the repair of hospitals. The ICRC believes the Hungarian Red Cross currently is practically independent of the Kadar regime and is likely to remain so if the HRC can financially support its relief activities without recourse to the regime. While the latter situation may be subject to some doubt, the HRC is a channel which is identified with the Hungarian people. This program of commercial distribution of relief supplies would be supplemented by free relief aid distributions directly to needy Hungarians. The ICRC representatives appear to attach great importance to an expanded Hungarian relief program utilizing commercial distribution facilities on the grounds that the magnitude of the probable requirements could only be met effectively by such distribution facilities and this method would have the additional advantage of generating local currency for the purpose of furnishing relief aid on a broader, more flexible and diversified basis to needy Hungarians. For example, with relief funds the needy Hungarians could buy clothing, blankets, soap and toilet articles on the local market. The ICRC representatives have also raised the question of their operating and administrative expenses incurred in bringing relief supplies to the Hungarian frontier. As a neutral international relief agency, the ICRC appears to be unconcerned with our political problem of trying to minimize the effects of relief aid on strengthening the Kadar regime. There is a possibility, moreover, that if we do not achieve a satisfactory accommodation with the ICRC, that agency which serves as our principal access for furnishing relief to the Hungarian people will reduce its relief efforts in Hungary and will justify such action as being necessary because the United States was unwilling to adopt the most feasible method of furnishing relief on a mass basis to the Hungarian people. The issues are whether (a) the United States should undertake an expanded relief effort for the Hungarian people and (b) such relief effort can be executed by the ICRC on terms acceptable to the United States. On the latter question, we believe the ICRC is anxious to undertake an expanded relief program and, to that end, will agree to a negotiated arrangement for the distribution of relief supplies. We have in mind a negotiated arrangement along the following lines: (a) The United States would be prepared to participate in an expanded relief program for Hungary, involving the provision of increased amounts of foodstuffs and of limited quantities of feed grains for farm animals, (b) foodstuffs and feed grains of U.S. origin would be distributed directly and gratis to the Hungarian people, (c) if the ICRC is insistent on using commercial distribution channels, the United States would agree not to discourage other friendly governments from furnishing relief supplies for distribution in limited amounts through commercial facilities provided the local currency proceeds were used to finance the distribution costs and administrative expenses of the ICRC and the HRC for relief activities in Hungary, and the balance of such funds promptly distributed on a nondiscriminatory basis, under the supervision of the ICRC, to needy Hungarians and (d) if the ICRC demonstrates a need for operating funds over and above those obtainable from other sources, including the private voluntary agencies, we would be prepared to pay a share of such costs out of the Section 401 funds made available for an expanded Hungarian relief program. The substance of the foregoing memorandum was coordinated at the staff level with ICA. Mr. FitzGerald, Deputy Director for Operations of ICA, sent me a memorandum under date of February 6FitzGerald wrote that “Until and unless relieved, distribution facilities now available in Hungary would seriously impede significant expansion of relief activities.” (Department of State, Central Files, 864.49/2–657) stating that while ICA concurred in principle with the desirability of expanding Western relief activities in Hungary, ICA had some reservation about seeking authorization at this time because of the problems of internal distribution in Hungary (Tab E). These problems are now upon us and it would be helpful if we could obtain guidance to negotiate suitable arrangements with the ICRC. Basic policy questions and recommendations:Herter initialed his approval of all the recommendations on March 11. A decision to expand the program of relief assistance to Hungary raises a number of related policy questions discussed in more detail in the attachments and enumerated below: 1. Should the United States be prepared to furnish assistance on an accelerated and expanded scale to the Hungarian people to meet a part of prospective resource deficiencies and on a properly safeguarded basis which would relieve hardship among the people but not alleviate to any appreciable degree the economic problems of the Kadar regime? Recommendation: That the United States be prepared to furnish such assistance to the Hungarian people. 2. If expanded assistance is approved, on what basis would it be furnished, in what amount and for what duration? Recommendation: That the United States be prepared to furnish as necessary, relief assistance to the Hungarian people in an additional amount up to $20 million in surplus foods (under Title II, PL 480) and, for non-surplus relief supplies such as medicines, and to cover other costs (including a share of ICRC operating expenses if necessary), $5 million from Mutual Security Act funds available under Section 401 in order to meet the immediate needs of the Hungarian people in accordance with the principles and objectives set forth in this memorandum. This assistance would be in addition to and would be integrated with the relief program now being implemented. To the maximum practicable extent relief supplies would be furnished free and directly to the Hungarian people to cover their relief needs until the new crop is harvested in August. It is contemplated on the basis of the present information that about 40,000 tons of flour estimated at $10 million in terms of CCC cost and about $10 million of other surplus agricultural products (rice, dried milk and feed grains) would be furnished as necessary. The $5 million of Section 401 funds would be used for non-surplus relief supplies such as medicines and to defray the costs of inland transportation in Europe, handling, distribution and other costs related to the furnishing of $20 million of surplus agricultural products. It may be necessary to make additional allocations of authority and funds in the light of the developing situation. It is recommended that you be prepared to consider recommendations for such allocations. Expenditures will be kept under continuous review. (Tabs A and D). 3. Should the United States as part of its efforts to furnish expanded relief assistance to the Hungarian people take steps where necessary to arrange with other European governments to provide food on a reimbursable basis pending arrival of shipments of like foodstuffs from the U.S.? Recommendation: It is recommended that you approve approaches to other European governments, e.g., Germany, Austria, Italy, to obtain their agreement to advance food on a reimbursable basis for U.S. use in assisting the people in Hungary under an expanded relief program. 4. Should United States relief assistance be channelled through the United Nations, if practical arrangements consistent with our policy objective can be made with the United Nations? Recommendation: That you approve the principle that the UN be associated with U.S. relief assistance to a degree mutually agreeable to the U.S. and the UN, provided such assistance is limited primarily to a relief program over which appropriate United States influence would be exerted. (Tabs B and D). 5. (a) Should the U.S. encourage other friendly countries to furnish relief assistance to the Hungarian people within a political framework not inconsistent with that adopted by us and (b) should the U.S. acquiesce in friendly countries furnishing exports on a loan or other credit basis directly to the Kadar regime? Recommendation: That you approve the principle that the U.S. (a) will encourage other friendly countries to furnish relief assistance and, within that context, indicate to them that the US would not object to some of their relief supplies being channelled through commercial distribution channels, provided the local currency proceeds were used to pay as needed some of the administrative and operating expenses of the ICRC and HRC and the balance of such funds were promptly distributed on a non-discriminatory basis, under the supervision of the ICRC, to needy Hungarians, and (b) will discourage other friendly countries from extending loans and credits to the Kadar regime on the grounds that such actions would undermine the resistance of the Hungarian people to the regime. (Tab C). 6. Should the Department undertake to initiate courses of action by the other interested government agencies and private organizations which will result in the execution of an expanded relief program for the Hungarian people, consistent with our policy of minimizing any indirect benefits to the Kadar regime? Recommendation: That you approve action by the Department to enter into necessary arrangements to obtain execution of an expanded relief assistance program at the earliest practicable date to the Hungarian people. Such a program, however, should be embarked upon and utilized primarily to strengthen the Hungarian people in their resistance against the Soviet dominated regime. 7. In light of (a) the ICRC estimate that the capability for direct food relief activities in Hungary probably could not be increased to reach more than 1 million people (about 200,000 families) mostly in Budapest and (b) its proposal that relief supplies be channelled increasingly on a commercial basis through normal distribution facilities with the sales proceeds to be used primarily for relief activities, what should be the guidelines for our negotiations with the ICRC? Recommendations: (a) Encourage the ICRC to increase its direct relief distribution facilities on the understanding that the United States would furnish appropriate quantities of flour and other surplus agricultural products exclusively for that purpose; (b) If the ICRC can demonstrate a need for funds to cover its operating expenses, chiefly outside of Hungary, and such expenses cannot be obtained effectively from other sources, the United States would be prepared to pay a portion of such unfunded expenses out of the $5 million of Section 401 funds requested in 2, above. (c) Encourage the ICRC to persuade the Hungarian Red Cross to utilize more effectively the churches and similar non-communist groups to register needy individuals and to serve as a distribution channel, and to cooperate closely with other relief agencies, such as CARE (acting under the supervision of the ICRC) to speed up direct relief distribution facilities in Hungary. 234. National Intelligence EstimateSource: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Secret. Regarding National Intelligence Estimates, see footnote 1, Document 11. Washington, February 19, 1957. NIE 12–57 STABILITY OF THE SOVIET SATELLITE STRUCTUREAccording to a note on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, The Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. “Concurred in by the Intelligence Advisory Committee on 19 February 1957. Concurring were the Special Assistant, Intelligence, Department of State; the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Director of Naval Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, USAF; and the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff. The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the IAC, and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.” The Problem To estimate the prospects for stability in the Soviet Satellite structure over the next few years. Conclusions 1. The long-latent conflict between Soviet interests and Satellite aspirations exploded into crisis last fall as a result of the progressive weakening of ideological authority and loosening of police controls following the death of Stalin.March 5, 1953. The Soviet leaders are experiencing great difficulty in formulating and putting into effect policies which will reduce this crisis to manageable proportions. (Paras. 8, 12) 2. We believe that the USSR will continue to regard the Satellite area as vital to its interests, and will not seriously entertain, at least for the next several years, the possibility of a general political or military withdrawal, even in return for a withdrawal of US forces from Europe. To the Soviet leaders, loss of control over Eastern Europe would constitute a severe setback for Communism. They would also view it as rendering them powerless to prevent German reunification, and as seriously impairing the USSR’s strategic position. (Paras. 11, 27) 3. We believe that the Soviet leaders have concluded from the events of recent months that although reforms in certain fields were acceptable, concessions to nationalist pressures involve hazards to Soviet control. They apparently intend for some time to come to put primary emphasis on the internal security of the Satellite regimes and on Soviet control over them. (Para. 29) 4. Poland’s success in maintaining its present limited degree of independence is a key factor affecting the future political developments in Eastern Europe. Should the USSR succeed in reimposing its complete control over Poland, it could more easily check dissident elements in other Satellites, particularly disruptive forces in the other Satellite Communist parties. If the USSR does not achieve its aim in Poland, its problems elsewhere will probably worsen. (Para. 49) 5. We believe that the Soviet leaders will try to undermine the special status which the Gomulka regime in Poland has acquired. However, the costs and risks of a military intervention would be great. Such action would almost certainly be resisted by the bulk of the Polish nation and armed forces, and thus involve Soviet forces in large-scale military operations, which could spread to East Germany and thus provoke a major international crisis. (Paras. 31–33) 6. Soviet success in repairing its losses in Poland, however, would not remove the underlying causes of disaffection throughout the Satellites. Tensions between the Satellite populations and their regimes during the next several years probably will be higher than prior to the events in Poland and Hungary, and the unity of Satellite parties will be subjected to greater strains. Soviet policy is not likely to reduce these tensions in Eastern Europe, or even to restore the degree of acquiescence prevailing earlier. (Paras. 47–49) [Here follows the “Discussion” section of this Estimate.] 235. Editorial Note NSC 5706, dated February 13, and entitled “U.S. Policy on Defectors, Escapees and Refugees from Communist Areas,” was discussed at the 313th meeting of the NSC on February 21. In the course of the discussion, Cutler referred to a memorandum from Loy Henderson to Sherman Adams, dated February 8, on the subject of Hungarian refugees in Yugoslavia. Henderson had recommended that: “1. There be approved in principle a policy of admitting into the United States under parole 1,000 of the Hungarian refugees in Yugoslavia. We should give no public indication that we will take more than 1,000 but it should be recognized within the Government that we may have to admit additional numbers if the refugee influx into Yugoslavia continues. “2. If it is felt necessary to do so, the Administration undertake to inform appropriate Congressional leaders of the contemplated action and the reasons therefor. The Department would be glad to do this, in conjunction with the Attorney General. We could at the same time discuss the changes required in the Administration’s immigration bill which would permit future flexibility in admitting refugees from Yugoslavia.” (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/2–857) Although Secretary Dulles supported Henderson’s proposals at the NSC meeting, “The Attorney General said that he and his colleagues in the Justice Department believed that the Henderson recommendations might well prove to be the straw that would break the camel’s back as far as the President’s whole immigration program, now before the Congress, was concerned. He predicted that the Congress would be violently opposed to the course of action recommended by Mr. Henderson. Secretary Dulles said that while he did not dispute the facts as the Attorney General had presented them, he did not think the Congress was very logical in proposing to punish Hungarian refugees because they had escaped from Hungary to Yugoslavia rather than to Austria. The President’s comment was that the Congress and a good many of the rest of us all seem capable of forgetting that we were descendants ourselves of refugees of the past. “A suggestion was then made for consultation with leading members of Congress regarding Mr. Henderson’s proposal, and the opinions of General Persons were solicited. General Persons said that of course there would be no harm in sounding out Congressional leaders with regard to the Henderson recommendations; but that the prospects for the President’s immigration programs generally were dim as regards favorable Congressional action this year. The Vice President agreed emphatically with Secretary Dulles that there was no logic in the Congressional position of treating Hungarians who had fled to Yugoslavia differently from those who had fled to Austria. Nevertheless, since Congress felt as it appeared to feel, it might be better to try to deal with the Henderson recommendations only after favorable action by the Congress on the President’s proposal for changes in our present legislation.” As a result of the debate on this subject, NSC 5706 was referred back to the NSC Planning Board with instructions to prepare a new statement to provide for, among other things, “flexibility to permit, following passage of new immigration legislation as a result of the President’s recommendations to the Congress, admission into the United States, under parole, of Hungarian refugees in Yugoslavia (in such number, more or less than 1000, as may then seem appropriate).” (NSC Action No. 1671; ibid., S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95) The President had sent a Special Message to the Congress on Immigration Matters on January 31. For text of the message, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1957, pages 110–117. On February 28, Ambassador Mates met with Murphy and raised the question of Hungarian refugees in Yugoslavia. The Ambassador was told “that the US hoped to help the Yugoslav authorities with agricultural commodities and perhaps some release of US-held local currency funds. Moreover, although it would not be possible to bring Hungarian refugees from Yugoslavia into the US on parole pending enactment by Congress of the Administration-sponsored immigration legislation, the US was hoping to find several million dollars to help other countries in Europe and elsewhere resettle the refugees. However, this was not yet to be taken as a US commitment since the US project was in the exploratory stage. Ambassador Mates declared that he fully understood, but was still happy to hear that the US was actively trying to aid Yugoslavia.” (Memorandum of conversation by David Mark, February 28; Department of State, Central Files, 611.68/2–2857) Negotiations in Washington Between Poland and the United States, February 26–June 7, 1957, and the Conclusion of an Economic Agreement, June 7, 1957; Adoption by the National Security Council of NSC 5706/2, March 8, 1957 236. Editorial Note On February 26, economic talks began in Washington between financial and trade officials of the United States and Poland. The Polish delegation was chaired by Henryk Kotlicki, Director General of the Ministry of Finance, and included Stanislaw Raczkowski, a financial adviser to the President of the Polish Bank; Edward Iwaszkiewicz, an agricultural expert; Marian Adamski, director of a department in the Ministry of Foreign Trade; Zygmunt Karpinski; and, as Secretary, Romana Buzek. The United States delegation, chaired by Kalijarvi, included Raymond Leddy and Jack C. Corbett of E, as well as representatives from ICA and the Departments of Agriculture and Commerce. According to a paper prepared in the Department of State on February 20, it was “the purpose of the United States to encourage the continuation of the Polish liberalization movement by opening the prospect of economic advantage to Poland through expanding economic relations with the West.” The degree of Poland’s independence from the Soviet Union was the decisive element in determining how much economic cooperation was possible. The importance was stressed of making clear to the Poles and to the American press and Congress “that the significance of the discussions lies in the beginning that has been made looking toward the widening of future economic relations rather than in the specific trade arrangements to be worked out at this time.” In addition to whatever “limited agreements” might be reached, it was anticipated that the talks would provide a “basis for preparing an economic agenda for the future discussions which are expected to take place concerning all outstanding US-Polish problems” and a basis for consideration by the United States of the desirability of further, longer-term, economic assistance to Poland. This paper and a complete record of the negotiations is in Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks. 237. Editorial Note On February 7, Wailes wrote to Loy Henderson “that it would be a mistake for me to present my credentials unless a miracle happens in the form of improved government.” Since he was likely to be pestered again to do so by Hungarian authorities, he wondered whether he should “leave before I may be thrown out—to which I would recommend the answer ‘NO’, although I must say I am not too happy with such a day-to-day existence and especially with the fact that I hesitate to leave Hungary for even a short ‘breather’ as the chances of my returning are not too good.” (Department of State, Central Files, (123–Wailes, Edward T.) On February 13, the Credentials Committee of the United Nations reported that by an 8 to 1 vote taken the previous day it had adopted a United States motion “that the Committee take no decision regarding the credentials submitted on behalf of the representatives of Hungary”. (A/3536) This enabled the Hungarians to participate provisionally in United Nations affairs. The United States decided neither to defer action on nor to seek rejection of the Hungarians’ credentials because of the “potentially serious implications” for the Chinese representation problem. (Gadel 118 to USUN, January 25; ibid., 320.57641/1–2557) By a vote of 60 to 0, with 1 abstention, the General Assembly affirmed the decision of the Credentials Committee at its 658th meeting on February 21. (A/PV.658, pages 1186–1189) On February 22, the Hungarian Foreign Office presented a note to Barnes which accused Wailes of “deliberately postponing” presentation of his letters of credence while still carrying on official activities to which only accredited heads of mission are entitled. The Hungarian Government, therefore, requested that Wailes be removed from Hungarian territory or present his letters of credence. (For complete text, see Department of State Bulletin, March 18, 1957, pages 441–442) Following Wailes’ departure from Hungary on February 27, the United States rejected the assertions contained in the Hungarian note. For text of the United States explanatory press release of February 27, see Ibid. 238. National Security Council ReportSource: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 5706 Series. Secret. In a covering note to the NSC, dated March 8, Lay summarized the action taken by the NSC at its 315th meeting on March 6. (Memorandum of discussion by Gleason; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records) Lay indicated that “The President has this date approved the statement of policy in NSC 5706/1, as amended and adopted by the Council and enclosed herewith as NSC 5706/2; directs its implementation by all appropriate Executive departments and agencies of the U.S. Government; assigns primary responsibility for taking leadership in the implementation to the Department of State; and designates the Operations Coordinating Board as the coordinating agency, provided that security screening procedures for escapees and refugees seeking admission to the United States shall be coordinated through the Interdepartmental Committee on Internal Security.” NSC 5706/2 superseded NSC 86/1. The Financial Appendix and Annex are not printed. Washington, March 8, 1957. NSC 5706/2 STATEMENT OF U.S. POLICY ON . . . ESCAPEES AND REFUGEES FROM COMMUNIST AREAS A. Definitions 2. Refugees and Escapees.In a draft of legislation submitted by the Administration to the Congress, a different definition of these terms has been suggested with regard to immigration. [Footnote in the source text.] a. Refugees. A refugee is a national or former national of a Communist-dominated country, who has fled from and/or is unwilling to return to such country, does not possess another citizenship, has not been integrated into the economy of the country of present residence, and is not a defector. b. Escapees. An escapee is a refugee who is a national (1) of a European satellite (except ethnic Germans) or Yugoslavia who has escaped since January 1, 1948, or (2) of the USSR irrespective of the date of his escape, or (3) of Communist China or the Asian satellites, on a very selective basis. B. Policy Guidance General 3. Asylum. The United States has always recognized and should take all feasible action to support the principle of asylum for those fleeing from persecution, including opposition to their involuntary repatriation. To this end, the United States should support and extend its own and international programs to assist Free World countries in maintaining liberal policies of asylum and in developing effective facilities and procedures therefor. The countries of asylum should be encouraged either to prevent Communist repatriation teams from operating in their territories or to prevent such teams from intimidating those who have sought asylum. 4. General U.S. Interest. Beyond supporting the rights of asylum and freedom from persecution for those fleeing from Communist oppression, the Free World countries, including the United States, should endeavor to secure the rapid establishment of such people as self-sufficient residents of free countries, meanwhile providing interim provision against want, as a practical application of Free World humanitarian principles. 5. Specific U.S. Interest. Quite apart from humanitarian considerations, U.S. assistance to persons who have fled Communist-dominated areas contributes to the achievement of specific U.S. national security objectives both toward Communist-dominated areas and the Free World. Such assistance demonstrates U.S. concern for the captive peoples of Eastern Europe and sustains the defector program. The nature of the U.S. interest is affected by the former nationality, circumstances, numbers and relation to U.S. objectives of the individuals concerned. Accordingly, differing U.S. programs and policies are required as set forth below. Escapees–Refugees General 8. The United States should take no action to encourage the departure of large numbers of nationals from countries in the Sino-Soviet orbit (other than the USSR) because: a. Sino-Soviet control over such countries can be more effectively weakened by continuing disaffection of nationals within those countries than by mass departure of nationals therefrom. b. Serious problems would arise as the results of the departure of larger numbers of nationals than could be successfully resettled in the Free World. Assistance to Escapees-Refugees: in Asylum Countries, by Resettlement, and by Admission to the United States 9. Consistent with U.S. policy as to asylum and U.S. general and specific interest in nationals fleeing Communist oppression:Yugoslav and Communist Chinese escapees and refugees are dealt with as exceptions to this policy. See paragraphs 12, 13, and 14. For East German and North Korean escapees and refugees, raising different quantitative and qualitative problems, see the respective NSC country papers. [Footnote in the source text.] a. The United States should encourage countries of asylum and other countries of the Free World to maximum efforts in arranging either for the progressive integration of escapees in the country of asylum or their prompt resettlement in a country other than the United States. b. The United States should continue, and if possible intensify, efforts to reduce the dependent refugee population, with principal emphasis in the first instance upon measures to promote assistance policies on the part of countries of asylum. The need for efforts to develop new measures has been intensified by the increased burdens upon asylum countries incident to the recent Hungarian mass exodus. c. Supplementing the efforts of other Free World countries, the United States should be prepared to provide, for a period not to exceed three years from entry into the country of first asylum (with allowance for exceptions to cover individuals or small groups of special importance to the United States, and with gradual implementation to avoid undue hardship in the case of persons now receiving U.S. assistance): (1) Interim material assistance to USSR and Soviet bloc escapees and refugees in countries of temporary asylum; and (2) Interim aid in permanently resettling escapees and refugees as rapidly as possible, either in countries of initial asylum or elsewhere in the Free World. Resources available through other U.S. programs should so far as feasible be used to meet the needs of defectors, escapees. and refugees, thus reducing the need for additional dollar appropriations. d. While encouraging other free nations to do their utmost to provide permanent resettlement for escapees and refugees, the United States, in recognition of such countries’ limited ability to assimilate large numbers, should be prepared in the future to admit to the United States escapees and refugees in such numbers as have been recommended by the President to the Congress, subject to security screening in conformity with applicable statutes.See Annex for outline of existing and proposed statutory provisions and of Executive screening procedures under existing statutes. [Footnote in the source text.] In order to enable the United States to be ready fairly to share in meeting future emergencies similar to the Hungarian mass exodus, the President should have flexible authority under the law to deal with any such emergencies. Utilization of Intergovernmental, Foreign Governmental and U.S. and Foreign Private Agencies, etc. 10. Continue as appropriate to utilize and support the facilities and programs of existing intergovernmental, foreign governmental, and U.S. and foreign private agencies in order to assist refugees and escapees. 11. The United States should continue the current Soviet orbit enlistment program of the Labor Service Units in Germany and recruitment under the Alien Enlistment Program (Lodge Act).Alien Enlistment Act, approved on June 30, 1950, Public Law 597. (64 Stat. 316) Special Problems 12.In September 1957, paragraph 12 was revised by the NSC to read as follows, including the footnote: “Toward precluding the involuntary repatriation of Yugoslav national political escapees, the United States should provide a limited form of assistance at approximately the current rate which reflects the extent of U.S. interest in this group in relation to other escapees.* This assistance should take into special account the willingness and capacities of the asylum countries bordering on Yugoslavia to make the maximum contribution of their own to this purpose, as well as the availability of assistance from international agencies and private groups. “The United States should take no action to encourage escape of Yugoslav nationals. Policies governing assistance to escapees and refugees contained in paragraph 9 above are pertinent as applicable to assistance granted Yugoslav escapees. *“The limitation under para. 12 (‘at approximately the current rate’) may be interpreted to authorize expenditures of up to $1.55 million during Calendar Year 1957, pending a more detailed study of the rate and motivation of the exodus of Yugoslav nationals and report thereon to the Council prior to December 1, 1957. Increased funds above the previously estimated expenditures of $1.2 million for Calendar Year 1957 should be additional to funds for USEP programs for other than Yugoslav nationals.” (Memorandum of discussion by Gleason, September 12; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records) Toward precluding the involuntary repatriation of Yugoslav national escapees, the United States should provide a limited form of assistance which reflects the extent of U.S. interest in this group in relation to other escapees. This assistance should take into special account the willingness and capacities of the asylum countries bordering on Yugoslavia to make the maximum contribution of their own to this purpose, as well as the availability of assistance from international agencies and private groups. 13. The United States should continue to assist satellite escapees who are within Yugoslavia and desire to leave, to resettle elsewhere in the Free World. 14. The United States should continue to further general U.S. policy objectives by providing assistance and resettlement at approximately current levels and on a selective basis, to limited numbers of Chinese who have fled from Communist China directly to territories other than that of the Republic of China. 15. The United States should continue its efforts, and seek to persuade other Free World countries, to combat the Sino-Soviet bloc repatriation campaign. Every individual has the right voluntarily to return to his home, but the United States should continue its own efforts, and seek to persuade other Free World countries, to take reasonable measures (a) to assure adequacy of treatment by countries of asylum and of resettlement, and (b) to prevent repatriation by coercion or false representation. 16. The existing situation in countries of asylum overseas for Hungarian escapees presents a unique problem of great magnitude which, if not promptly dealt with, could have long-range and costly consequences to the Free World. The United States to date has played a significant role in assisting Hungarian escapees. For these reasons, in carrying out paragraph 9, the United States should emphasize action during Calendar Year 1957 (1) to encourage countries of asylum overseas to make maximum efforts to care for, integrate, or resettle Hungarian escapees, and (2) to supplement such efforts with U.S. interim material assistance and interim aid, to the end that such escapees receive adequate care in countries of asylum on a substantially equal basis within each such country, and reasonable opportunity for early permanent resettlement. Psychological Exploitation 17. The United States should restrict its psychological exploitation of defectors and escapees, by radio or otherwise, to specific cases where a net advantage can be expected. In each case, due consideration should be given both to the possible adverse propaganda effects of possible subsequent redefection or return. . . . 18. The United States should continue to adhere to its policy of not publicizing its assistance to Yugoslav escapees. 19. During a mass exodus, U.S. controlled media should not encourage persons to flight. Favorable aspects of treatment of escapees in Free World countries should not be so emphasized to the country from which flight proceeds as to increase the exodus—to the net detriment of U.S. interests; but the facts may be given concerning U.S. participation with other Free World countries in humanitarian assistance in countries of immediate asylum. Where appropriate and feasible emphasis should be placed on U.S. assistance to the population which remains in the homeland, rather than on aid given to escapees. Executive Branch Organizational Arrangements 20. Outside the United States the defector program should be administered in accordance with NSCID No. 13. The exploitation of defectors (and other aliens) within the United States should be administered in accordance with NSCID No. 14.Regarding NSCIDs 13 and 14, see footnote 2, Document 54. 239. Letter From Senator John F. Kennedy to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/3–1257. Washington, March 12, 1957. Dear Mr. Secretary: I am writing to reassure you that there is within the Congress a considerable body of opinion which would look with favor upon an Administration decision approving economic assistance to the people of Poland.On March 8, however, Senator William F. Knowland (R.–California), told Kalijarvi that economic assistance to Poland was a very dangerous course of action. (Memorandum of conversation by Kalijarvi; ibid., 848.00/3–857) Despite the unfortunate extent to which the Communists retain control over the present Polish Government, the Polish people themselves have made a determined and courageous fight to win some degree of national independence from the Soviet Union. They appear to have been at least temporarily successful in lessening the iron control that the Soviets have hitherto exercised over their lives—and their ability and willingness to turn to this nation for assistance for the first time should be encouraged, not castigated. If there is even a slight chance that this demonstration of friendship on our part will help the Polish people to loosen further the bonds of Soviet domination, then the obvious gains to this nation and the Free World will have been well worth the effort. If, on the other hand, Poland should once again slip completely behind the Iron Curtain, then this nation will have at least demonstrated to the world our willingness to help impoverished people in any land, whatever the political situation may be. I recognize, of course, that others have pointed out advantages for us in refusing aid to the Poles—it will make matters more difficult for their Communist government and absentee Soviet masters, and it will demonstrate our recognition of the degree to which the Polish Government is still within the orbit of Soviet control and ideology. But hunger has never been a weapon of American foreign policy—and if we can score these “cold-war” advantages only by turning a deaf ear to Polish hunger and misery, then we will have won only a dubious “victory” at best. It is true, too, that we have thus far looked in vain for any Polish move to better relations between our nations—such as lifting those restrictions that make it difficult for Polish citizens to accept private gifts of food and other material from relatives and friends in this country. But these issues can never be settled satisfactorily if this nation refuses to negotiate on their requests to us. As a result of the systematic policy of economic and political exploitation the Russians have carried out within Poland in the last decade, the Polish people are extremely hard-pressed to maintain even a minimum standard of living. This economic problem is being accentuated by the fact that many thousands of Poles previously deported to Siberia are now returning to their native land homeless, hungry, destitute, and in poor health. I visited Poland less than two years ago,Kennedy visited Poland in September 1955. Documentation on this subject is ibid., 033.1100–KE. and I know first-hand of the population’s rejection of Communist philosophy. Poland may still be a satellite government—but the Poles are not satellite people. To deny them help because they have not been able to shake off total Communist control would be a brutal and dangerous policy, either increasing their dependence on Russia or driving them into the slaughter of a fruitless, premature revolt. Such assistance, of course, should contain the strongest possible safeguards to prevent its exploitation for political purposes by the Polish Government. Particular attention should be focused on those forms of assistance which will be of direct benefit to the Polish people, such as the shipment of surplus foodstuffs and the sale of farm machinery. I realize, of course, that international political considerations are involved here; but, important as these considerations are, they should not obscure the basic human values at stake. Sincerely yours, John F. Kennedy 240. Editorial Note At the 316th meeting of the National Security Council, March 14, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles briefed the Council on developments in Poland: “Dulles pointed out that Gomulka gave every appearance of putting the brakes on the anti-Stalinist liberalization movement in Poland. Gomulka’s moves were probably dictated by tactics, but there was danger that these tactics would cost him a large measure of popular support. Mr. Dulles indicated that Poland’s basic problem was still economic. Gomulka regards the current negotiations with the United States for assistance as of the utmost importance. If Poland received no assistance from the United States, Mr. Dulles predicted that the chances of survival for the Gomulka regime would be very slim indeed. In this contingency, Gomulka would be obliged to turn to the USSR for economic assistance denied him by the United States, and he would therefore be at the mercy of the Soviet Union.” (Memorandum of discussion by Gleason, March 15; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records) 241. Despatch From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 511.644/3–1857. Secret. Drafted by Nyerges. Budapest, March 18, 1957. No. 443 SUBJECT Comments on March 15 and Media Broadcasting The passing of March 15The anniversary of the 1848 Hungarian Revolution. For text of a statement issued by President Eisenhower, see Department of State Bulletin, April 1, 1957, p. 538. without a single shot being heard and with no demonstration of any kind reported calls for certain comments on Western radio’s role in similar future situations. The Legation does not know exactly what VOA, RFE, and BBC broadcast in regard to March 15. However, it has the impression that BBC attempted to give publicity to a stay-off-the-streets demonstration between 1400 and 1500 hours. RFE has been accused in the Hungarian press of having made constant references to MUKAccording to Joint Weeka 6 from Budapest, February 8, the greeting MUK stood for the initials of the slogan “In March we start again.” (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00(W)/2–857) in recent broadcasts, but the Legation has not monitored RFE sufficiently to judge whether this accusation is true. VOA, as far as the Legation is aware, treated March 15 in a general, historical manner. The Legation believes that the outcome of March 15 reveals, above all, the falsity of regime propaganda assertions that when the Hungarian people are moved to anti-regime demonstrations they are moved by Western propaganda, primarily the radio media. In light of the results, the Legation also believes it behooves the media to exercise the utmost modesty when appraising their ability to guide or maneuver the Hungarian people into a desired direction. Apropos this caution, the Legation recalls seeing a Time magazine article in which RFE seemed to credit its broadcasts with a major role in shaping the fifteen-point student demands of last October, which included such matters as free elections and a multi-party political system. It borders on the fantastic to assert that any outside source supplied these ideas, which are the general inheritance of the West and well-known in Hungary. The clear fact is that there was considerable internal strength for the realization of these ideas, which was probably encouraged by the support it received in Hungarian-language broadcasts from the West. An amorphous internal will toward a March 15 demonstration was certainly present a number of weeks before the holiday. In face of the security build-up carried out by the Kadar regime and the Russians as March 15 approached, this would, had it persisted, have amounted to no more than dangerous willfulness. In any event the will was not present by zero hour, and it is most likely that even if the US media, presumably like the British, had publicized a silent demonstration, the results of March 15 would have been the same, namely: people would have gone about their normal business, shopping in stores, strolling with their children, sitting in parks, and working. The gauging of the internal will of the Hungarian people to specific overt acts against the regime will probably become increasingly difficult. However, it is too much to expect that they will support a dangerous action which is openly announced weeks ahead of time. They will in all probability take it for what it may have been meant to be on March 15, a phase in a war of nerves. Even those more audacious elements of the population who, if encouraged, might have been susceptible to irrational behavior on March 15 will probably now be swayed toward a game of waiting, in which timing with international events will form an important impetus to action. If this analysis is correct, any attempt by Western radio to stimulate a maneuver will almost certainly end in fiasco. Without detracting one bit from the news-carrying value of the media, it can safely be said that what the United States is and does means far more to the Hungarians than what it says. Until such time as the West feels it possible to give actual help to the Hungarian people in their fight or to create a more fluid European situation, it will almost certainly be the better part of wisdom for the media to refrain from giving the Hungarians advice (even concealed advice) in specific conditions of danger. The media, like the Hungarian people, have to live with the hard fact that the Soviet-supported Kadar regime has succeeded in gaining more surface control of the situation in Hungary than most observers would have thought possible a month or two ago. If the Department sees fit, it may wish to send processed copies of this despatch to MRC and PRU (2) Munich; to PAD and PRU Vienna; and to the United States Information Agency. N. Spencer BarnesChargé d’Affaires, a.i. 242. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Beam) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Poland Desk Files: Lot 61 D 77, Basic Statements re Poland. Secret. Drafted by Trivers. Washington, March 23, 1957. SUBJECT Current Status of the Gomulka Regime in Poland A current appraisal of the situation in Poland made by our Embassy in Warsaw (Embtel 1316, March 22)Telegram 1316 concluded that it would be in U.S. interest to extend moderate credits, especially agricultural surpluses, on an installment basis. (Ibid., Central Files, 748.00/3–2257) Beam described telegram 1316 as “an excellent report, with which we fully agree” in calling it to Dillon’s attention. (Memorandum from Beam to Dillon, March 23; ibid., EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, Basic Preliminary Documents, #1) and by the Department together with the CIAThis joint paper, dated March 22, concluded: “While the Gomulka regime, as a result of some of its more recent actions, may appear less ‘liberal’ than initially, nevertheless so long as the Gomulka forces remain in effective control of the Polish Communist Party, the Polish regime, in our opinion, will continue to seek as much independence as it can in its relations with the USSR.” (Ibid.) has resulted in the following conclusions: 1. The basic elements of Gomulka regime policy remain substantially unchanged since last December when the finding was made that Poland had achieved a relative degree of independence from Soviet control and domination and hence could be regarded as a “friendly nation” under Section 107, PL 480. 2. While there have been variations in various aspects of the general situation in Poland, there has been no significant alteration. Poland still has a relatively high degree of independence in domestic affairs, while it maintains only limited deviation from the Soviet bloc countries on foreign policy. 3. There has been no significant reversion to the situation before establishment of the Gomulka regime last October. All the major measures deviating from Soviet-approved practice continue in force, e.g. decollectivization in agriculture, workers councils, the church-state agreement, cessation of jamming, limited revival of private enterprise, a modicum of press freedom. 4. Press reports that Polish liberalization processes are undergoing recession have been misleading. Gomulka has been reining in some party editors who tended to allow discussion to go considerably beyond the limits of the regime’s program. 5. Despite the retention of Deputy Prime Minister Zenon Novak and other leading Stalinists, there has been a continuing reduction in the number of Stalinists holding key posts. 6. Even in foreign affairs, the Poles continue to show some independence in preserving cordial relations with Yugoslavia and indicating continued reserve regarding the Soviet intervention in Hungary. Gomulka’s March 15 message to the Hungarian press was not so different from previous messages;According to telegram 1316 (see footnote 2 above), Gomulka said: “Polish nation has witnessed with profound sympathy recent tragedy Hungarian nation—at moment when peoples of Hungary were entering road towards redressing past errors—counter-revolutionary force undertook mad attempt overthrow socialist structure”. he has still not given personal endorsement to Kadar or expressed appreciation for the role of the Soviet troops in Hungary. 7. The Gomulka regime has maintained its efforts to re-orient its trade to the West and to seek economic assistance outside the Soviet bloc. 8. The USSR appears to be tolerating the Polish deviation watchfully, while trying to isolate and undermine it. 9. The Gomulka regime continues to represent the most important development in the Soviet bloc, since Tito’s expulsion in 1948, in the direction of U.S. national interests. 243. Despatch From the Legation in Romania to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.66/3–2757. Secret; Limited Distribution; No Distribution Outside Department. Bucharest March 27, 1957. No. 417 SUBJECT Conference with Foreign Minister PreoteasaGrigore Preoteasa. March 26, 1957 On Monday February 25th, I called Mr. Caius Frantescu, the Chief of Protocol, to discuss with him the matter of travel regulations, with particular reference to the question as to whether Lt. Col. K. G. TaylorLieutenant Colonel Kenneth G. Taylor, U.S. Army Attaché. would be able to motor through the Oradea district on his way out to Vienna to meet his wife who was returning from a protracted illness in the United States. In the course of this conversation, I casually mentioned that sometime when convenient I would like to see the Foreign Minister and have a general discussion with him about U.S.-Rumanian relations. I said that I hadn’t had a chat with him since he had left before Christmas for the United Nations meetings, and that although there was no great rush I would appreciate the chance of talking to him. A few days later, at a moving picture showing at the Diplomatic Club sponsored by our Legation, Mr. Frantescu volunteered the information that he had already spoken to the Foreign Minister about a meeting with us. Two days later he called me to say that the Foreign Minister was very sorry he had not been able to see me that week but he would surely do so sometime during the coming week. Thereafter about ten days went by with no word whatsoever, and I therefore called Mr. Frantescu, who said he had no answer but would pursue the matter. Another week went by, and I finally called again and said that although several weeks before when I first requested an appointment I had been in no special hurry, time had sped by with no results, and now certain matters began to be pressing. Mr. Frantescu replied that he was constantly reminding the Minister of my request and had been insisting that an appointment be made. (It should be noted that this is the first time that I have ever had to wait more than three or at most five days to get an appointment with the Foreign Minister.) It was at the beginning of the fourth week since I had requested an appointment that I met Mr. Frantescu in the gallery of the Chamber of the Grand National Assembly on the occasion of its recent meeting. I at once reminded him that it was now three weeks since I had made my original request, and that I had always understood that international diplomatic usage gave a Minister the right to demand to see the Foreign Minister, which the latter could not refuse. Mr. Frantescu led me aside away from eavesdroppers and said that he frankly was personally very much embarrassed by the situation, and so was the Foreign Minister; but the latter had been told not to see me until the Rumanian Government had made an important decision regarding Rumanian-United States relations. The Minister was therefore powerless to do anything and, as I could well see, the Government at the moment was completely absorbed in the proceedings before the Grand National Assembly and nothing could be expected until they were over. I asked whether the decision involved something pleasant or unpleasant in our relations, and Mr. Frantescu replied that he hadn’t the slightest idea what it was all about. He stressed that he had had no business to tell me as much as he had, and he begged me to keep it very much to myself. Later on in the morning I again had him repeat what he had told me, and received another assurance that he had no inkling as to the nature of the so-called “decision.” Under the above circumstances the problem presented to the Legation was to determine what action, if any, could be taken to influence in any way the Rumanian Government in coming to this “decision”, in the absence of any clue as to what this decision was. Since no negotiations were at the moment pending on any question, the matter to be decided must, it would seem, necessarily be a question of whether the Rumanian Government should take some action either favorable or unfavorable towards the United States. The objective of favorable action would be to create a climate in which the United States would be disposed to grant export licenses for the materials which the Rumanian Minister is at present actively privately negotiating with various business concerns in the United States, notably in the chemical industry. The objective of unfavorable action would be to assist the Soviets, as had been done by other members of the bloc, in their campaign to show the world, particularly the masses in Asia and Africa, that espionage and subversion was back of the Hungarian revolt and that therefore their violent measures in Hungary were justified. In view of the tenor of not only press attacks but also the current speeches in the Grand National Assembly, particularly that of Prime Minister Stoica emphasizing U.S. espionage and calling for it to halt,In telegram 567 from Bucharest, March 22, Thayer indicated his belief that a formal protest should be lodged against the “unwarranted and false allegations” made by Romanian Prime Minister Chivu Stoica in his speech. (Department of State, Central Files, 766.13/3–2257) The Department of State replied to Thayer in telegram 331, March 25, that it was not “general practice to protest formally such propaganda charges.” (Ibid.) it appeared that unfavorable action was more likely since favorable action would seem anomalous in the existing climate. The unfavorable action most conforming to precedent in other countries of the Soviet bloc, and most logical as a denouement to all of the verbal accusations, would be the declaration of someone such as a Military Attaché as Persona Non Grata and his expulsion. It has been my personal experience since I have been here that the most effective attitude to adopt towards the Communist regime is a combination of personal friendliness and official firmness and severity. In personal relations they have, all of them, a definite inferiority complex, and they respond to personal warmth with a certain amount of surprise and eagerness. This is particularly true in this country where even the top members of the hierarchy are Latins and Western in their orientation. On the other hand, they understand hard dealing and respect it, and I have never failed to get action as a result of extreme firmness to the point of almost violence on a matter where it was clear that the United States had a justifiable case. I therefore determined to carry out a campaign on this basis covering the few days remaining before the end of the Grand National Assembly Meeting, after which it could be expected that the “decision” would come up for consideration. This campaign consisted of visiting the Chamber of the Grand National Assembly daily and making myself as agreeable as possible personally to every official of the Rumanian Government that I knew, as well as to the members of the Eastern Diplomatic corps, particularly the Soviet Ambassador. A moving picture at my residence was organized for children of the diplomatic corps and to it there were invited the children of some Eastern diplomats, the first social invitations extended since the Hungarian revolt. An invitation was issued through Protocol several days later for a moving picture showing and dinner to a group of Rumanian musicians. On a Sunday excursion on which I invited a Rumanian, whom I have reason to believe reports conversations with me regularly to the Government, I took pains to explain that unfortunately relations between our two countries were so sensitive at the moment that any unpleasant action by the Rumanians might have the result of seriously affecting any pending business negotiations being carried on by the Minister in the United States, as well as my own position here. I also dropped hints of the same nature casually in passing with Rumanian officials with whom I came in contact. Finally, on Monday, March 25th, the day following the end of the Grand National Assembly, I called Mr. Frantescu and told him that now the situation regarding my appointment with the Foreign Minister had reached a stage where it was becoming a very serious matter. I emphasized that if I had to report to my government that I as a Minister was unable to see the Foreign Minister I could not be at all sure that they would not come to the conclusion that under these circumstances there was not much point in the United States having a Minister in Bucharest. Mr. Frantescu said he would convey this message to the Foreign Minister. About four hours later I received word that the Foreign Minister would see me at 1800 on March 26th. Later that day at the reception given by the Greek Ambassador on the occasion of the Greek National Holiday, Mr. Frantescu confided to me that my message had had immediate and most successful results. The Foreign Minister upon receiving it had gone immediately to see the Government (a phrase used by Rum officials to indicate the Politburo) and had remained with them three hours even though he had had no prior engagement with them. Upon his return, he had asked to have me advised that the appointment was set for 1800 on the next day. I asked if the “decision” had been made and whether it was favorable or unfavorableThe words “favorable” and “unfavorable” were underlined and the following appears in the margin: “what’s with this favorable unfavorable stuff!” and he said he did not know. At the same reception, I was greeted cordially by the Foreign Minister who referred to our pending meeting and apologized for the delay, saying that he had been very busy lately. I had a friendly non-political conversation with him. I was also greeted in a friendly if somewhat less cordial fashion than usual by Prime Minister Stoica who is customarily somewhat embarrassingly effusive in his greetings. The manner of these other Rumanian officials toward me at this reception made it quite evident that a decision unfavorable to the United States had not been taken at the morning meeting with the Foreign Minister. It had either been deferred or else a decision had been made to take no action whatsoever. This was confirmed by the conference itself with the Foreign Minister. He was most affable and friendly throughout and more receptive to the proposals that I made than I have ever known him to be. The conference took place at 7:30 P.M. on March 26th at the Foreign Office with Mr. Gavril Gabor, the head of the United States desk in the Rumanian Foreign Office acting as interpreter. I opened the discussion by stating that between November 1955 and November 1956 I had worked very hard to try and improve the relations between our two countries and I felt that I had had some measure of success. I emphasized that progress in improving relations because of past experience must necessarily be very slow but at least we had been inching on. Then suddenly a volcano erupted in the shape of the Hungarian situation. I pointed out that it would be a complete waste of time for me to discuss the events in Hungary with the Foreign Minister since I knew from reading his speeches before the UN that he and I were in complete disagreement in the interpretation of these events, and although I subscribed to Mr. Voltaire’s views on the right of Mr. Preoteasa to have his own opinion, a debate on the subject at this time would serve no useful purpose. The important point, I believed, was to face realistically the situation as it exists today and try to find areas of agreement in which some kind of joint action that would tend to improve relations would be possible. I had several suggestions to make to this end. I then referred to the refusal to the Rumanian Government to permit American election observers to visit Rumania, although Rumanian observers had gone to the United States.On January 19, Romania refused to allow three observers from the United States to be present when national parliamentary elections took place on February 3, despite an agreement under which Romanian observers had come to the United States for the 1956 presidential election. See Department of State Bulletin, February 11, 1957, p. 213. I said that, on a reciprocal basis, it would seem appropriate that in exchange for the Rumanian visits there should be a visit to Rumania of three American specialists on education, political science, and chemical industrial matters. I also brought up the question of student exchanges and finally I handed to Mr. Preoteasa two copies of the publication, Amerika, pointing out that if it was possible for such a publication to be distributed within the Soviet Union at a time when obviously our relations with the USSR were not of the closest, it should also be possible to do the same thing in Rumania. I then said that there were several current pressing problems confronting the Legation that needed to be solved and that although each one of them in itself might seem insignificant, I considered their solution symbolic of Rumanian sincerity and good will in trying to improve our relations during this period. I said that first of all it had been agreed that there should be no limitation on our having a reasonable number of Legation employees in Bucharest and that I, personally, had gone to see the head of the ODCD over six months ago on the question of obtaining housing for new employees. I pointed out that three months ago we had been assured that there were two apartments that would be ready about the 15th of March, that they actually existed, and we even had gone so far as to discuss whether or not our employees would assist in making repairs. We had been assured this would not be necessary. Suddenly a few weeks ago, we were advised without prior warning that not only were these apartments not available but that it was doubtful if anything would be ready until the end of the year. I stressed that it would be impossible for me to retain Legation personnel indefinitely in a hotel and that this sudden refusal was tantamount to an act deliberately limiting the number of personnel the Legation could have. If this was done it would mean, of course, that the United States Government in Washington would be compelled to limit the personnel at the Rumanian Legation and we would then start in the same old ridiculous process of retaliatory measures which I deeply deplored. I then briefly described the case of Mrs. Kohn,Documentation concerning Helene Clepcea Kohn is in Department of State, Central Files, 266.1122–Kohn, Helene Clepcea. the last American citizen of American birth and upbringing who has not received an exit visa and also the cases of Vasile Charles Cionca, Maria Nanos and Georgeta Cotarla, as being cases deserving of immediate action by reason of their humanitarian elements. I mentioned the subject of tourism, pointing out that an American citizen visiting Rumania had been told by militiamen that no tourist visas would be issued this year to American citizen and said if this were true, it should be reported to American tourist agencies. Finally, I took up the question of the use of the United States Air Force plane, emphasizing that I had been told by the Chief of Protocol that I could use the plane in any way that I wished, that I had no desire to interfere with the income of the transportation sections of the Rumanian Government, but that the plane was most important for me and my staff in view of the great distances involved when travel was necessary for official or vacation purposes, particularly where children were involved. I said that all I wished was to be told exactly what the Rumanian position was on this subject. I pointed out that I would only require the plane for three or four trips out of Rumania and return each year and that once this permission had been granted by the Rumanian Government last year, I could see no basis for withdrawing it since certainly the privilege had not been abused. I closed with a statement that even though US-Rumanian relations had been going through a period of heavy weather I felt that there were plenty of opportunities for finding things to do which would be of mutual benefit and have at least a tendency to bring us back to where we had been last year. Mr. Gabor wrongly translated this last remark to indicate that I expected US-Rumanian relations to enter into a period of heavy weather in the future. The Prime Minister at once asked me in a rather startled manner what specifically I meant by this remark. I pointed out the error in translation and said that I referred to the current situation, not something that would happen in the future. I said that I had read Mr. Stoica’s speech and that I had been surprised to hear from him the same ridiculous propaganda about the United States being imperialistic and attempting to take over the whole world for the benefit of Wall Street bankers which I had been reading lately in the newspapers. I pointed out that I knew from my own personal contacts with the Rumanian people that none of this was having any effect upon them since they all realized it was as ridiculous as I did, but at least it would appear to indicate that at the moment the Rumanian Government did not have very friendly feelings toward the United States. The Foreign Minister started off by saying that he agreed that our relations had slowly improved during the last year. He hoped I was of course aware that this was a result of Rumanian efforts. They had tried to show the United States Government the real desire of the Rumanians to improve relations. Last fall this desire materialized in actual discussions.See Document 139. The Minister said he would like to recall that the Rumanians had hoped these discussions would be of a concrete, substantive character but the United States had insisted that they were nothing but preliminary talks. However, even this achieved some useful purpose and at least it was good to know each other’s intentions. The Rumanians wanted to discuss problems which, if relations are to be normal, have to be solved by the two governments. One of them was the problem of American claims and in this connection since the claims are American it was hard for the Rumanians to understand why we had not been prepared to present definite substantive amounts. The American Government in its turn wished to raise other problems which the Rumanians agreed to discuss. With regard to the present Rumanian position he pointed out that I had been able to listen to Mr. Stoica’s speech and he assumed that I had noticed the part where he had declared the conviction of the Rumanian Government that on the basis of principles of equality and mutual respect, normal and reciprocal relations can develop between our two countries. Mr. Preoteasa said that it was this thought that he wished to be a guide in his answer to the proposals that I had suggested. He also agreed that there was no point in discussing the period of last November. He did not want to talk about the propaganda made against the Rumanian Government which, of course, could not be accepted by the Rumanian people. He laid these matters aside with the aim and the wish that in order to improve relations we should try and find those things upon which we could agree. He said that I had expressed a wish to improve relations—the Rumanian Government had the same wish—let us now see how this can be achieved. He remarked that I had made certain proposals which I had referred to as symbolic of our desire to improve relations. These proposals will be studied. There are certain elements in them which the Foreign Minister considers as being on good, solid ground. Referring to the visit of United States specialists, he agreed thoroughly with the principles of mutual visits. He recalled that Rumanian specialists in chemistry had visited the United States and found it normal that correspondingly US chemical specialists should come over here. He could not give me an answer on any particular visit since this has to be studied by the Government, but he agreed completely with the principle. Later on, other similar visits should be developed. The Foreign Minister pointed out that last fall we stopped without any conclusion concerning our discussion of all of these problems. At that time the Rumanians had raised the question of solving United States financial claims, together with the general problem of commercial relations. The Rumanian Government sees in commercial relations an efficient means to improve collaboration and advance relations in general. Specifically, it was through commercial relations that they hoped to find a way to pay for United States claims since Rumania has not the money for such payments that is available to the United States. Rumania is a country with a young economy in the process of development. It is rich in resources and in order to improve the living standards of the Rumanian population they have to pay a great deal for the development of their national economy. It was, therefore, perfectly normal that when they wanted to pay the United States the debts which they owed them they should look for a way of doing so. Mr. Preoteasa pointed out that the United States had never told the Rumanian Government what we thought about this proposal and of whether it could be solved in a commercial manner. He stressed that simply to explore the question is not enough and that they were desirous of finding effective means of definitely solving the problem. Perhaps if it could not be solved immediately through commercial relations, it would be possible for the United States to extend a long term loan to Rumania in order that she could pay her debts. Since the United States has millions of dollars to spend, why should not some of this money be used in this manner? In the Foreign Minister’s opinion, we should re-examine certain parts of the discussion during the autumn conference. It seemed absurd if the United States had claims against Rumania that these claims should not be discussed and an effective solution found to the problem of paying them. With regard to the publishing of a Rumanian magazine in America and an American magazine in Rumania, the Rumanian Government wished the United States people to know Rumania and its people as they are, the efforts of the Rumanian people to gain a better life and a higher culture. The opposite, of course, is equally valid, namely, that the Rumanian people should know the American people, their life, their culture, their achievements. For this purpose there exists various ways and means and we wished to choose those which are based on mutual considerations. The magazine which I propose is a very nice looking one made on good paper with excellent printing and workmanship. The material in the magazine is not controversial but deals with appropriate subjects. However, it should be pointed out that everything that is valid between the United States and the USSR is not equally valid between the United States and Rumania. Perhaps the USSR has the means to make a magazine of this quality and distribute it within the United States but the Foreign Minister was rather skeptical on this point. In any event, the matter would be studied. Mr. Preoteasa went on to mention that an exchange of exhibits should be seriously considered and other forms of exchanging reciprocal information concerning our countries. He noted in the magazine an article on an American tenor. Why should the tenor not come himself instead of being presented on paper in a magazine? On the question of tourism, there is no reason this should not continue to be developed provided there is a clear understanding between the travel agencies of the two countries. The Foreign Minister pointed out that Rumania was only in the beginning of its development of tourism. Housing is a basis for tours and it is the one thing which Rumania lacks. Its means are very restricted in this line. In this connection he wanted to emphasize that there was no intention whatsoever on the part of the Rumanian Government to limit Legation personnel by denying it housing. The housing situation was a serious and difficult one in Rumania but the Foreign Minister promised to look into this matter immediately. The Foreign Minister said that in this answer he was giving me it was necessary to realize that underlying it was the spirit in which the Rumanian people looked on things and he hoped he had been sufficiently clear in expressing it. What the Rumanian Government wanted was that on the basis of certain principles of equality, respect for the Rumanian way of life, Rumanian laws and respect for the American way of life, and American laws, the Rumanian Government should improve and develop these relations with the United States. He hope that these things should be only a tiny part of the great work of the improvement of general international relations throughout the world. Rumania is a much smaller country than the United States but the Rumanian people are proud people and love their country, its independence, and its development. The problem is how to make the Rumanian people known in the world. They are not always understood. The main wish of the Rumanian Government is that Rumania should progress on the road of well-being and many sided development. The Foreign Minister closed by saying that close attention will be given to the various Legation problems I had brought up and he assured me that the earliest possible answer to them would be forthcoming. This is one of the few conferences I have ever had with the Foreign Minister when at some point or another he did not raise strong objection to United States actions. I received the very definite impression that at least so far as he himself was concerned, he was most anxious to have things restored to the same basis that they were before. It is obvious that the economic situation is predominant in his mind and I have the feeling that anything that we ask for or suggest will be examined by the Rumanian Government to see if it cannot be turned into something which will redound to their economic advantage. By the same token, I believe that we should have them in mind in considering things that we may desire to obtain from the Rumanian Government. It should not be difficult for us to get them to agree to doing things for us in return for something economically beneficial to them and their need is so great that we should be able to get a great deal in return for very little if we so desire. What the “decision” contemplated by the Rumanian Government as related to me by Mr. Frantescu was we shall probably never know. I am convinced that it was not merely a device advanced by Mr. Frantescu to cover the Foreign Minister’s failure to make an appointment with me. It is interesting to speculate as to whether at the reported three hour meeting between the Foreign Minister and the Government prior to the fixing of a date for our meeting there was discussion concerning the effect of unfavorable action against us on the prospects of future economic dealings with the United States. It is always impossible to assess accurately the effects of psychological warfare and in this case whether the brief campaign carried on to try and forestall unfavorable action had any influence on the situation is questionable in the extreme. However, I continue to believe that United States interests and objectives can best be advanced in Rumania by a tactful combination of personal friendliness and very severe and firm official relations with the Rumanian officials. Robert H. Thayer 244. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks—Basic Preliminary Documents, #1. Secret. Drafted by Dillon and concurred in by E, OFD, ITR, L/E, EUR, EE, and in substance by U/MSA. Also sent to the Under Secretary of State. Washington, March 28, 1957. SUBJECT Aid to Poland Problem Before we can proceed with the Polish discussion it is necessary for the Department to determine its position on the level of assistance to Poland. Discussion A recent appraisal by EUR, concurred in by R and CIA, indicates that there has been no change in the basic Polish situation since your “friendly nation” finding last December (Tab A).Reference is to the memorandum from Beam to Dillon, March 23; see footnote 3, Document 242. The Poles have requested aid approximating $300,000,000. Their requests, covering cotton, fats, wheat, coal-mining machinery and certain other items are set forth in Tab B.None of the tabs is printed. A condensed statement of the Polish economic situation and the new Polish economic policies in relation to U.S. aid appears at Tab C. The Polish economic situation is serious. Poland is moving in the right direction—toward internal economic freedom and away from its heavy dependence on the Soviet Bloc. The Poles have stated that the U.S.S.R. now pays the entire cost of its troop support in Poland. There is relatively widespread press support for U.S. help to Poland (Tab D). You had earlier authorized aid offers of $25,000,000 ($15,000,000 under P.L. 480 and $10,000,000 under Section 401 of the Mutual Security Act). It is the opinion of our negotiators and of Embassy Warsaw, in which I concur, that the $25 million previously authorized will be inadequate to achieve the political objectives which we seek. Embassy Warsaw feels, however, that as much as $75,000,000 would be on the generous side and that less could be given (Tab E).These recommendations were incorporated in telegram 1333 from Warsaw, March 26, which concluded by emphasizing the “desirability of ‘keeping our hand on the faucet’”. On the basis of Poland’s record over the past decade, the Embassy believed that the Polish request for $300 million and the possibility that a lesser amount might be rejected was “almost beyond comprehension.” (Telegram 1346 from Warsaw, March 27; Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/3–2757) My judgment is that any amount lower than $50,000,000 in direct assistance would be a severe disappointment to the Poles, would not help in achieving our objectives and might well be considered money wasted. Taking all views into consideration I would recommend a program of direct assistance of $50–$65 million, of which $25,000,000 would come from P.L. 480 and $25–$30 million in dollar loans from Section 401. In addition, we should attempt to negotiate trilateral deals with Western Germany to finance surplus agricultural commodities to Poland on the basis of a credit to Germany by our Commodity Credit Corporation.On February 11, German Ambassador Heinz L. Krekeler informed the Secretary of State that Germany wished to supply grain to Poland but would need U.S. surplus grain to substitute for that shipped to Poland. (Memorandum of conversation by Jacques J. Reinstein; ibid., 748.5–MSP/2–1157) In an aide-mémoire dated February 12, Germany noted that if the U.S. Government agreed, “the forthcoming American-Polish negotiations could be helpful in including the Federal Republic in three-cornered trade arrangements or using her as a transit country.” (Memorandum prepared in the Department of State entitled “Economic Talks with Poland”, enclosed with a letter from Kalijarvi to the Assistant Secretary of Agriculture, Earl L. Butz, February 19; ibid., 748.5–MSP/2–1957) If trilaterals are feasible, they might range from $10,000,000 to $30,000,000 depending on discussions with Germany. Tentative estimates of commodities which could be furnished under the present $25 million authorization and under the proposed enlarged authorization of $55 million are given in Tab F. Both authorizations envisage mainly agricultural commodities for consumption, chiefly in 1957, plus some of the Polish requests for coal-mining and agricultural machinery. The trilaterals through Germany would be mostly for cotton, but possibly also a small amount of wheat to meet current deficits. Information on Polish credit negotiations with other Western countries—so far very modest—appears at Tab G. What we do will undoubtedly influence future possibilities. These recommendations have not yet been discussed with the other agencies on the U.S. delegation (Agriculture, Commerce, and ICA) because we wished your prior approval of the general lines of the program. Agriculture will undoubtedly agree to the increase in P.L. 480 funds and to trilateral arrangements. The full $30,000,000 which we recommend from Section 401 are not now available in ICA and would require transfers from unused military assistance funds. To achieve any substantial increase in Section 401 funds will presumably require the personal intervention of the Under Secretary with Mr. Hollister and possibly with Defense. Recommendations 1. That you approve an increase from $15 million to $25 million (the present limit under existing appropriations) of funds for supplying agricultural commodities under Title I of P.L. 480 to meet Poland’s most urgent agricultural requirements. 2. That you approve an increase of $10 million to $30 million (the legal limit) of funds under Section 401 of the Mutual Security Act to be used for the purpose of opening a line of credit to Poland, to be payable in dollars on terms to be agreed for Polish purchases in the United States of coal-mining machinery, agricultural machinery, fertilizers and possibly some agricultural or other items. 3. That you authorize the Department to take the position with ICA that the Section 401 loan referred to above not be treated as an ICA loan but that it be serviced by the Export-Import Bank and conform closely to Eximbank procedures. This would be acceptable to the President of the Bank. 4. That you approve an immediate approach to the Federal Republic of Germany urging it to agree in principle to finance from $10 million to $30 million of surplus United States agricultural commodities to Poland on the basis of credits made available by the Commodity Credit Corporation.On March 29 Dulles initialed his approval of all recommendations. In recommendation 2, however, he reduced the figure from $30 million to $25 million and crossed out “(the legal limit)”. He also wrote in the margin: “Subject to ICA views, when it is involved”. 245. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Young) and the Polish Representative at the United Nations (Michalowski), Washington, April 2, 1957Source: Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/4–257. Confidential. Drafted by Young. Washington, April 2, 1957 SUBJECT U.S. Polish Aid Negotiations Ambassador Michalowski, with whom I discussed various matters from time to time during the recent session of the General Assembly, called me today to ask me to lunch with him which I accepted, inviting him to my home for my convenience. It became clear at the beginning of his conversation that he wished to discuss the negotiations with the U.S. on aid to Poland in order to impress on me the concern of the Poles. The Ambassador said he was extremely depressed and pessimistic over the long delays and the relatively small amount which he understood the U.S. negotiators were considering offering to Poland. The Ambassador stated emphatically that he knew his government could not and would not accept an offer of $30 to $50 million.The Secretary discussed the question of aid to Poland in a press conference on April 2. For text, see Department of State Bulletin, April 22, 1957, p. 646. After commenting that the Poles were highly gratified over the reaction in the American press and even in Congress to the desirability of aid to Poland, he said that he was afraid the American side might not fully understand the very great political implications of adequate U.S. assistance. He hastened to add that he was not criticizing the State Department but only taking into account the fact that the Polish negotiators were technicians and refrained from emphasizing political arguments. To justify large-scale U.S. assistance to Poland from the Polish political point of view Ambassador Michalowski made the following points: 1. The Polish Government and the elements supporting it cannot take the political risk of accepting a small loan from the United States without compensating economic advantages which such a loan would lack. It would expose the regime to serious attacks from the “conservative Communist” elements and the Soviets. It would also be interpreted by the Polish population as an American rebuff or lack of confidence. 2. Substantial economic assistance is needed to facilitate the structural changes in the Polish economy to move away from the old-style Stalinist regime. For example, sufficient wheat is required in order to terminate the system of compulsory deliveries. While there is enough bread in Poland, the margin of stocks is so low that the end of compulsory delays might cause difficulties. Sufficient stocks are needed by the state to meet any emergency and at the same time permit a new system to take hold. 3. Of long-range significance is Poland’s need to end economic dependency on the U.S.S.R. This cannot be done unless the U.S. provides sufficient cotton, wheat, machinery and other materials to replace Soviet goods. The Ambassador pointed out that Poland is now totally dependent on the U.S.S.R. for cotton and iron ore, and also needs wheat. Under such conditions the Soviets can apply economic pressures to slow down and divert the Polish revolution. The Soviet Government is using this leverage now. If the economic situation further deteriorates, its pressure could bring about undesirable political consequences in Poland. 4. As far as he could see, there is no other national leader at present but Gomulka. If he fails or is forced out, there will be nothing but “Nihilism” and disaster. Gomulka has to make some compromises, and developments in Poland will go zigzag for awhile until the situation straightens out. However, the Ambassador emphasized that we should remember the people of Poland have given Gomulka only a “short term credit” to improve their lot. The economic situation is the real challenge. If Gomulka cannot master this with suitable outside help, the alternatives might be either the return of the Natolin group or another Hungary with its consequence for Europe and the United States. 5. Protracted negotiations in Washington are now beginning to play into the hands of the Natolin group. The Ambassador said that this was to him the real danger in the situation and the reason for his pessimism. He claimed that there were now indications that this group is beginning to take advantage of the delays to spread the idea the U.S. was much less reliable support for Poland than the Soviet Union. According to the Ambassador, the Natolin group now has the Soviet-Hungarian economic agreement to cite as purported proof of Soviet generosity compared with American.Telegram 806 from Budapest, April 2, summarized the March 28 Soviet-Hungarian communiqué which spelled out Soviet economic assistance following Kádár’s trip to the Soviet Union. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.6461/4–257) The Ambassador seemed very disturbed that the Kadar regime had been able to obtain roughly $200 million worth in rubles and free currency for Hungary while Poland after weeks and even months was still unable to reach an agreement with the U.S. If the U.S. offers only $30 million, the comparison with Hungary would be a severe blow to the Gomulka regime. The Ambassador urged that we fully understand the necessity of doing everything to circumvent the Natolin group which he claimed is still powerful, seeking Gomulka’s downfall and is receiving considerable secret support from the Soviet Union. I commented only to the effect that I had nothing to do with Polish affairs or the aid negotiations, as he well knew, but that I thought something might be worked out if his government would be patient and understand the problems from our side, as I was sure American officials were trying to understand theirs. I also emphasized to him the real difficulties we have in our legislation and procedures in meeting a considerably different situation than what we are used to in the aid field, that is furnishing assistance to a Communist state formally allied to the Soviet Union. He said he thought his people fully understood these difficulties. However, he was concerned as to whether the U.S. fully grasped all the implications of aid to Poland from the Polish point of view. He said that he had the impression that State Department officials were well informed and understood what was going on in Poland, but wondered whether or not there was a general appreciation in the U.S. Government of what the Polish Government is facing.Polish Ambassadors Spasowski and Michalowski met with Murphy on April 3 and April 9 to discuss the issue of U.S. aid to Poland. They expressed again Poland’s need and desire for U.S. aid. (Memorandum of conversation by Trivers, April 3; ibid., 748.5–MSP/4–357 and memorandum of conversation by Murphy, April 9; ibid., 748.5–MSP/4–957) At the Secretary’s Staff Meeting on April 9, Kalijarvi described the prospects of reaching agreement with Poland as dim. (Ibid., Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75) 246. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Dulles) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks—Basic Preliminary Documents, # 1. Secret. Washington, April 15, 1957. SUBJECT Political Consequences of US Economic Assistance to Poland 1. Acceptance by Poland of a US offer of economic assistance on the order of $80–90 million would probably have important political consequences within Poland, with respect to Soviet policy toward Poland, and potentially within the other European Satellites. Poland 2. The Polish population, which is overwhelmingly anti-Communist, would be encouraged to persist in the political attitudes which emerged openly last summer and fall. US assistance would be taken as a tangible evidence of American support for Polish efforts gradually to reduce Soviet influence in Polish affairs. Assistance of $80–90 millionThe Polish press would almost certainly report and discuss the volume of assistance in terms of its value at world market prices. Any US attempt to evaluate it in higher prices would therefore produce negative effects in Poland. [Footnote in the source text.] would disappoint original expectations of a much higher amount, but this effect would be partially offset if the US government indicated that the chances were good for further assistance in subsequent years. Popular reaction would in any event be favorable to the US and to the West in general, although this would be limited to some extent if, as present plans envisage, about one third of the total were channeled through the West Germans. The adverse effects of West German involvement would be reduced if additional West European states participated as well. 3. An assistance agreement would considerably strengthen Gomulka’s position within Poland. To the population, it would indicate his ability to deal effectively with the West as well as the East and hold out some promise of the reestablishment of fruitful relationships with the West. It would also be taken as an indication that, contrary to the impression created by some recent measures, Gomulka desires to preserve and expand the area of independent action which he extorted from the USSR in October, and that he has a good chance of success. 4. Within the Polish Communist Party, Gomulka would probably attract new support from both dissident wings. While some Soviet-oriented Communists would regard economic assistance from the US as confirmation of their fears concerning Gomulka’s innovations, many orthodox party members who have heretofore remained aloof would probably regard it as a gain for Poland and would therefore view Gomulka’s leadership more approvingly. In the opposite wing of the party, which seeks more rapid liberalization, extremists would remain dissatisfied, but many others would applaud the agreement and increase their support for Gomulka. Most important, Gomulka might gain the allegiance of a large number of party rank and file who are apparently thus far uncommitted to any group. 5. The size and composition of proposed US assistance would not produce dramatic results in the Polish economy, but it would assist Gomulka in his attempts to raise living standards and to liberalize Poland’s economic structure, particularly its agricultural system. The US proposal includes fertilizer to increase agricultural yields, fats and oils to enrich the feeding program for animal production, and cotton and textile machinery which would directly contribute to the improvement of consumer goods production. Grain shipments, offered by the US, taken by themselves, would permit a reduction of compulsory deliveries levied on the Polish peasants. The proposed US shipments are not substitutes for deliveries which the USSR is now making to Poland, nor is the USSR likely to increase its shipments as a result of the denial of US aid. The US program would make no direct contribution to the Soviet Bloc’s military capabilities. 6. In any case, acceptance of US assistance would not change Gomulka’s basic Communist orientation. He is at present concerned chiefly with the implementation of his original program rather than its extension through further measures of liberalization. US assistance would, however, improve his chances of consolidating his recent gains. The USSR 7. The Soviet press has let it be known that the USSR regards the prospect of US economic assistance to Poland with deep misgivings. Nevertheless, it is quite unlikely that Polish acceptance of the US proposal would precipitate a drastic Soviet counter-action. The deterrents to such action have restrained the USSR in several instances more provocative than the present one, and would almost certainly continue to do so in this case. The Polish request for US assistance indicates that Gomulka has similarly estimated the Soviet reaction, and he may even have secured the USSR’s permission in advance. 8. In addition to its capabilities for drastic action, the USSR can exert great influence on Polish policy on a graduated basis, not only by political means but also in the sphere of economic and military relations. If an assistance agreement is signed with the US, the USSR might stiffen its attitude toward Poland in these areas, although it would be concerned that, with a basis for US-Polish cooperation already laid, such a policy might rapidly strengthen this cooperation. The more that US statements link American assistance with increasing Polish independence from the USSR, the more likely are the Soviet leaders to increase their pressure upon Gomulka. Statements of Polish leaders subsequent to signing an assistance agreement would probably lay great stress on friendship for the USSR in an attempt to reassure Moscow that Poland had not been “bought” by the West and to forestall any increased Soviet pressure.An unsigned memorandum from Armstrong to Secretary Dulles, dated April 18, noted general agreement with this memorandum, but described its evaluation of the Soviet reaction to U.S. aid as “incomplete.” Armstrong indicated that he was aware of only one “equivocal” comment on the subject in the Soviet press. He also suggested that the memorandum overlooked “Moscow’s willingness to adjust to a limited increase in Polish-American economic ties” and “Moscow’s willingness to deal more equitably with Poland employing the carrot as well as the stick”. (Department of State, Poland Desk Files: Lot 61 D 77, Economic Aid) The European Satellites 9. Assistance to Poland in the proposed amount would probably encourage many in the Satellite countries to hope for a day of greater independence. Overtly, however, the popular manifestations of this would be slight, and any immediate political consequences would be unlikely. The results would be more substantial among the Satellite Communist parties. Here the image of Western enmity, an important factor in maintaining internal party unity and the sense of dependence upon the USSR, would be blurred. Nationalist elements within these parties would be encouraged to argue for a similar course in their own countries. While their chances for influence are quite small in the present phase of Soviet policy, over the long run their activities would probably weaken party unity and thereby increase Soviet difficulties. Consequences of Failure To Conclude an Agreement 10. Because the issue of American assistance to Poland has been raised and negotiations have begun, failure to consummate an agreement would probably have serious political consequences. Within Poland, popular hopes for higher living standards and greater political independence would suffer a setback, although they would probably not be destroyed. Gomulka’s prestige among the population would diminish, and Soviet-oriented elements within the Polish Communist party would probably gain a substantially greater voice than they now have. 11. The Soviet leaders would probably calculate that Poland was rendered less able to resist Soviet pressure. With his bases of domestic support weakened, Gomulka would probably be forced into greater reliance upon the USSR and would be less able to resist its demands than he is at present. While Poland would not immediately resume the status of her Satellite neighbors, pressures to move in this direction would increase significantly. Under these circumstances, and with economic improvement held back by the absence of Western assistance, the chances for popular disorders would be increased. 12. Elsewhere in Eastern Europe, Satellite populations would tend to link the failure of assistance negotiations with Western conduct in the Hungarian crisis and to conclude that it was hopeless to expect concrete Western help against their regimes. Nationalists in the Satellite Communist parties would be discouraged about the prospects for eventual greater independence from the USSR and would play a lesser role in party affairs. Allen W. Dulles 247. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks—Basic Preliminary Documents, #1. Secret. Drafted by John M. Leddy; concurred in by E, ITR, OFD, EUR, BNA, EE, U/MSA, and L/E. Washington, April 16, 1957. SUBJECT U.S. Position on Polish Aid The economic discussions with Poland now hinge on whether the United States can meet the hard core of the Polish requests. Their original requests have been brought down to the lowest level of assistance which would appear necessary to enable the Polish regime to move forward soon with its internal economic reforms and make a beginning on inceasing coal exports to the West. In particular, the level of our aid will determine whether the new regime will be able to tell the Polish farmers—about half the population—that the present system of compulsory farm deliveries to the State will be ended.Ambassador Spasowski called on Acting Secretary Herter on April 15 and stressed the importance of this point. (Memorandum of conversation by Trivers; ibid., Central Files, 748.5–MSP/4–1557) An estimate of the political consequences of aid to Poland, signed by the Director of CIA and dated April 15, is at Tab A.Supra. Original Polish Request The Poles originally asked for about $300,000,000 in long-term credits (not grants) for cotton, fats, wheat, machinery and other products. The details are at Tab B.Tabs B, D, E, and F are not printed. This figure was based on the export value of agricultural commodities. At CCC costs, which are higher, the figure would be over $400,000,000. The Poles asked that this amount be financed under a long-term dollar credit from the Export-Import Bank, but this was out of the question because of the Battle Act.Leddy indicated in a memorandum to Dillon dated April 5, that the Poles wanted “to stay as far away from the mutual security program as possible” because of “their neighbors”. Even if the source of the funds was Section 401, they preferred that it come through the Export-Import Bank rather than ICA. (Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/4–555) U.S. Offer As approved by you (Tab C)See Document 244. we replied by offering a complicated package of P.L. 480 funds, Sec. 401 funds and CCC triangular credits through West Germany totaling $60–$80 million. Within this range we pressed the Poles to state the relative priorities which they attached to their various commodity requests. The Poles pointed out that if our offer were to stand unchanged, that would mean that they could realize only some $38–$40 million in actual commodities at export prices. Briefly, the reasons for this were that (1) the Poles primarily because of political problems could not use the $30 million of CCC triangulars through West Germany and (2) the $25 million of P.L. 480 funds was worth only $15–$17 million if used for wheat or cotton. These points are elaborated at Tab D. Also, transport costs—several million dollars—would have to be deducted. New Polish Proposal The Polish Delegation has put forward as a counterproposal substantially the U.S. aid package (i.e. about $81 million) but in terms of commodities at export prices and to be handled entirely under P.L. 480 and Section 401, plus $10–$15 million for transportation costs. At the same time, they agreed to our proposal to buy back, for dollars, such local currencies (zlotys) as the U.S. does not use for its own purposes after a period of five years, the payments to be made gradually. Thus, any P.L. 480 deals with Poland would be substantially harder than those we have with other countries. The Polish counterproposal would furnish them 500,000 tons of wheat (half of their proposed reserve), 50,000 tons of cotton (their 1957 consumption deficit plus half of their proposed cotton reserve), about one-third of their requests for fats and oils to be used for current consumption ($10,000,000), and a small amount of drilling equipment for coal mines ($4,000,000 as against their original request of $46,000,000). The Poles state they could move forward on this basis provided that we would state our willingness to consider further requests later in the year. However, in the coming months they would try to obtain some CCC exporter credits directly from private U.S. exporters and banks. To the extent that they succeed presumably further requests from us would be reduced. Canadian Objections Meanwhile, we have informed the Canadian government that the Poles have made wheat an essential and urgent part of their revised request for assistance. The Canadians object vigorously, claiming that any wheat shipments by the U.S. to Poland on a concessional or long-term credit basis will hurt future Canadian sales. Embassy Ottawa’s cables on this are at Tab E. Canada has itself just sold Poland 450,000 tons on a short-term (2–3 year) credit. We have asked Canada to join us in extending long-term credits for a Polish wheat reserve but so far they are unwilling. We have made it clear that our sole interest in the Polish situation is political, not commercial. We have pointed out that the wheat reserve is necessary if the compulsory farm delivery system is to be abolished, and that this is of great political importance. At our urging, the Poles have agreed to give assurances to Canada on future purchases of Canadian wheat. Senator Humphrey has let us know that there will be trouble if we refuse to provide wheat to Poland because of Canadian pressure. A further approach at a high level, as recommended by Ambassador Merchant in the telegram at Tab E, should be made to the Canadians to impress upon them the necessity of supplying wheat for the Polish reserve, and to ask them to consider seriously whether they could not join with the U.S. in extending long-term credits to the Polish government for this purpose. Conclusions I believe we should meet the new Polish request, which represents a strong effort by the Polish delegation to come close to our offer. In commodity terms their proposal is not too far away from the $80 million which we offered and which has found substantial public support. Although we would need some $92 million in P.L. 480 funds for the purpose, the actual P.L. 480 agreement would be recorded in export values at $65 million in actual commodities at export prices and $14 million in transportation necessary to move this volume, or a total of $95 million. An illustrative table is at Tab F. We are in better shape now with the Congress than we were at the start. At our recent consultation on Polish aid with the Senate Foreign Relations subcommitteeA memorandum of this conversation of April 11 by Kalijarvi is in Department of State, Poland Desk Files: Lot 61 D 77, Economic Aid. Senator Knowland was silent while Senators Sparkman,Senator John Sparkman (D.–Alabama). MansfieldSenator Mike Mansfield (D.–Montana). and Humphrey spoke strongly in favor of adequate help to Poland. The vote in the Senate on deleting Section 304 of P.L. 480, which was widely (but incorrectly) thought to be a vote in favor of Polish aid, was 54–23.The vote was taken on April 1. Section 304 reads: “The President shall exercise the authority contained herein (1) to assist friendly nations to be independent of trade with the U.S.S.R. or nations dominated or controlled by the U.S.S.R. for food, raw materials and markets, and (2) to assure that agricultural commodities sold or transferred hereunder do not result in increased availability of those or like commodities to unfriendly nations.” We could not meet the Polish request without using the new P.L. 480 authorization which has passed the Senate but is still before the House. Nevertheless, it is essential that we not delay our negotiations any longer. With the approval of the Department of Agriculture, it would be possible to negotiate the larger amount on a conditional basis, it being understood that actual signature of the agreement would be held up until after the Congress had completed its actions. This course was suggested to us by Senator Sparkman in summing up the views of the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee during our Polish aid consultations. Recommendations 1. That you approve in principle: (a) An increase from $25 million to $30 million in Section 401 funds to cover transport costs other than those which would be financed by P.L. 480 (funds to be obtained from ICA or Defense). (b) An increase in P.L. 480 funds, with the approval of the Department of Agriculture, to the extent necessary to finance approximately $60 million in surplus commodities at export prices, and the transportation costs of $5,000,000 for that part of these commodities required to be shipped in U.S. flag vessels. (It being understood that any P.L. 480 agreement utilizing new authorizations would not be signed until the pending legislation has been approved by the Congress.) 2. That you authorize an immediate approach to the Canadian government at a high level to ask that they seriously consider joining us in supplying wheat for the Polish reserve, or if they are unwilling, to seek to persuade them not to press their objections to the U.S. proceeding with the arrangements now proposed. 3. That after these consultations have taken place with Canada, negotiations with the Poles be resumed on the basis of the authorizations set forth in 1, above.Dulles initialed his approval of the recommendations on April 18. The original sum of $25 million derived from MDAP funds under the provisions of Section 401(a). At the Secretary’s Staff Meeting on May 2, Herter discussed the additional funding with Hollister who agreed to approach the Department of Defense to secure from them the additional $5 million. (Department of State, Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75) 248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in PolandSource: Department of State, Central Files, 411.4841/4–2457. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Ottawa. Washington, April 24, 1957—6:11 p.m. 839. Polish proposal obtain 500,000 tons wheat from US through P.L. 480 and long-term Sec. 401 loans (Deptel 794)Telegram 794 to Warsaw, April 12, indicated that the Poles also hoped to obtain as much as $20 million worth of grain from the CCC, preferably via U.S. exporters and banks but, if this was impossible, then via triangular relationships. (Ibid., 411.4841/4–1257) has created problem in US-Canadian relations re wheat. Canada fears extension to Poland of US concessional program on wheat, even though aimed at building Polish grain reserves, will cut into Canada’s future market for current consumption. US-Polish arrangement comes at time when Canada exercised over US disposal programs elsewhere in world accompanied by build-up of excessive grain surpluses in Canada and prospect of declining wheat exports. View desirability avoiding further irritant US-Canada relations Dillon visited Ottawa over weekend consult with Minister Trade and Commerce Howe and others.The meeting took place on Saturday, April 20. Result was request by Canada that Poles be urged give them fairly specific and direct assurances on Poland’s imports of Canadian wheat for current consumption next two years. Canadians also indicated that while Canada not now able extend long-term credit to Poland for 300,000 tons of 800,000 ton reserve which would not be covered by proposal under negotiation between US and Poland, Canada might be in position to do so in fall of 1957 after Canadian elections.The election was scheduled for June 10. Polish delegation was informed of these developments yesterday.Memorandum of conversation by Kalijarvi, April 23, not printed. (Ibid., 748.5–MSP/4–2357) Replying, Kotlicki stated Spasowski and Michalowski had already made it clear to Canadian Embassy in Washington and to Canadian representative to UN that reserve stocks provided by US would not be used as substitutes for current consumption. Doubted that Polish government could go further. Unable predict imports in future because of possible variations in domestic output, which may well increase because of larger sowings arising from expectation that compulsory deliveries would be ended. Also, if specific commitments given Canada, other countries (e.g. USSR) might insist on similar assurances. Stated if US meant insist on specific commitment to Canada as condition US help this would create apprehension in Warsaw, which was very sensitive to “conditions”. Dillon stated not question of “conditions” but of working out cooperative arrangement acceptable to Poland and Canada which would be entirely consistent with statements already made by Poles re use of US wheat for reserve. Emphasized desirability direct conversations between Poland and Canada rather than indirectly through Canadian Embassy in Washington. Kotlicki stated he not authorized negotiate with Canada, Polish Embassy at Ottawa not staffed for this purpose and perhaps best channel would be Canadian Embassy at Warsaw. (However also stated that members Polish wheat delegation to Canada are still here—one in New York and two traveling in Canada.) Any case still doubted that assurances could go beyond those already communicated by Spasowski to Canadian Embassy in Washington. Matter left that Poles would communicate with Warsaw. Kotlicki stated he satisfied that US not insisting on “conditions”. Did not comment on possibility obtaining long-term credit from Canada in fall. FYI Canadian Embassy Washington informs us Polish assurances were very vague and should have gone through more direct channel. Fact that these assurances had been given had not been reported to Ottawa at time Dillon’s visit there. End FYI. If FonOff raises question with Emb, suggest you point out that while US not attempting tie special conditions to US assistance, long-term or concessional nature of proposed arrangements for wheat naturally causes concern on part Canada and that anything Poland can do through direct conversations to allay Canadian fears would be most helpful to U.S.Telegram 563 from Ottawa, April 30, reported the Embassy’s opinion that a Polish commitment to purchase Canadian wheat was essential and that the United States was responsible for maintaining pressure on the Poles to do so. (Ibid., 411.4841/4–3057) On May 16, Dillon wrote Merchant that despite U.S. pressure the Poles did not wish to commit themselves to the Canadians so far in advance. Dillon believed the Polish promise, in effect, to give Canada first chance at their external purchases over the next 2 years was all that could be expected. (Ibid., 748.5–MSP/5–1057) Dulles 249. Letter From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Beam) to the Director of Special Operations, Department of Defense (Erskine)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.64/4–2357. Confidential. Drafted by Sutterlin and cleared by Murphy. Washington, May 8, 1957. Dear General Erskine: I would like to return to the question of declaring the Hungarian Assistant Military Attaché in Washington persona non grata in retaliation for the expulsion from Hungary of Captain Thomas R. Gleason.On April 3, Captain Gleason and Colonel J.C. Todd, U.S. Military Attaché, had been apprehended on a public road near the Soviet barracks in Hungary and held for 6 hours. On April 9, the Hungarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs alleged that Gleason had been guilty of “open espionage” and ordered his departure within 48 hours. On April 25, Barnes delivered a note to the Hungarian Foreign Ministry denying the charges and protesting Gleason’s treatment. For text, see Department of State Bulletin, May 20, 1957, pp. 810–811. You will recall that this was the subject of my letter to you on April 23, 1957This letter, not found in Department of State files, asked for Erskine’s views on the desirability of expelling the Hungarian Assistant Military Attaché. and of your reply of the same date.Erskine replied that “you may wish to consider again whether it is necessarily desirable to counter one expulsion with another. It might be preferable to expel Soviet bloc officials against whom we have a good case at a time that can appear to be of our choosing.” Thus he recommended either taking no immediate action or else taking action against whomever presented the best target in terms of generating “unfavorable publicity to the bloc.” (Department of State, Central Files, 611.64/4–2357) In a memorandum to Murphy dated April 26, Beam indicated that in deciding between the Air Force view, which opposed a reciprocal expulsion, and the Army view, which favored it, the Office of the Secretary of Defense supported the former. (Ibid., 611.64/4–2357) After further discussion of this matter in the Department including review by the Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs, we continue to feel that in the light of our over-all foreign policy objectives in Eastern Europe we should proceed with the expulsion. I would like to call to your attention the following two considerations which we consider of overriding importance: (a) The United States must maintain a posture of strength vis-à-vis the present Hungarian regime. The position of our Legation in Budapest is a delicate one. We have no minister there and do not intend to send one under present circumstances but we desire if possible to maintain relations. The over-all size of our staff in Budapest at the present time is three times as great as that of the Hungarian staff in Washington. Cardinal Mindszenty’s refugee status within the Legation is unusual. There is in these circumstances much to tempt the Hungarian regime to apply threats and pressures of various kinds. If we on one occasion display a willingness to back down before such a threat the temptation for Hungarian authorities to try again in perhaps an even more sensitive area would become still greater. In the present instance the consequences for us of refusing to give in to the Hungarian threat may be a decrease in our Service Attaché staff. But if we do not react firmly, the Hungarian authorities conceivably may miscalculate our policy and apply further pressure to which we could only react by breaking relations. This would result in the withdrawal of our entire mission from Budapest. In short we cannot afford to allow the Hungarians to assume that we will give in to threats or pressure. (b) As you rightly imply, actions which we take affecting one country under Soviet domination have implications on our policy toward all the countries of the area. It is in general our intent to make it clear to the Communist governments of the area that if they arbitrarily declare a member of a US Mission persona non grata they must expect similar action against one of their representatives. The object of this policy is of course to discourage Soviet and East European regimes from indulging in indiscriminate expulsions. I don’t need to emphasize that they could create very serious problems for us if they felt free to expel without fear of consequence our trained personnel who have spent many months in preparation for their assignment. (Captain Gleason was, I was told, just such a case.) Thus in the interest of our staffs throughout the area we simply cannot, in our opinion, let a case as blatant as the present one go unchallenged. Feeling strongly the importance of the above considerations, the Department intends sometime in the near future to declare the Hungarian Assistant Military Attaché persona non grata.On May 29, the United States informed Hungary that First Lieutenant Károly Mészaros, the Assistant Military and Air Attaché at their Legation, had been declared persona non grata and was to depart no later than June 3. For text of the note, see Department of State Bulletin, June 17, 1957, p. 983. At the same time we will make it clear that the Hungarians are entirely free to replace the officer in question as we consider ourselves to be in Budapest. Should you continue to have strong objections to this proposed action I would be happy to discuss the matter further with you at your convenience.A Hungarian note of May 25 called for a reduction of more than one-third in the number of administrative and diplomatic personnel of the Legation in Budapest. In its reply of June 11, the United States denied Hungary’s right to determine the size and composition of the mission in Budapest and described the proposed action as contrary to the maintenance of friendship between the American and Hungarian peoples. For text, see ibid., July 1, 1957, p. 30. Sincerely yours, Jacob D. BeamPrinted from a copy that bears this typed signature. 250. Operations Coordinating Board ReportSource: Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Poland and Hungary. Top Secret. Prepared by the Ad Hoc Working Group on Contingencies in Poland, a working group of senior officers including Bowie and Beam, in response to a decision taken at the OCB meeting of February 27 to develop contingency plans to implement paragraph 17 (a) of NSC 5705/1 together with related courses of action as stated in NSC 5616/2 and NSC 5608/1. (NSC 5705/1 was not declassified; NSC 5616/2 and NSC 5608/1 are printed as Documents 196 and 80) (Preliminary Notes by Richard, February 27; Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Minutes) A covering memorandum by Charles E. Johnson, Executive Assistant of the OCB, noted that the OCB had revised and concurred in this Operational Guidance and had requested the Working Group to develop agency action assignments for the implementation of the proposed programs. Washington, May 8, 1957. OPERATIONAL GUIDANCE WITH RESPECT TO POLAND I. Introduction A. References: 1. U.S. Policy Toward Certain Contingencies in Poland, NSC, 5705/1 (with particular reference to para. 17(a)), approved by the President February 25, 1957. 2. Interim U.S. Policy on Developments in Poland and Hungary, NSC 5616/2, approved by the President November 19, 1956. 3. U.S. Policy Toward the Soviet Satellites in Eastern Europe, NSC 5608/1, approved by the President July 18, 1956. C. Current Situation in Poland. 5. Following the establishment of the Gomulka regime October 19–20, 1956, Poland has moved in an evolutionary development in the direction of our objectives. The Gomulka regime, which was born in defiance of the Kremlin leadership, has achieved a relative degree of independence from Soviet control notwithstanding Poland’s continued membership in the Warsaw Pact. This relative independence has been exemplified by decollectivization, cessation of jamming, the church-state agreement, and the return to Moscow of Rokossovsky and other Soviet military officials and intelligence advisers. It has also been evidenced by a Polish desire to reestablish contacts with the West. On the other hand, by remaining in the Warsaw Pact and the Communist camp, and by restraining thus far the Polish population from revolutionary uprisings, the Gomulka regime has been able to avoid the fate of Hungary. Bracketed as they are by Soviet military power, the Poles have little prospect at present of achieving full national independence. Nevertheless, the Gomulka regime represents an important crucial step in the desired direction, not only so far as Poland is concerned, but also, in its potential effect, so far as the other satellite countries and the Soviet Union itself are concerned. For the future, the Polish example may be even more important in Eastern Europe than the Tito example has been in the past. 6. The Gomulka regime is engaged in a complicated balancing act. On the one hand, it has been subject to unremitting pressure from the Natolin group and the Soviet Union seeking to regain control; on the other hand, Gomulka is being pressed by the liberalizing forces inside and outside the Party to ameliorate economic and political conditions in the direction of a freer society. The Natolin group has some backing from the disaffected Communist bureaucrats who may have lost their jobs or previous privileges as a result of the Gomulka regime, but it has no popular support. The “liberalizing” elements—called “revisionists” by the Soviets and they are revisionists in the classical sense—would like to move rapidly towards a brand of social democracy unacceptable to the USSR. The overwhelming majority of the Polish people are strongly anti-Russian and particularly opposed to Marxism-Leninism and the Soviet system. If the Natolin group were clearly to regain control of the Party and government apparatus, it might well lead to a popular uprising, followed in turn by Soviet armed intervention. If the “revisionists” were to obtain control of the Party and the Government, or if the Polish people were to get out of hand, it may be expected that the Soviets would move in with armed might. Gomulka and his “centrist” group are the only force in Poland capable of maintaining the delicate balance among these other forces: The Natolin group, the “revisionists”, the people, and the USSR. 7. The Gomulka regime is leaning over backwards to avoid trouble with Moscow. However, although it appears ready to go nearly all the way with the USSR in foreign affairs, nevertheless it has not yielded on what it undoubtedly regards as the decisive point—control of affairs inside Poland and defense of Poland’s economic interests. Likewise, recent concessions to the Natolin group, such as leaving Zenon Nowak as Deputy Prime Minister, as well as recent indications that the most outspoken proponents for liberalization are being curbed should not be misinterpreted; they are necessary shifts in Gomulka’s balancing act. The basic post-October achievements in domestic policy remain unchanged. 10. Economic. a. So long as the Polish Government retains relative independence from Moscow the United States should expand economic relations with Poland gradually in a manner designed to enable the Polish Government to lessen the economic dependence of Poland on the Soviet bloc, to increase its economic ties with the West, and, where possible, to allow greater internal economic freedom to the Polish people. Parallel policies by other Western countries should be encouraged, especially through NATO. b. Such economic assistance as is given to Poland should be designed to contribute insofar as possible toward: (1) facilitating the reorientation of Polish trade toward the West; (2) promoting internal economic reforms, e.g., decentralization of industrial management, greater freedom of labor, agricultural decollectivization, and the elimination of compulsory farm deliveries to the state; and (3) reducing Soviet power to manipulate the economy of Poland. c. Measures should be taken seeking to relax gradually governmental barriers which impede the normal conduct of trade between Poland and the West. d. Efforts should be made to encourage the resumption of contacts and transactions between private business and charitable organizations in the West and Poland. e. The settlement of long-standing economic issues between Poland and the United States resulting from the actions of the Polish Government prior to October 1956 should be sought. 11. Information and Exchanges. a. U.S. information programs should seek to (1) influence the new Polish leaders to continue their implementation of commitments for reforms that are conducive to the attainment of U.S. objectives; (2) strengthen confidence among Poles that American policy and actions are in accord with the best interests of Poland; and (3) convey a favorable presentation of American achievements, aspirations, and culture. Emphasis should be placed on the basically Western character of Polish culture; the great interest of the American people in the peaceful activities and accomplishments of the Polish people; appreciation of Poland’s new and more independent status; and the encouragement of confidence that eventually Polish aspirations for full independence can be realized through peaceful means. b. Information media should avoid any material that (1) invites, or treats as desirable, resort to violence; (2) appears to justify charges that changes in Poland are being inspired from without, or that the U.S. seeks military, economic or political advantage for itself or its allies in an independent Poland. Programs should be developed which indirectly discourage recourse to violence by the Polish population. c. The United States should initiate and actively promote contacts and exchanges with Poland in economic, scientific, cultural and other fields in the context of NSC 5607. These should be coordinated through the Department of State. In addition to officially arranged activities, unofficial contacts and exchanges should be encouraged, including visits by tourists, businessmen, cultural leaders, educators, technicians, and students. II. Current and Proposed Programs A. Diplomatic. 1. Encourage the Free World countries to accord in their foreign relations different and more favorable treatment to Poland than to the Soviet satellites. 2. Continue to initiate and support, as appropriate, discussion of Polish problems in the North Atlantic Council to the end that the NATO countries may develop coordinated policies toward Poland consonant with U.S. objectives. 4. Consider initiating discussions with Nehru and the other neutralist leaders to emphasize to them the hazards of the present Polish situation and to explain U.S. views on the importance of maintaining gradual, orderly change in Poland. In this way prepare for the possible use of their influence in order to prevent Soviet intervention in Poland. 5. Support the inclusion of Poland in UN specialized agencies or other multilateral bodies, and election of Poles to offices in such bodies, if such inclusion or office is sought by Poland and if it is regarded in each case as appropriate and consonant with U.S. objectives. In the UN General Assembly and in the UN Commission and Committee meetings, try to avoid statements or actions which tend to imply that Poland is a member of the Soviet bloc. 6. Supplemental to the existing circular instruction to U.S. diplomatic missions for increased contact with Polish representatives (issued November 23, 1956),CA–4374, not printed. (Ibid., Central Files, 607.1148/11–2356) issue further instructions to seek more cordial relations with Polish representatives, having in mind the need to be discreet in accordance with local circumstances and cautious in view of the uncertainty about the particular position with many Polish representatives. Such instructions should call for (1) treatment implying that the Poles are no longer puppets, (2) expressions of respect for and interest in the activities of Polish intellectuals, (3) satisfaction over the progress made toward settlement of the Church issue, and (4) genuine concern over Poland’s economic problems and difficulties. 7. Consider, if appropriate at a future time, inviting appropriate top leaders to this country for an official visit. Be prepared to send American leaders to Poland for an official visit. 8. Screen official communications to the Poles from the standpoint of insuring that they contain nothing which if reported to Moscow could legitimately serve to arouse suspicions as to U.S. purposes. In public statements avoid expressions which might cause difficulties and embarrassment to the Polish regime in its relations with the USSR. B. Economic Programs. The responsible agencies plan to undertake the following types of economic programs with respect to Poland over a period of the next 6–12 months: 9. The sale to Poland, for zlotys, of surplus agricultural commodities under Title I of Public Law 480. 10. The opening of credit facilities to Poland, financed under Section 401 of the Mutual Security Act for the purchase of United States products. 11. The establishment of facilities whereby the Commodity Credit Corporation may extend credits to United States exporters for the exportation of surplus agricultural commodities to Poland, which credits may be re-extended to Poland either directly or indirectly, via third countries. 12. Study of other Polish requests for economic assistance. 13. On appropriate advice by the Department of State, the amendment by the Treasury Department of Treasury Circular 655Treasury Circular No. 655, dated March 19, 1941 (31 CFR Part 211), as amended, listed Poland as one of several Communist nations U.S. Treasury checks would not be sent to because the payees might not actually receive them or be able to negotiate their full value. to permit the resumption of remittances to payees in Poland of checks or warrants drawn against funds of the United States Government or its agencies. The continuation of the flow of such remittances, if authorized, would depend upon the continuation of satisfactory conditions in Poland. 14. Encouragement of the Polish Government to come to an agreement with the Foreign Bondholders Protective Council with respect to defaulted dollar bonds of the Polish Government. 15. The negotiation with the Polish Government of a lump-sum settlement of American property claims against Poland arising out of the taking of property by the Polish Government. 16. The unblocking of blocked Polish assets in the United States, provided that a satisfactory settlement is reached with Poland on American property claims.A position paper drafted by William Frohlich (OFD:FN) and Valdemar N.L. Johnson (EUR/EE), dated February 25, on “Unblocking or release of Polish assets in the United States” is in Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks—P–2. 17. Subject to appropriate assurances from the Polish Government with respect to diversion, transshipment and re-export, and introduction of certain moderations in the present application of the export control system toward Poland,On January 25, 1957, the Advisory Committee on Export Policy (ACEP) recommended that negotiations be started with Poland looking toward a less restrictive export control policy. If it appeared feasible, ACEP urged that assurances be sought from Poland that it would use U.S.-origin goods solely for its own domestic purposes and would not divert or re-export any items to the Soviet Union, its satellites, or Communist China without prior U.S. authorization. This point was included in the February 25 Department of State position paper on “Export Licensing.” (Ibid., US/Polish Talks, Draft Position Papers and Assignments) consideration should be given to: a. Removal of the present requirement that individual export licenses must be obtained for a range of items not on the Positive List of b. Issuance of licenses for reasonable shipments of Positive List items in Categories C–IIICategory C–III corresponds to International List III, i.e., items subject to surveillance. [Footnote in the source text.] and C–IV.Category C–IV are items which are not on the International Lists, which are nevertheless considered strategic by the U.S., and which are susceptible of unilateral control by the U.S. [Footnote in the source text.] c. Applications to export C–I items (International List I embargo) and C–II items (International List II quantitative control) would only be considered on a case-by-case basis. d. Modification of the U.S. export controls and efforts to modify COCOM export controls to permit the shipment to Poland of civilian aircraft, within appropriate limits. 18. The negotiation with Poland of arrangements which would (1) permit the entry into Poland under reasonable conditions of gift parcels donated to Polish individuals by persons in the United States, and (2) permit the operation in Poland of United States charitable organizations. 19. Participation by the United States in the Poznan Fair through an American Exhibit and an American Trade Development Mission. 20. Consideration by the United States, in the course of 1957, of the restoration to Polish trade of most-favored-nation treatment which was suspended in 1952 pursuant to Section 5 of the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1951.Trade Agreements Extension Act, Public Law 50, approved June 16, 1951. (65 Stat.72) C. Information Programs. 21. Utilize USIA and other resources to ensure appropriate publicity for official public statements designed to encourage the Poles to seek independence from Soviet control gradually, and without internal disorder and without causing any situation to develop which the Soviets would feel they had to repress with military force. 22. Report, particularly to Poland and other countries of the Soviet orbit, world reactions which accord with or endorse the publicly expressed position of the United States. 23. Report to Poland reactions from respected sources which assure the Poles that the free world is aware of actions effected by the Poles themselves, without violence, to secure greater independence from Soviet control, and that such peaceful accomplishments by the Poles are regarded as favorable to Polish national interests. 24. Report and interpret all positive results of the economic discussions between the United States and Poland as evidence of genuine U.S. concern over Poland’s economic problems and difficulties, and, simultaneously, make clear that the agreements reached are free of any Polish subservience whatsoever to the United States. 25. Discourage, through judicious selection of news items, Polish actions likely to result in Soviet efforts to reimpose earlier predominant controls over Poland. 26. Expand, discreetly and gradually, the distribution of publications, wireless file material, documentary motion pictures, television films, radio broadcasting material, and approved books translated into Polish and copyright-cleared for use in Poland. 27. Seek opportunities for presenting exhibits which would demonstrate various aspects of American life and culture, including a major architectural exhibit for showing in Warsaw and other Polish cities. 28. Exhibit an “American Book Store”—consisting of selected literature in the fields of science, fiction, and the social sciences, etc.—as an attraction along with other American exhibits at the Poznan Fair; circulate this book exhibit to other cities in Poland; and, finally, donate the books to appropriate Polish institutions. 29. Undertake, depending on Polish acceptance and on a reciprocal basis if necessary, the publication and distribution of a Polish edition of America Illustrated magazine. 30. Establish an Information Media Guaranty program in Poland, if the Polish Government is willing to accept it. 31. At an appropriate occasion, seek opportunity to establish a U.S. reading room and reference library in Warsaw and, eventually, in other cities. 32. In connection with visits to Poland of outstanding American leaders, scientists, technicians, performing artists, etc., exploit these visits as concrete indications of U.S. interest in the people of Poland. D. Exchanges. 33. Continue to initiate and promote exchanges of individuals and delegations, on a generally reciprocal basis, including: a. Technical experts such as the currently planned visits concerned with the coal, housing, steel, food distribution and road-building industries, as well as agriculture. b. Delegation to conferences, such as the forthcoming congress of actuaries, the assembly of the Lutheran World Federation, the symposium on cosmical gas dynamics, etc. c. Academic exchanges, such as exchanges of professors, research workers, lecturers, technicians and students. d. Cultural contacts, such as visits by orchestras, college jazz bands, choral groups, and individual artists. e. Athletic participation, such as exhibitions by champion athletes, participation in sports contests, etc. f. Literary contacts, such as planned contributions by American sociologists of articles for the “Warsaw Cultural Review.” 34. Encourage U.S. foundations to initiate and subsidize exchanges, by large-scale grants, scholarships, and other measures for promoting visits by large numbers of Poles to the United States and smaller numbers of Americans to Poland. In this connection the Polish universities, particularly Cracow, should be encouraged to hold summer seminars for foreign students. 35. Encourage unofficial travel between Poland and the United States, and foster ties between Poles and Americans, with special reference to Americans of Polish descent and to the Polish-American press. Consideration is being given to the resumption of service by the Batory to New York.The Batory had been used by fugitive Communist Gerhart Eisler to escape from the United States in May 1949. Its service to New York had been terminated in 1951. 251. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of Agriculture (Butz) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Kalijarvi)Source: Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks—Basic Preliminary Documents, #2. Confidential. Washington, May 27, 1957. Dear Mr. Kalijarvi: It is our understanding that you contemplate proceeding with a $30 million program for Poland including 100,000 tons of wheat, to be financed with Export-Import Bank loans. Also that a Title I PL 480 agreement totaling $65 million at market value would be signed and announced immediately after action by the House of Representatives on pending Title I legislation, the agreement to include, among other things, funds for about 400,000 M.T. of wheat and to provide that any portion of the program in excess of $25 million (CCC cost) would be validated only after additional Title I funds become available. In view of the considerations involved in the proposed program as outlined in Mr. Dulles’ January 3 letter to Mr. Benson,Document 220. we concur in the proposed actions subject to the following understandings: 1. Your Department has determined that it is necessary to proceed with undertakings to supply wheat to Poland despite Canada’s position in the matter.Kalijarvi informed the Canadian Embassy of this fact on May 28. Telegram 442 to Ottawa, May 28, indicated that the United States had done everything possible to get the Poles to accommodate the Canadians. (Ibid., 442.4841/5–2857) 2. Your Department has determined that it is necessary to proceed with signature and announcement of a Title I agreement with Poland prior to availability of new funds in the face of urgent pending request for commodities by Spain and other countries and will undertake any necessary clearance and justification of such action within the Administration and with Congress. Sincerely yours, Earl L. Butz 252. Memorandum of Conversations Between the First Secretary of the Legation in Hungary (Rogers) and Cardinal Mindszenty, Budapest, May 1957Source: Department of State, Hungary Desk Files: Lot 75 D 45, Refuge for Cardinal Mindszenty, 1956–57. Confidential. Drafted by Rogers. The source text does not indicate the dates on which the conversations took place. undated SUBJECT America’s Failure in the Hungarian Problem I have discussed this subject with Cardinal Mindszenty several times, always at his initiative, and have heard him talk to others as well. His line of thought seems to be about as follows: The West, and first and foremost the United States, failed Hungary, which clearly was fighting the battle for the West, during the revolution. The Cardinal seems to believe strongly that had the United States successfully urged UN action to bring in a small detachment of international troops, or to bring in a high-level UN representative early in the revolution, or had the United States delivered an ultimatum of some kind to the Soviet Union, the latter would not have intervened a second time. The Cardinal refuses to believe that some action of this kind, whether it presented an ultimatum or not, was not possible. He points to the activity of the United States in the Suez crisis in October and has said plainly that he thinks the greater activity in Suez than in Hungary has been because oil is involved. “Unfortunately there is little oil involved in Hungary, only moral.” The Cardinal has not argued as strongly for an ultimatum or a threat of military action (during the revolution) as he has for a UN force or representation. He has accepted the argument that the situation in the Suez differed from that in Hungary, as far as UN troops are concerned, because Egypt accepted the UN forces. He does not accept the argument that the Hungarian situation is different because Hungary is occupied by the Soviet Army. “Hungary is occupied because Roosevelt agreed to it at Yalta.”Reference is to the Yalta Conference among Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin, February 4–11, 1945. The Cardinal also believes that the West, and primarily the United States, has failed in Hungary after the Revolution. Again he compares the situation in Hungary unfavorably with that in the Middle East. “At least, there, there is activity, whether there is success or not. Here there is only death.” He obviously has no patience with the discussions in the United Nations since the revolution and has referred bitterly at times to one news-item or another (examples: a remark allegedly made by the Secretary in mid-March concerning greater contacts with the Soviets; the withdrawal of Minister WailesSee Document 237. as being evidence of unwillingness to seriously consider stronger steps which he considers necessary. To comments that we would welcome suggestions for peaceful means of helping the situation in Hungary, however, the Cardinal has few to make. His first suggestion and most frequently repeated is an economic boycott (his opinion of Soviet economic and military strength is very low), but he appears to accept some of the counterarguments. He has no other concrete suggestions, however, except “activity,” and completely fails to understand why there is so much continual diplomatic activity, a Presidential doctrine, a high-level mission, continual discussion in the UN, over the Suez, and “nothing” concerning Hungary. His bitterness on this point seems to be increasing as time goes on. 253. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Kalijarvi) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/6–757. Official Use Only. Drafted by Leddy. Washington, June 7, 1957. SUBJECT Completion of Polish Economic Negotiations We signed the Polish economic arrangements today at noon and issued a press release (Tab A).None of the tabs is printed. For their text and that of the agreements referred to, see Department of State Bulletin, June 24, 1957, pp. 1003–1008. In a separate statement (Tab B) the Polish chairman made clear the uses to which the Polish Government hopes to put the commodities that come from the United States. He refers to the policy of eliminating compulsory farm deliveries and allowing greater freedom of decision to individual industrial enterprises in Poland. The signed agreements provide for an Eximbank credit of $30,000,000On May 29, President Eisenhower signed a Memorandum of Determination as required under Section 401(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended, and thus ICA released the sum of $30 million to the Export-Import Bank from funds appropriated to the President under Section 401(b) of the Act. (Letter from Hollister to Samuel C. Waugh, June 3; Department of State, EE Files: Lot 76 D 232, US/Polish Talks—Basic Preliminary Documents, #2) plus a P.L. 480 agreement of $18.9 million. The text of an unsigned supplemental P.L. 480 agreement—$46,100,000—was also published.The signed agreement provided 100,000 metric tons of wheat worth $6,400,000 to Poland and the unsigned supplemental accord called for 400,000 more metric tons of wheat costing $25,600,000. On April 26, Dulles approved an exchange rate of 24 zlotys to the dollar, which Hollister had previously opposed. (Memorandum from Dillon to Dulles, April 26; ibid., US/Polish Talks—Basic Preliminary Documents, #1) Additional documentation on this issue is Ibid. We will not sign this until the pending P.L. 480 bill has been enacted. The press release simply states that it is hoped that the Supplemental Agreement may be signed as soon as possible. The arrangements with Poland also include an agreement in principle to negotiate a lump-sum settlement of American property claims against Poland and for the unblocking of blocked Polish assets in the United States. The United States is separately announcing—that is, not by agreement with Poland—(1) an amendment to existing Treasury regulations to remove the existing prohibition on sending to Poland U.S. Treasury checks (for payment of Social Security, Veterans benefits, etc.); (2) the willingness of the Commodity Credit Corporation to give short-term credits for shipment of agricultural commodities to Poland; and (3) changes in U.S. export controls to simplify licensing procedures to permit, among other things, the actual exportation to Poland of agricultual commodities financed on a credit basis.On May 20, Dulles approved recommendations that made a distinction between Poland and the rest of the Soviet bloc in the matter of security trade controls, thus making available to Poland various strategic and non-strategic goods. (Ibid.) At the request of the Department of State, the Council on Foreign Economic Policy also discussed the question of extending most-favored-nation treatment to Poland and informally decided it would be desired. (Minutes of May 27 meeting by Cullen; Ibid.) The Polish delegation, also in a separate statement, referred to the action which Poland has taken in permitting CARE and American Relief for Poland to resume activities in Poland and in reducing or abolishing customs duties for gift parcels sent to Poland from the United States. Before proceeding with these arrangements, we have consulted extensively with members of Congress. I have talked with Senators Sparkman and Wiley,Senator Alexander Wiley (R.–Wisconsin). as well as Congressmen Gordon, Bentley, Fulton and Machrowitz.Thomas S. Gordon (D.–Ilinois), Alvin M. Bentley (R.–Michigan), James G. Fulton (R.–Pennsylvania), and Thaddeus M. Machrowitz (D.–Michigan). Bentley and Fulton were members of the Special Study Mission to Europe on Policy Toward the Satellite Nations of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs. The findings of the Mission were published in House Report No. 531, June 4, 1957. Only Bentley visited Poland, April 25–28. All of them felt strongly that we should proceed now in view of the indefinite delay in the House action on the new P.L. 480 bill. We have explained carefully that the text of the supplemental agreement providing for some $46,000,000 in agricultural sales would not be signed at the present time although it would be published. They have approved of this procedure. 254. Department of State Policy Information StatementSource: Department of State, Central Files, 511.00/6–757. Confidential. Enclosure to circular instruction CA–10442, June 7, sent to various diplomatic posts worldwide and to the USIA and other interested agencies in Washington. Recipients were requested “to make it available to appropriate officers of USIS and other interested U.S. agencies as assigned to your posts.” Drafted by A.J. Cefaratti of E and S.C. Lyon of EE and cleared with EUR, EE, and BNA. Washington, June 7, 1957. E–64 UNITED STATES-POLISH ECONOMIC AGREEMENT [Here follow Sections I and II.] III. Special Political Considerations for Guidance of United States Agencies and Officials The agreement should be treated in a matter-of-fact manner and its significance under-emphasized rather than stressed. There should be no suggestion of wooing the Poles away from the Soviet bloc or of aligning them in a military sense on the side of the West. While we are anxious that Poland evolve in the direction of independence from the U.S.S.R., this is for Poland a most delicate operation, given her contiguous position, Soviet sensitivity to events at her borders, and the position taken by the Poles who have described the negotiations as directed toward “the normalization of economic relations between Poland and the United States.” Discourage public commentary from United States sources to the effect that P.L. 480 sales will allow for certain beneficial adjustments in the new Polish economic plan. It is the chairman of the Polish Delegation who is expected to make clear how Polish purchases of United States agricultural commodities will fit into his country’s new economic program. This will avoid any implication that the United States is dictating terms of Polish economic policy. Polish statements may, of course, be used for credibility. Consistent with the above, any discussion of the negotiations should not refer to them as “foreign aid” which inevitably carries the implication of a non-economic quid pro quo. Avoid reference to the fact that the Export-Import Bank credit is derived from Mutual Security funds, about which Poles are sensitive. [Here follows a brief discussion of the nature of the agreements.] Treatment to U.S.S.R. In coverage directed toward the U.S.S.R. the agreements should be handled as items of straight news based on official documents. The fact that these are agreements between two equals is implicit in the official documents. While there should be no doubt that this is the fact, any over-emphasis of it from official sources will run the danger of “protesting too much.” No interpretative commentary should be used for Soviet audiences. Treatment to Soviet Satellites (not including Poland) Full news coverage is recommended to insure that the facts are adequately presented. Commentary should bring out the pertinent parts of the United States public position as laid out in the U.S. press release, but should avoid the appearance of urging the satellites to seek greater independence. Audiences should be allowed to draw the obvious conclusions themselves. Reference may be made to President Eisenhower’s statement of October 31, 1956, which mentioned United States readiness to assist independent governments economically, without demanding “their adoption of any particular form of society as a condition upon our economic assistance.”See Document 149. This statement of United States policy can probably best be given unobtrusively in the course of reporting responsible press comment if an article can be found which quotes the President on this. [Here follows additional discussion of the agreements.] Report of the U.N. Special Committee on Hungary, June 20, 1957; Discussion of the Hungarian Question at the Reconvenened Eleventh Session of the U.N. General Assembly, september 1957 255. Editorial Note On June 20, the Special Committee on Hungary, established by the United Nations General Assembly to investigate the events in Hungary of October and November 1956, published its extensive report. The committee was created by Resolution 1132 (XI); see Document 229. Its members included representatives from Australia, Ceylon, Denmark, Tunisia, and Uruguay. The report concluded that the events in October and November 1956 were “a spontaneous national uprising” due to longstanding grievances which included the inferior status of Hungary to the Soviet Union and the terror tactics of the Hungarian secret police. The thesis that the uprising was “fomented by reactionary circles in Hungary” and encouraged by “Western Imperialism” was rejected by the committee. Instead the committee believed that the uprising was led and supported by students, workers, and intellectuals, many of whom were Communists or former Communists. The focus of the demands of the demonstrators, according to the report, was democratic socialism. The committee also concluded that the uprising was not planned in advance, but rather bore the “hallmark of continuous improvisation.” The committee did find evidence that the Soviet Union contemplated armed intervention in Hungary as early as October 20, and it held that the firing upon demonstrators by the secret police on October 23 and the intervention by Soviet tanks and combat troops within a few hours did much to unite the opposition among Hungarians. The committee was unable to determine if any invitation was issued by the Hungarian Government for Soviet assistance in quelling the uprising on October 24 or November 4. In the committee’s opinion the uprising drew symbolic support from Imre Nagy, although he did not instigate it nor was he its actual leader. During the “few days of freedom” in Hungary, the committee believed that the Hungarian people enjoyed political and human rights and began to assert control over their nationalized industries. After November 4, the basic human rights of the Hungarian people were violated by the Kádár government, which was totally dependent for its authority upon Soviet occupation forces. The text of the report is in U.N. doc. A/3592 and the conclusions summarized above are printed on pages 137–139. In keeping with the request contained in Resolution 1132 (XI), the United States submitted to the United Nations Secretary-General for the use of the committee its own report on the developments in Hungary, which is summarized in a letter from Representative Lodge to Secretary-General Hammarskjöld, May 2. (Department of State Bulletin, May 27, 1957, pages 865–866) The United States released a statement of support of the findings of the Special Committee on Hungary in press release 378, June 20, printed ibid., July 8, 1957, pages 62–65. Background on the establishment of the Special Committee on Hungary and its work is in Annual Report of the Secretary-General on the Work of the Organization, 16 June 1956–15 June 1957, Official Records 12th U.N.G.A., Supplement No. 1 (A/3594), pages 41–43. 256. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) in New York, June 19, 1957, 11:06 a.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Phyllis D. Bernau. June 19, 1957, 11:06 a.m. TELEPHONE CALL TO AMB LODGE On the Hungarian business,Reference is to the decision whether the United States should encourage and support the reconvocation of the Eleventh U.N. General Assembly to discuss the report of the Special Committee on Hungary of June 20. See the editorial note, supra. the Sec said while he supports L’s position about not having a GA meeting, you have to be awful careful we don’t get the monkey pinned on our back that we are in the way.Dulles expressed similar concern to Beam during a telephone conversation earlier in the day. (Memorandum of telephone conversation, June 19, 10:56 a.m.; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations) L AGREED. The Sec said we want to be sure we don’t lobby against it in any way that will become known. L has not said to anyone he does not want a special meeting. The Sec expressed his concern because of the cable reporting L’s talk with Dixon.In telegram 1102 from USUN, June 18, Lodge summarized a conversation he had with British Permanent Representative Dixon on the question of a possible special U.N. General Assembly session on the report of the Special Committee on Hungary. Dixon reported to Lodge that he had received a cable from the Foreign Office in London which concluded that it would be a “pity” to miss the opportunity of a special session to inform the world, particularly the Africans and Asians, of the true nature of Soviet policy in Hungary. Dixon and Lodge both agreed that they opposed a special Assembly session and Lodge stated that Dulles also felt this way. (Department of State, Central Files, 320.5764/6–1857) L said he did not mean to give the impression. The Sec said if there were a willingness to have it he would go along—the Sec assumes it is because of unwillingness that we are against it—we are conforming.The views of the major U.S. allies in the United Nations were not unanimous. According to memoranda of conversations between U.S. Delegation personnel and their counterparts, the French and Canadian Governments opposed resuming the Eleventh General Assembly while the Australian, British, and Italian Governments saw more advantages than disadvantages to reconvening the Assembly to discuss the special report. (Memoranda of conversation by Sisco, May 29; by Brown, June 6 and June 18; and by De Palma June 12; ibid., 320/5–2957, 320/6–657, 320/6–1857, and 320/6–1257, respectively) We are not ourselves opposing it. L agreed and thinks a sponsors meeting is good to have in any case and then a special session may come out of it or it will come up in Sept. [Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.] 257. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Walmsley) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 320/6–2457. Confidential. Drafted by Elizabeth A. Brown (IO/UNP). A marginal note on the source text indicates that the Secretary saw this memorandum. According to notes of the Secretary’s Staff Meeting of June 24, Dulles asked IO to prepare this memorandum because of Congressional pressure to seek reconvening of the General Assembly in special session. The Secretary thought there was “some merit in principle” to a special session. (Notes by Joseph N. Greene; ibid., Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75) Washington, June 24, 1957. SUBJECT Reconvened GA on Hungary In examining the considerations surrounding a decision whether the General Assembly should be reconvened on the Hungarian item, we have reviewed the pros and cons once more to be sure that we have not overlooked any pertinent factors. The following questions emerge: 1. Would our own objectives, including our desire to maintain pressure on the USSR and the need to respond to public opinion, here and abroad, be better served by discussing the situation in Hungary at a reconvened session now or by deferring such discussion to the Twelfth Regular Session? 2. Would a reconvened Assembly session exclusively on Hungary, the outcome of which could not be practical in any degree, damage the prestige of the UN by highlighting its ineffectiveness? 3. Would a US initiative for reconvening the Assembly on Hungary prejudice such prospects as there are for successful negotiations in other areas where US-Soviet interests are not in direct conflict? 4. In view of the recent increased pressure of the Hungarian regime on Western diplomatic personnel, would reconvening the Assembly stimulate the Soviets to direct the Hungarians to break diplomatic relations? [Attachment] REASONS FOR AND AGAINST RECONVENING THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON HUNGARY For 1. It would give added status and publicity to the Committee’s reportSee Document 255. and conclusions. 2. It would maintain pressure on the USSR and demonstrate it remains in defiance of the General Assembly resolutions on Hungary. 3. It would force the uncommitted states to face the issue of Soviet action in Hungary on the basis of the Committee’s report. 4. It would constitute a positive response to domestic and international pressures, official and otherwise favoring further action on the Hungarian situation. 5. It would demonstrate to the people of Hungary, and in the satellites generally, that their plight was not forgotten. 6. It would provide opportunity to focus world attention exclusively on Hungary without the competition of other subjects. 7. Failure to reconvene the General Assembly might be interpreted as an effort to bury the Committee’s report and as reflective of unwillingness to face the consequences of its decisive findings. Against 1. Any conceivable General Assembly resolution would have no practical effect in Hungary, would appear weak in proportion to the magnitude of the Hungarian problem, and consequently disappointing to advocates of further United Nations action, and might not command the same measure of support as past General Assembly resolutions on Hungary. 2. Routine, apathetic discussion by second-level representatives would underscore the United Nations’ ineffectiveness, tend to vitiate the report’s effect and minimize the importance of the Hungarian question, and might be exploited by the USSR to its own purposes. 3. Pushing the Hungarian item might affect prospects for negotiations in other areas, e.g. the Middle East, and might sow doubts (with Soviet support) in uncommitted areas as to the good faith of the United States in pursuit of disarmament and re-establishment of confidence. 4. A reconvened Assembly might be confronted with proposals for additional agenda items; even if such proposals were defeated the accompanying procedural discussion could cause serious problems and might dilute the desired effect. The French particularly are fearful and have even asked us to take the lead in opposing reconvening.As reported in a memorandum of conversation by Matthew Looram (WE), June 24. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/6–2457) 5. If the resumed General Assembly primarily stemmed from United States initiative, Assembly discussion would to a considerable extent take on the aspects of a straight cold-war exercise, with reduced support for any prospective General Assembly action. 6. The report might be used more effectively at the 12th General Assembly to give the United States greater maneuverability and flexibility in meeting Soviet propaganda offensives. 258. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) in New York, June 26, 1957, 9:50 a.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed by Phyllis D. Bernau. In a meeting with his staff, June 26, Dulles briefed the group on this conversation with Lodge. “Mr. Walmsley felt that one danger in reconvening lies in the Indian idea that such a session could definitively end UN interest in the subject; the Secretary thought this would be no greater problem in September than in July since the real question is what action can we devise to keep the issue alive and before the UN. The Secretary suggested for study, as one possibility, having the General Assembly recommend to the Security Council suspension of Hungarian membership in the UN. Ambassador Richards noted that there would continue to be pressure from Congress to keep the matter alive. It was left that, at least at the sponsors’ meeting today, Mr. Lodge would play by ear the question of reconvening the Eleventh General Assembly.” (Notes by Greene; Department of State, Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75) June 26, 1957, 9:50 a.m. TELEPHONE CALL FROM AMB LODGE L said everything he can find out convinces him we are going to have to have a special session. So L thinks he should take the line the US is in favor of it. If it breaks with nothing accomplished he can say the US reserves the right to get a special session. He will tell the newsmen the US favors a special session—there are varying views re the dates. The Sec said under the procedure established the Pres will be expected to consult with the gen comm. The Sec said we have not thought of anything to do. Why not suspend Hungary from membership until there is an independent govt. They both know that will be vetoed. L would prefer to have discussion rather than a res as the vote will not be as good. L would be opposed to re-enacting previous Hungarian resolutions and mentioned having one deploring the treatment of the satellites. The Sec said the more territory you take in the more votes you lose and L agreed. It is o.k. for [to] go for the special session and the Sec said re date as soon as we can have an adequate meeting. They agreed we must be solid re having a special meeting. 259. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Wilcox) to the Secretary of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/7–1857. Confidential. Drafted by Sisco; concurred in by EE, EUR, P, and Murphy. Washington, July 18, 1957. SUBJECT Hungary: US Objectives in General Assembly Consideration of Report on Hungary In response to the Acting Secretary’s request of July 5,Herter instructed IO “to make firm recommendations on U.S. objectives in any reconvened session of the General Assembly on Hungary.” (Notes of Acting Secretary’s Staff Meeting by Greene, July 5; ibid., Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75) the following recommendations are made for the United States objectives when the General Assembly reconvenes to consider the report of the Special Committee on Hungary. Since the Eleventh General Assembly is not expected to reconvene before mid-September, we believe the lines of the United States position, including a resolution on which the 24 co-sponsors could agree, should not be made final until nearer the time of the session and in the light of our consultations with other delegations, particularly the co-sponsors. 1. In general, our objectives at the reconvened Eleventh General Assembly should be: (a) To exploit to the maximum the conclusions of the Special Committee’s report as a critical point-by-point refutation of the soviet version of events in Hungary last fall. (b) To seek the adoption of a General Assembly resolution which would put the weight of world opinion, and in particular, Asian opinion, in support of the Committee’s report and conclusions which are damaging to the Soviet position in the world. (c) To maintain at the reconvened Eleventh General Assembly session the position already taken by the Assembly last March when it neither rejected nor approved the Hungarian credentials, but to consult with UN Members at the Twelfth General Assembly convening one week later with a view to determining whether rejection of Hungarian credentials is advisable and, if so, has sufficient support. (d) To utilize as fully as possible, without endangering our and other Western missions in Budapest, any information suitable for use in Ambassador Lodge’s statements which focuses on current repressions and trials in Hungary. 2. The attached resolutionNot printed. is designed to achieve maximum support within the Assembly, and is intended as a basis for initiating consultations with other delegations at a reasonably early date. In addition to endorsing this report and calling upon the USSR and Hungary to desist from repressive measures against the Hungarian people, it provides for renewing the mandate of the Special Committee so that it may continue to observe the Hungarian situation and to report as appropriate. In view of the fact that the Ceylonese Ambassador, who served on the Special Committee, has been reprimanded by his Government for agreeing to the report, we may find that the composition of the Committee must be changed, a new Committee may be necessary, or that it would be inadvisable to engender unnecessary discussion by attempting to provide for the renewal of the Committee’s mandate in the resolution since the Committee would remain technically in existence. 3. As regards the question of the credentials of the Hungarian delegation at any reconvened session, we believe the position taken at the Eleventh General Assembly should be maintained. This would be without prejudice to action we might seek at the 12th GA. The Assembly adopted the report of the Credentials Committee which neither approved nor rejected the credentials of the Hungarian delegation. This position should be maintained because: (a) a decision has already been taken by the Eleventh General Assembly on this question and a motion to reconsider the Assembly’s action in this regard would require a two-thirds vote which would be very difficult to obtain; (b) an effort to reconsider and reject the credentials of the Hungarian delegation at any reconvened session would deflect attention from the report; and (c) the airing of the report at the Eleventh General Assembly might have a favorable effect on some governments, and they may be more disposed to consider afresh and sympathetically the question of credentials in the early days of the 12th General Assembly. The question of the possible rejection of the Hungarian credentials at the 12th General Assembly is being studied further and recommendations will be made in a subsequent staff studyDocument 263. which will include the principal advantages and disadvantages of such action from the point of view of the interests of the United States. It is our present view the most serious objection to the rejection of the Hungarian credentials is the implication which such action would have with respect to the status of the Western missions in Budapest, including, most importantly, the continuation of diplomatic relations with Hungary. We believe that, rather than challenging directly the legality of the Kadar regime on the basis of the Special Committee’s comments and findings, it may be preferable to focus primary attention on the intervention of the Soviet Union which was solely responsible for the installation of the puppet Kadar regime against the clear will of the Hungarian people and to emphasize that the Soviet Union, upon whom the Kadar regime is completely dependent for its existence, bears the onus of that regime’s unrepresentative character and its repressive policies. It is questionable in view of the diplomatic implications of rejection of the Hungarian credentials that sufficient voting support for such action would be forthcoming. Moreover, the rejection of the Hungarian credentials could have an effect on our position on Chinese representation. On the basis of past practice, the report of the Credentials Committee has required only a simple majority for GA approval. Should we maintain that only a simple majority of the Assembly were required to reject the Hungarian credentials, this would constitute a serious precedent as to the voting requirement for the rejection of the Chinese credentials. In order to protect ourselves on the question of Chinese representation, we would likely have to maintain that the rejection of Hungary’s credentials required a two-thirds vote. In these circumstances, it would give credence to the view already expressed by India at the last General Assembly that our moratorium motion on the Chinese representation question failed of adoption because the 47 votes it received was just short of two-thirds of those present and voting members. 4. We intend to exploit to the maximum extent materials concerning current repressive actions of the Kadar regime. We have asked R and the CIA, through the OCB mechanism, to assist in the collection of such material as may be available. Recommendation: That you approve the foregoing objectives as those to be sought by the US when the 11th General Assembly reconvenes to consider the report of the Special Committee on Hungary.Dulles initialed his approval on July 24. The Department sent the approved recommendations to New York in telegram 73 to USUN, July 26. (Ibid., Central Files, 320.5764/7–2357) 260. Telegram From the Legation in Romania to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.66/7–2257. Official Use Only. Bucharest, July 22, 1957—6 p.m. 56. At Belgian reception July 21 Politburo member Alexandru Moghioros (also Vice President Council of Ministers) sought me out, with Deputy Foreign Minister Lazareanu acting as interpreter, to express his pleasure at progress US-Rumania relations and asked me if I do not think things were going very well. I replied in negative stating I had seen no indication on part officials to grant any US requests in spite of fact US had consistently acquiesced in everything Rumanians had sought. I said that co-existence could not be one-way street, there must be some give as well as take, and that Rumanian officials who always stressed reciprocity must practice what they preach. Moghioros quickly replied that reverse was true and Rumanians had given more than they had received. He asked me what US had given to Rumanians. I listed (1) visit Rumanian agricultural group in 1956 resulting in hybrid corn, modern US agricultural machinery; (2) visit Rumanian chemists resulting in successful purchase acrilon factory; (3) visit election observers; (4) agreeing to establishment Economic Counselor; (5) offers of opportunities for innumerable cultural exchanges. Moghioros countered with statement that everything Rumanians had received they had paid well for. I emphasized payment was to individuals and asked him what requests of US Rumanians had granted. After long discussion with Lazareanu on side, Moghioros lamely came up with permission for my use USAF plane. I emphasized this normal courtesy afforded all diplomats all countries and personal courtesies should not be considered in discussion reciprocity of substantive requests by governments. Moghioros said US just as interested in expanding commerce as Rumania and US had gained by commercial transactions. I denied this pointing out foreign trade very small part US commerce and US not interested in Rumanian products although it was interested in assisting Rumanian people but I was disturbed find harvest American hybrid corn going elsewhere than to people. Moghioros said Rumanian people had long history oppression starting with Greeks, Romans, Turks and were exploited most under capitalistic businessmen and land-owners in early part 20th century. In last ten years people finally set free and were making extraordinary strides in development. I replied I was convinced Rumanian people were being exploited today by Communists in far worse fashion than they had ever been exploited before by foreign people or by selfish industrialists and land-owners. Moghioros said this untrue and proof their present release from exploitation found in enthusiasm Rumanian people everywhere for building Socialist state. I suggested Moghioros disguise himself and travel around country with me in order hear what people really felt about regime. He said disguise unnecessary but would take me to his own village where every person knew him and they would tell me how they felt. Moghioros asked me what American requests had been refused. I said opening of reading room, publication of magazine and institution of program of information to Rumanians concerning America was one of several such requests. He said he saw no reason why these matters could not be negotiated and suggested they be taken up in detail with Foreign Office. However, he said VOA violent attacks against Rumania were continuing. I countered that false accusations and lies contained in press articles against America far worse than any broadcast ever could be. He said there was reason for this (see separate telegram.Telegram 55 from Bucharest, July 22, reported a conversation with Moghioros in which he accused the United States of trying to destroy the Romanian harvest by “fire balloons.” (Ibid.)) He realized that thing like radio was sponsored by small group powerful selfish men in US whose interest was only in profits arising out of waging war and who were constantly attempting bring about war and had power to do so. I said this was ridiculous fiction manufactured in Communist propaganda mill and believed by nobody. I emphasized there was no individual in US with as much personal power as Moghioros himself and [had] in Rumania. He said power in Rumania was with people, that Hitler had underestimated power of people and that imperialist groups in America also making same underestimation. I agreed dictators underestimated power of people and pointed out that in addition to Hitler, Stalin had also made same underestimation and so had Soviet puppets in Hungary. Moghioros dodged Hungarian issue and returned to co-existence and peace asking why US had not accepted Soviet disarmament proposals.Apparent reference to a Soviet aide-mémoire of June 7, summarized in telegram 6820 from London, June 7, vol. XX, p. 609. I replied his question was typical of all Communist attitudes on co-existence, namely, that co-existence consisted only in accepting all Communist proposals and turning down all others. I said this pointed out fact real difficulties between our two countries lay in difference between our definition of co-existence and reciprocity and theirs. Until we agreed on such definitions normal relationships would be difficult to attain. To his emphasis on desire of Rumanian government for peace I said desire for peace today no longer virtue about which one could boast. Since war means self-destruction everyone desires peace. Moghioros finished discussion by stressing importance begin building friendly relations between our two countries. He said greatness of American people and power of American government should not make them overlook importance friendship with small country like Rumania which sincerely desires good relations. I said desire was reciprocated but good relations only possible if there was real reciprocity. This conversation reported in detail since I believe it indicates formal beginning concentrated sweetness and light campaign by Rumanians. This first time since last year I have been deliberately sought out by only Rumanian Politburo representative present to praise conditions our relations and held in conversation for such long time. In spite my deliberate efforts at goading him Moghioros preserved friendly attitude throughout. My objective was lay firm foundation from which we can capitalize on this effort at détente by perhaps obtaining some of things we have been seeking. Thayer 261. Telegram From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 320.5764/7–2557. Confidential. Budapest, July 25, 1957—8 a.m. 69. Department pouch NATO posts, EE posts, Vienna and USUN. Intel July 10.Not found in Department of State files. Legation considers U.S. and Western objectives for treatment Hungary report at U.N. Assembly and thereafter should be so drawn up as to take advantage of either alternative: A. In which some possibility may exist for U.N. to play directly constructive role here in future; or B. In which such possibility apparently does not exist. In latter case, aim would be to maximize pressure of world public opinion against U.S.S.R. Under A, if present committee members (or, if that impossible, similar group or even one suitable individual) could be persuaded to continue work, Legation believes that U.N. request to committee to explore possibilities for solution which both satisfactory to Hungarian people and takes into consideration proper Soviet strategic interests provides best means take advantage any possible Soviet conciliatory mood in coming months, of keeping issue alive and of placing West in best propaganda position should all efforts fail. Committee approach, we believe, should at this stage attempt to be constructive not recriminatory. (This does not mean debate on report in U.N. should not be sharply critical of U.S.S.R.) It should aim at present solution which would meet following conditions: 1. Would not be all-or-nothing proposal, but would present solution as series of steps, at least some of which Soviets might permit, even if not all, and even if committee’s work were publicly denounced by them. 2. Would not necessarily require formal acceptance by Soviets or Hungarians for implementation. 3. Would appeal to neutralist and non-Western areas. 4. Could be implemented (at least in initial phase) within present Hungarian legal and constitutional framework. 5. Would carry with it some positive gains for Soviets and would not, we would hope, be complete anathema to all elements in Soviet hierarchy. In brief, Legation (viewing problem from Budapest and not from world-wide vantage point) sees little value in proposing a solution of Hungarian problem which patently unacceptable to Soviets. Such course of action could be of use only for internal domestic reasons in U.S. and Western European countries, but could hardly contribute to solution and might even hinder it. Furthermore, we doubt that they would receive wide popular support outside U.S. and Western Europe. Type of proposal visualized by Legation might run along following lines (visualized as steps, of which following are examples, which could be taken over period of time): 1. Start toward Hungarian freedom from terror by cancellation existing legislation establishing or permitting summary prosecution, detention without trial, deportation, etc; amnesty for insurgents; abolition of reconstituted secret police. 2. Increased Hungarian sovereignty through renegotiation Status Forces Agreement to provide effective Hungarian control over movement of Warsaw Pact forces outside garrisons. 3. Increased cultural freedom through (a) reopening banned cultural institutions (this might be coupled with plea by committee for broadened cultural contacts with other U.N. members) and (b) relaxation party pressure in schools. 4. Increased local democracy through strengthening Workers Councils. 5. Some broadening of government. For steps beyond this point, committee could either propose new electoral procedures or could end suggestions at this point, stating above considered as first step, and further proposals would have to await later review of situation by committee. Legation undecided at moment what type new electoral procedures or “further proposals” would be appropriate; several possibilities suggest themselves, such as Bibo’s idea of parties committed to Socialism (Legation despatch 513)In despatch 513, April 19, the Legation forwarded a summary with extended extracts of a study by Istvan Bibo, Hungarian Peasant Party leader and former Minister of State in the Nagy government. Bibo suggested a compromise to the Hungarian problem based on a multiparty system to preserve socialism and allow for the withdrawal of Soviet occupation forces. Hungary, in Bibo’s view, would be a test of the West’s ability to relax tensions, and the Soviet Union’s ability to rid itself of Stalinism. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/4–1957) or attempt to reproduce Polish electoral system. Problem would be to avoid both extremes of demanding too little and of making unacceptable demands. Defense against charges that above suggestions constitute interference in internal affairs would have to be prepared, but we do not believe this would be difficult and mere existence of committee would be sufficient to bring out such charges any event. Question might be considered whether at this point committee should propose some type Western declaration of intent vis-à-vis Hungary, i.e., disavowal of intention establish military bases or restore old regime. Under b above, for committee to make proposals along above lines would probably somewhat increase already existing pressure on Soviets to take such steps, but in our judgment would probably not bring this pressure to point where satisfactory compliance would be very probable. Therefore, unless additional incentive or pressure can be applied to situation, and if best guess is Soviets intend continue repressive policy here regardless, question is whether West gains more propaganda-wise in Hungary and in world in general by demand for complete Soviet capitulation in Hungary or by proposal along lines suggested above. While this is not question for Legation properly to judge, our feeling is latter choice preferable.In an unattributed memorandum of August 6, the CIA provided Walmsley with comments on the proposals in telegram 69. The CIA believed them to be constructive, but did not think they should be considered in such “black and white” terms. The U.S. Government should seriously consider retention of the Special Committee on Hungary or a successor committee to continue to investigate the Hungarian situation since it could present recommendations which would have real possibilities for negotiated action. Even if the Soviet Union refused to accept any of the committee’s recommendations, the political and propaganda impact of its refusal would be considerable, particularly among neutral nations. The CIA also recommended that the United States not take the lead in proposing new terms of reference for the special committee. (Ibid., 329/8–657) Comment on credentials follows separately.In telegram 70 from Budapest, July 25, the Legation stated that if the U.S. plan was to call for Soviet withdrawal and free elections, then acceptance of the credentials of representatives of the Kádár government would be inconsistent and unrealistic. On the other hand, if the United States favored an approach similar to the one outlined by the Legation in telegram 69, then rejection of Hungary’s credentials would be a mistake. (Ibid., 320.57/7–2557) Ackerson 262. Memorandum From the Acting Secretary of State to the PresidentSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/8–1357. Drafted by C.J. Sobotka (ORM) and cleared in draft in EE. Washington, August 13, 1957. SUBJECT Recommendation for Acceptance by the United States of an Increased Number of Hungarian Refugees from YugoslaviaIn telegram 1781 from Belgrade, June 24, the Embassy argued that the United States hurt its own prestige and international standing by refusing to accept Hungarian refugees in Yugoslavia on the same basis as those in Austria and other Western European nations. (Ibid., 764.00/6–2457) Following a visit to Yugoslavia, the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization and the Chairman of the House Subcommittee on Immigration suggested in a report to the President acceptance of 2,500 Hungarian refugees in Yugoslavia. The Department of State concurred in the suggestion. (Memorandum from Henderson and Cartwright attached to the memorandum to the President) The United States has contributed substantially to alleviate the situation of the Hungarian refugees who fled to Austria through the provision of financial and material aid and through the admission of over 34,000 of the refugees to this country. However, our program for the Hungarian refugees who have sought asylum in Yugoslavia has been operated on a very restricted basis and permits the parole into this country of only about 300 of the refugees who are relatives in the first degree of citizens and aliens already here. It has become increasingly apparent that it would be in the political interest of the United States to admit a considerably increased number of the Hungarian refugees remaining in Yugoslavia. The approximately 9,000 refugees still in Yugoslavia are a particularly worthy group and include a goodly proportion of active fighters against Communism and of highly skilled, technical, and professional workers. It is important that they should not remain longer as political and economic burdens for Yugoslavia but rather should be given an opportunity to become productive workers in the free world. By increasing the number we admit into the United States, we would encourage other Western countries also to accept greater numbers. Moreover, we would thus reduce at a crucial time a cause of friction and misunderstanding between Yugoslavia and the United States and illustrate again to the people of Hungary that the United States maintains its interest in their plight. It is therefore recommended that you authorize the Attorney General to broaden the criteria being employed in the parole of refugees from Yugoslavia to enable the United States to absorb up to 2,500 of them over the period of the next 3 months.There is no indication on the source text whether or not Eisenhower approved this specific recommendation. However Congress passed P.L. 85–316 (71 Stat. 639), September 11, which amended the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1953 and made provisions for granting visas to all remaining refugee-escapees. Christian A. HerterPrinted from a copy that bears this stamped signature. 263. Report of the OCB Committee on the United Nations General Assembly Special Meeting To Consider the Report of the Special Committee on HungarySource: Department of State, OCB Files: Lot 61 D 385, Hungary—Documents. Secret. The OCB discussed this report at its meeting on August 21. (Ibid.: Lot 62 D 340, Preliminary Notes) Washington, September 4, 1957. 1. The 11th session of the UN General Assembly is expected to reconvene September 10 to consider the report of the Special Committee on Hungary. 2. Consonant with the approved basic policyNSC 5608/1; NSC 5616/2. [Footnote in the source text.] of the United States toward the satellites, the United States delegation will seek achievement of the following objectives, without prejudice to such actions as it may choose to take during the Twelfth General Assembly: a. To exploit to the maximum the conclusions of the Special Committee’s report as a critical, point-by-point refutation of the Soviet version of events in Hungary last fall. b. To seek the adoption of a resolutionFor text, see Document 266. that will effectively place the weight of world opinion, and in particular Asian opinion, behind the Committee’s report and conclusions which are damaging to the Soviet position in the world. c. To utilize as fully as possible in the Assembly discussion all suitable information about the current wave of repression, including trials, indiscriminate arrests, and mass deportations, having in mind the importance of maintaining American and other non-Communist diplomatic representation in Budapest. 3. The U.S. should seek further action focusing on the current situation in Hungary through diplomatic channels and, as appropriate, through action in the United Nations. Considerations 4. The unanimity of the Special Committee’s report and the character of its findings and conclusions make it a telling documentary record. It can effectively be exploited to refute Soviet and Hungarian contentions regarding events in Hungary. To the extent possible it is in the interest of the United States to make every effort to enlist widespread support in the Assembly for the Committee’s findings, preferably through endorsement in a specific resolution. Adoption of such a resolution in the Assembly would serve the dual purpose of placing the Assembly on record in support of the Committee’s conclusions, thereby specifically rejecting the Soviet version of events, and putting the weight of world opinion behind the efforts last fall of the Hungarian people to achieve a greater measure of national independence. The degree to which these objectives can be achieved will depend upon the ability of the United States and other key delegations to enlist such broad support, particularly from the so-called uncommitted states in Asia. In turn this factor may result in a somewhat less forthright assertion of principle and purpose in the Assembly’s resolution than would be the ideal, but our larger purpose is likely to be better served by the degree of support for the Assembly’s action than by specific provisions in a resolution. 5. Recent events in Hungary have included shocking examples of the extent to which the Kadar regime feels required to go to maintain control. While it is unlikely that any action in the United Nations will ameliorate the situation in Hungary, it is desirable for the Assembly to place itself on record against the current campaign of repression. This can be done in limited degree by inclusion in speeches of the United States Representative and others of specific cases. Subject to sentiment in the Assembly it may also be possible to cover this aspect of the Hungarian situation by inclusion of appropriate provisions in a resolution. Such efforts should remain coupled with the use of diplomatic channels to bring such pressure as is feasible upon the Hungarian authorities, and with other publicity designed to focus attention on the situation. In view of the limited results that can be obtained, however, this aspect of the Hungarian case should not be permitted to deflect the Assembly’s attention from the broader issues covered in the report of the Special Committee. 6. The situation in the Assembly may develop in such a way that questions will be raised regarding the possibility of further means of verifying the Committee’s findings. The character of the Soviet and Hungarian defense, if any, will be determining. If it is limited to assertions that the United Nations lacks jurisdiction on grounds of Article 2(7),Article 2(7) of the U.N. Charter enjoins the United Nations from intervening in matters within the domestic jurisdiction of any state. it is unlikely that any sentiment will develop in favor of fact-finding efforts supplementary to those of the Special Committee. In general, any attempted Communist rebuttal should be met with the same observations made in the Special Committee’s report; namely, that the United Nations would undoubtedly have profited by the data which Hungary and the USSR could have submitted but that, in view of the comprehensive and detailed documentation and testimony available, such data would not have modified the Committee’s main conclusions regarding what actually took place in Hungary, though it might possibly have changed or elaborated certain specific points in its report. Subject to circumstances, consideration could be given to the transmission of any additional documentation to the Special Committee. Primary emphasis, however, should remain upon the continuing need to permit the United Nations and particularly its Special Committee to have access to Hungary for purposes of direct observation. Soviet and Hungarian rejection of such offers would strengthen the propaganda case. At the same time care would be required to ensure that such offers in no way compromised the conclusions of the Special Committee or suggested that its operations lacked objectivity. 7. In order to carry forward standing United States objectives and to maintain such moral pressure as is available through the United Nations on the Hungarian situation, the present Special Committee should be continued on a standby basis available to serve the Assembly at any time. Since the Committee’s existing terms of reference may be generally regarded as limiting its efforts to reporting and factfinding, it may be desirable to explore the possibility of explicitly extending its terms of reference to authorize it to undertake continued observation and examination of all aspects of the Hungarian situation and to make recommendations as appropriate. Alternatively, some other instrument might be established for this purpose. If any proposals put forward as the result of such activity by the Committee proved acceptable, so much the better; if not, some propaganda advantage might be achieved without adverse effects upon the situation in Hungary. 8. A remaining problem involves the future status of Hungary in the United Nations. It is desirable at the reconvened 11th session to maintain the position taken by the General Assembly last March when it decided to take no action on Hungarian credentials (thus refusing either to reject or approve them).On February 12, 1957, the Credentials Committee decided, at U.S. suggestion, to take no action regarding the credentials submitted by the Kádár government. The Assembly approved this course of action on February 21 and on March 26 the Hungarian Representative complained that such nonaction was a discriminatory procedure without precedent in the history of the United Nations. (U.N. doc. A/3594, p. 41) See Document 237. A motion to reconsider this action would require a two-thirds majority which in all probability could not be obtained and could deflect attention from the report. Meantime, the present action serves to demonstrate that the Assembly does not regard Hungary in the same light as all other Members of the Organization. Whether more drastic action, such as outright rejection of Hungarian credentials, should be sought at the 12th session should be determined in the light of the situation then prevailing. By extension, the argument could be applied to the status of the Hungarian diplomatic mission in Washington, possibly producing Hungarian retaliation. It may in the long run best serve our objectives to maintain primary attention on the intervention of the Soviet Union and its responsibility for the installation of the Kadar regime against the palpable will of the Hungarian people. An additional problem involves creation of a possibly adverse precedent for the United States position on Chinese representation. 264. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic MissionsSource: Department of State, Central Files, 320/9–1157. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Brown (IO/UNP) and cleared by EE, NEA, and FE (in substance). Sent to Accra, Addis Ababa, Amman, Baghdad, Jidda, Phnom Penh, Rabat, Tripoli, and Vientiane; repeated to USUN. Washington, September 11, 1957—7:22 p.m. 230. To complement USUN’s conversations New York you should approach FonOff soonest, expressing strong US hope it can urgently instruct its UN delegation to support pending GA resolution on Hungary. Vote expected September 13. Resolution cosponsored by US and 35 other UN members endorses Special Committee’s report; finds that Special Committee’s conclusions confirm Soviet violations of Charter, Hungarian violation of human rights and freedoms guaranteed by Peace Treaty, imposition of present Hungarian regime by Soviet intervention, Soviet violation of obligations under 1949 Geneva Conventions, and mass deportations; condemns these actions and continued defiance of GA resolutions on Hungary; recognizes continuing plight of Hungarian people; considers further efforts must be made to realize UN objectives in regard to Hungary in accordance with Charter purposes and principles, pertinent GA resolutions; calls upon USSR and present Hungarian authorities in light of evidence in Committee report to desist from repressive measures, to respect Hungarian enjoyment of human rights and freedoms, to ensure return to Hungary of citizens deported to USSR, and to respect liberty and political independence of Hungary; requests Prince Wan of Thailand as GA Special Representative on Hungary “to take such steps as he deems appropriate in view of findings of Special Committee to achieve objectives of UN in accordance with pertinent GA resolutions, to consult as appropriate with Special Committee and to report and make recommendations as he may deem advisable to GA”; and decides to place Hungarian item on 12th GA provisional agenda. You should emphasize desirability strong endorsement unanimous report of Special Committee, pointing out facts established by Committee’s report conclusively demonstrate need for continued UN consideration Hungarian situation since they highlight flagrant character of Soviet intervention in Hungary’s internal affairs, including use of armed force against Hungarian people, and consequent denial to Hungarian people of right to choose own government. Stress also US conviction that best hope for improvement of present plight of Hungarian people lies in mobilization of world opinion through GA action, to which USSR cannot afford indefinitely remain unresponsive. It would be most unfortunate if after receiving Special Committee’s unanimous report GA were to pronounce itself equivocally on Hungarian situation and by smaller vote. For Phnom Penh only: Approach left in your discretion. Dulles 265. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Elbrick) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)Source: Department of State, Hungary Desk Files: Lot 75 D 45, Refuge for Cardinal Mindszenty, 1956–57. Secret. Drafted by Sutterlin. Washington, September 13, 1957. SUBJECT Problems Concerning Cardinal Mindszenty In recent weeks the Hungarian regime has increased its propaganda offensive against Cardinal Mindszenty and his continued presence in the American Legation in Budapest. On August 20 the press spokesman of the Hungarian Foreign Ministry reiterated a previous statement that the Cardinal’s right of asylum in the American Legation is highly debatable and in doing so went into considerable detail including the quotation of a passage from the American Foreign Service Regulations pertaining to the diplomatic right of asylum. Since then, the Hungarian press has dwelt at length on the subject, and the Hungarian Deputy Foreign Minister is known to have remarked to the British Minister in Budapest that the American Legation was harboring a convicted criminal. In the light of this mounting campaign, our Chargé d’Affaires in Budapest, Garry Ackerson, is somewhat concerned over a number of potential problems arising from the Cardinal’s status. In an informal memorandum which Mr. Ackerson recently forwarded to the DepartmentUndated draft memorandum by Ackerson, entitled “Policy Regarding Cardinal Mindszenty,” attached to official–informal letter from Ackerson to Sutterlin, August 21, neither printed. (Ibid.) he points out that it would be highly advantageous if we knew the Vatican’s wishes concerning the Cardinal’s eventual departure from Hungary. It is conceivable, he says, that a temporary easing of the situation might offer a brief opportunity for the Cardinal to leave the country. Without any instructions from Rome, however, he might hesitate to leave until the opportunity had passed. Our Chargé likewise feels that the possibility of a safe conduct from Hungarian and Soviet authorities may also become more real at a future date, and he is of the view that some prior preparation for such an eventuality would be wise. He suggests that the Department might wish to consider the possibility of arranging for the transmission of an “order” or “strong intimation” from the Vatican to the Cardinal “so that he would be favorably inclined toward a request for ‘safe conduct’ in the event that the time for making such a request should become opportune.” You will recall that on April 26 you spoke with the Apostolic Delegate here in WashingtonA record of this meeting, a memorandum from Murphy to Beam, April 29, is Ibid. and outlined the problem regarding Cardinal Mindszenty. The Apostolic Delegate promised to communicate with you further on the subject as soon as he had received the necessary information from Rome. He has not, however, as far as we know, raised the matter again. Mr. Ackerson was confidentially informed of the initiative which you had taken with the Apostolic Delegate and is therefore aware that the Department has already endeavored to obtain the views of the Vatican concerning the Cardinal’s eventual departure from Hungary. Since, however, there has been no reply you may desire at a convenient opportunity again to broach the subject with the Apostolic Delegate. Mr. Ackerson has also called attention to the problem we would face in the event of a break in diplomatic relations between Hungary and the United States. It is his view that the Cardinal’s care would presumably pass to the Power assuming protection of American interests. Since the time element might be important and limited, he believes that the Department should make contingency plans now as to which Power would be requested to assume these responsibilities. Certainly it is by no means inconceivable that following our strong action in the UN in support of the UN report, the Hungarian regime may be tempted to create a situation where the further maintenance of relations will be impossible. However, there are two questions which come immediately to mind if the formation of contingency plans is to involve consultation with other nations on this delicate problem. The first question is would it be in our interest to pose the question of assuming the representation of our interests in Hungary at a time when no crisis is apparent and when, as a result, the country approached would have an opportunity to consider all aspects of the situation—most notably the status of the Cardinal—and could in good conscience give a negative or qualified reply on the assumption that we had time to make other plans? If we delayed an approach until such time as a rupture in relations were clearly imminent or had been announced, the country which we approach would have to give a quick decision which in view of longstanding tradition would probably be positive notwithstanding the complications involved. The second question is one of security. If at this point we made such an approach to other representatives in Budapest, it is entirely possible that it would cause wide-spread rumors that we are preparing to break off relations. It is also possible that the Hungarian regime would gain an indication of what our plan of action would be with reference to the Cardinal should relations be broken. Moreover, should we approach a foreign government at this point with specific reference to the Cardinal it is likely that that government would insist on being told all of the background of the Cardinal’s present status as well as our plans for the future. Here again we might run the risk of compromising the security of our strategy. If efforts were limited to a high level approach to the British in London the security risk would probably be minimal. It would, however, afford the British a convenient opportunity to turn us down. On balance, therefore, we feel that it would be inadvisable to consult with other governments on this matter at the present time. When and if we reach the point of a break in relations we shall simply have to canvass hurriedly the friendly Powers represented in Budapest and see if we can persuade one of them to represent our interests including the maintenance of the Cardinal’s refuge. If at that time no other country is willing to accept this responsibility, we believe that the Chargé d’Affaires should attempt to take the Cardinal out of Hungary with him, assuming that the Cardinal is willing. It would be clearly understood, however, that no resistance would be offered if Hungarian authorities forcibly detained the Cardinal. The final problem to which our Chargé calls attention is the situation which would arise if the Cardinal should one day decide to give up his refuge and walk out of the Legation. Mr. Ackerson says that he would seek to obtain a written statement from the Cardinal that he was leaving of his own free will and that his refuge had not been withdrawn by the Legation. He then suggests that, following the Cardinal’s departure, he would inform the Foreign Office that the Cardinal was no longer at the Chancery. We feel that if circumstances permit, it would, indeed, be worthwhile to obtain some kind of written statement from the Cardinal prior to his departure though it is not believed that we need to insist on one if this should prove embarrassing. We do not see any advantage, however, to furnishing notification to the Hungarian regime of the Cardinal’s departure, particularly since we never have officially informed the regime that he has been granted refuge in the Legation. Recommendations: 1. That if an appropriate occasion can be arranged, you again question the Apostolic Delegate in Washington concerning the Vatican’s attitude on the eventual departure of Cardinal Mindszenty from Hungary;Murphy wrote the following marginal notation on the source text at this point: “He [the Apostolic Delegate] is still in Rome. RM.” 2. That no consultations be initiated with other Powers at this time on the representation of American interests in Hungary should relations between Hungary and the United States be broken;Murphy wrote the following marginal note on the source text at this point: “Agree, RM.” 3. That our Chargé d’Affaires in Budapest be informed in an Official-Informal letter (to be drafted in EE) a) that should the Cardinal relinquish his refuge in the Legation no notification need be given to the Hungarian regime by the Chargé, and b) that if at the time of a break in relations between Hungary and the United States no other Power is willing to continue the Cardinal’s refuge, the Chargé should attempt to take the Cardinal with him out of the country but should not resist any forcible attempt by Hungarian authorities to detain the Primate.Murphy wrote a question mark on the source text at this point. According to a covering note to this memorandum from Norbert L. Anschuetz (Murphy’s Special Assistant) to Elbrick, Murphy was willing to take up this matter with the Apostolic Delegate when he returned, agreed that no consultation should be initiated with other powers regarding representation of American interests in Hungary, but had “serious reservations” with regard to the third recommendation. 266. Editorial Note On September 14, the Eleventh United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution 1133 by a vote of 60 to 10 (the Soviet bloc and Yugoslavia) with 10 abstentions. The text of the resolution had been under discussion for some time in the Department of State. On August 30, Assistant Secretaries Wilcox and Berding, Deputy Assistant Secretary Fred W. Jandrey, and others met with Dulles and discussed a draft of the resolution. Wilcox said there was “considerable sentiment among UN missions that it is desirable to have a resolution acceptable to the largest possible majority in the GA, even if the resolution must be ‘watered down.’” Dulles then commented “that the present draft resolution was a ‘tough one.’ After looking at last year’s resolutions on Hungary, he suggested the present draft resolution is repetitious. His concern, he said, is that a vote on the present resolution which is less than the votes on past resolutions with imply that the Special Committee’s findings on Hungary do not meet with general approval. The voting record on previous resolutions is excellent, he said, and he does not want to damage the record now by having a weaker vote on a nearly identical resolution.” At the close of the meeting Dulles stated that “He did not feel, however, that all human ingenuity had been exhausted in putting forward new ideas for exploiting the Hungarian issue to our advantage.” (Memorandum for the record by Toussaint (S/S) and attached draft resolution; Department of State, Central Files, 320/8–3057) On September 3 at 10:34 a.m., Lodge and Dulles discussed the resolution and strategy in the General Assembly on the telephone: “L read the Sec’s comments on the Hungarian resolution and agrees. He thinks we should go ahead and try for something tough. The Sec said you have to use your judgment to tailor it to get the maximum position of making it tough and getting enough votes. L thinks we should get a fairly strong resolution and then after it is introduced we will have to see—may have to modify it to get 2/3s vote—L rather modify it then rather than now.” (Memorandum of telephone conversation; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers) The text of the resolution, which was sponsored by 37 nations including the United States, reads as follows: “The General Assembly, “Recalling its resolution 1132 (XI) of 10 January 1957, establishing a Special Committee, consisting of representatives of Australia, Ceylon, Denmark, Tunisia and Uruguay, to investigate, and to establish and maintain direct observation in Hungary and elsewhere, taking testimony, collecting evidence and receiving information, as appropriate, “Having now received the unanimous report of the Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary, “Regretting that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the present authorities in Hungary have failed to co-operate in any way with the Special Committee, “1. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee for its work; “2. Endorses the report of the Special Committee; “3. Notes the conclusion of the Committee that the events which took place in Hungary in October and November of 1956 constituted a spontaneous national uprising; “4. Finds that the conclusions reached by the Committee on the basis of its examination of all available evidence confirm that: “(a) The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, has deprived Hungary of its liberty and political independence and the Hungarian people of the exercise of their fundamental human rights; “(b) The present Hungarian régime has been imposed on the Hungarian people by the armed intervention of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; “(c) The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has carried out mass deportations of Hungarian citizens to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; “(d) The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has violated its obligations under the Geneva Conventions of 1949; “(e) The present authorities in Hungary have violated the human rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty of Peace with Hungary; “5. Condemns these acts and the continued defiance of the resolutions of the General Assembly; “6. Reiterates its concern with the continuing plight of the Hungarian people; “7. Considers that further efforts must be made to achieve the objectives of the United Nations in regard to Hungary in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter and the pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly; “8. Calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the present authorities in Hungary, in view of evidence contained in the report, to desist from repressive measures against the Hungarian people, to respect the liberty and political independence of Hungary and the Hungarian people’s enjoyment of fundamental human rights and freedoms, and to ensure the return to Hungary of those Hungarian citizens who have been deported to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; “9. Requests the President of the eleventh session of the General Assembly, H.R.H. Prince Wan Waithayakon, as the General Assembly’s special representative on the Hungarian problem, to take such steps as he deems appropriate, in view of the findings of the Committee, to achieve the objectives of the United Nations in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 1004 (ES–II) of 4 November 1956, 1005 (ES–II) of 9 November 1956, 1127 (XI) of 21 November 1956, 1131 (XI) of 12 December 1956 and 1132 (XI) of 10 January 1957, to consult as appropriate with the Committee during the course of his endeavours, and to report and make recommendations as he may deem advisable to the General Assembly. “10. Decides to place the Hungarian item on the provisional agenda of the twelfth session of the General Assembly.” (U.N. doc. A/3658 (A/Res/1133 (XI); printed in Department State Bulletin, September 30, 1957, pages 524–525) A statement by Ambassador Lodge made in the General Assembly on September 10 in support of this resolution is also ibid., pages 515–524. 267. Letter From the Deputy Director of the Office of Eastern European Affairs (Leverich) to the Chargé in Hungary (Ackerson)Source: Department of State, Budapest Mission Files: Lot 75 D 163, Mindszenty, 1956–57. Secret; Official–Informal. Washington, October 1, 1957. Dear Garry: The informal memorandum which you sent under your letter of August 21, 1957See footnote 2, Document 265. raising certain problems in connection with Cardinal Mindszenty has been discussed thoroughly in EUR and was the basis of a memorandum which was sent from EUR to Mr. Murphy, a copy of which is enclosed.Not enclosed, but for text, see Document 265 Certain action and decisions have resulted which I would like to relay to you in this letter. The first point which you raised was the desirability of learning from the Vatican its views as to the Cardinal’s future. You will recall that while you were here on consultation, we mentioned to you that Mr. Murphy had already broached this question directly with the Apostolic Delegate here in Washington but that no reply had been received. Quite by chance, almost immediately after reading EUR’s memorandum, Mr. Murphy saw the Apostolic Delegate, who had been absent for some time in Rome. The subject of the Cardinal was raised (whether by the Apostolic Delegate or Mr. Murphy, I am not quite sure), and the Apostolic Delegate indicated that the Vatican “prefers to let sleeping dogs lie”. It is the practice of the Church, he said, to keep the shepherd with the flock and the Vatican would not therefore call Cardinal Mindszenty out of Hungary. The Vatican believes that we are handling the whole question of the Cardinal well and has no suggestions to make.Ackerson wrote the following marginal note at this point: “Easy for them to say! A” It thoroughly understands the restraint which we must place on the Cardinal’s activities and would not wish it otherwise. Mr. Murphy gained the impression from the Apostolic Delegate that the question of the Cardinal is not a “lively topic of conversation” in the Vatican. In short, the Vatican is quite content to leave the problem in our lap. You will notice in the memorandum to Mr. Murphy that EUR recommended that no consultations be initiated with other powers at this time on the eventual representation of American interests in Hungary.At this point Ackerson wrote the following marginal notation: “I did not suggest consultation—merely that Dept. give matter thought as this would be an important factor if we had to ask some nation to take over our interests here.” The reasoning is given in detail in the memorandum so I shall not elaborate here. Mr. Murphy agreed with the recommendation and we shall therefore initiate no action until there appears to be an immediate likelihood of a break in relations. After reading the memorandum, Mr. Murphy commented that we should not request a written statement from the Cardinal should he decide to walk out of the Legation. This, he feels, would only disturb the Cardinal, who is a temperamental old man. He concurs that if no other power is willing to assume the responsibility of the Cardinal at the time of a rupture in relations between Hungary and the United States, you should try to take him along with you out of the country. Mr. Murphy feels, however, that the Cardinal almost certainly would not desire to leave and that you should do nothing if he refuses to go or if the Hungarians forcibly prevent his departure. Mr. Murphy concurred in EUR’s recommendation that no notification need be given to the Hungarian regime should the Cardinal relinquish his refuge. Basically I am afraid this leaves all of your problems concerning the Cardinal pretty much as they were. At least we now know, however, that no positive action can be expected from the Vatican. It is our view here in EE that it would be better to refrain from indicating to the Cardinal in any way, for the present at least, that he has been the subject of an exchange between the Department and the Vatican. Sincerely, “Butch” Continuing Reevaluation of U.S. Policy Toward Eastern Europe 268. Despatch From the Legation in Romania to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.66/10–957. Confidential. Bucharest, October 9, 1957. No. 171 SUBJECT Conference with Deputy Foreign Minister Alexandru Lazareanu On Thursday, October 3, I was received by Deputy Foreign Minister Lazareanu, with whom I had originally asked an appointment in connection with the U.S. exhibit “Built in USA” (Legdes No. 170, October 9Not printed. (Ibid., 511.662/10–957)). After a brief discussion on this matter, during which he confirmed the agreement to open the exhibit on January 18, 1958, I told Mr. Lazareanu I would like to take this opportunity of expressing my current personal views on the status of relations between the United States and Rumania and that after the recent conferences I had had in WashingtonThayer was in Washington in September 1957. I could say that I was also reflecting the views of my Government. I reviewed what had transpired during the last two years since I had come to Bucharest emphasizing that during this period I had done everything possible to recommend to my Government that favorable replies be made to Rumanian requests in matters in which the Rumanian Government was substantively interested, because I felt that the United States should make a serious effort to indicate the sincerity of its desire to improve relations between our two governments. These efforts had unfortunately been interrupted by the events in Hungary, but as soon as the international situation warranted it they had been resumed. I mentioned the cooperation we had given in granting visas to Rumanian agricultural experts desiring to go to the United States to transact business with Mr. Garst and study American agricultural practices; the visit of Rumanian chemists which had resulted in negotiations for the acrilon plant and the favorable reply from the Department of Commerce for an export license; the granting permission for the appointment of a high ranking Rumanian officer in the Department of Trade as Economic Counselor; and finally, the granting of visas to a trade delegation composed of some of the highest ranking officers in the economic field in the Rumanian Government to visit America and examine any and all possible trade opportunities. All of those things I stressed were matters in which the Rumanian Government was deeply interested and in all of these matters I had urged my Government to give favorable responses and they had done so. In return, I asked, what had the American Government received? It is true that relations and friends of myself and members of my Legation staff had been granted visas to make visits to Rumania; that I had been given the United States Air Force plane; and that the Rumanian Government had been very courteous in affording myself and my staff from time to time personal conveniences. But these it seemed to me were not matters of substantive value but were simply courtesies which any government is accustomed to offer every day to representatives of countries with whom it has diplomatic relations irrespective of the political differences which may exist between them. To the matters in which the United States Government was substantively interested as keenly as was the Rumanian Government in the question of trade, either definite negative replies or no replies at all had been received, or else we had been told that these questions must be settled only in the context of the settlement of all the problems between our two countries. The record, I pointed out, thus showed that although the United States Government had done everything in its power to show a friendly attitude and a desire to improve relations, the Rumanian Government only had given lip service without granting a single substantive request we had made. We had asked for such simple things as the opening of a reading room and the publication of a magazine about America, two things which were freely granted in many other Communist countries such as Poland and Yugoslavia and yet even these had been turned down. I finally said that under the circumstances it was logical for me to feel that the Rumanian Government was not sincere in its expressions of desire for an improvement of relations with the United States, and that I saw no reason, unless the Rumanian Government was prepared to make a gesture in the case of both or part of the two matters I mentioned, the publication of the magazine and the opening of a reading room, why I should continue to recommend to my Government that favorable replies be made to requests from the Rumanian Government and that at the present moment I was inclined not to make any such recommendations until after some affirmative action was taken by the Rumanian Government. Mr. Lazareanu at once launched into a long harangue with all the familiar phrases about co-existence, non-interference in internal affairs, etc. etc. He claimed that insofar as trade was concerned the United States had no right to consider any of the things I had mentioned as the granting of a substantive request since in all of these instances the United States benefited from any trade arrangement that was made by the receipt of dollars in return for goods. I interrupted to point out that trade was a question of both export and import and that unfortunately Rumania did not produce products which interested American consumers. Mr. Lazareanu went on to say that the Rumanian Government had originally brought up the question of claims but that we had insisted on adding other problems to the discussions, that we had had these discussions but they had led nowhere. He said that the Rumanian Government was still interested in settling the question of claims and pointed out, as evidence of how important it was for matters such as these to be settled first, that as soon as Rumania and France had come to an agreement on how to settle claims they had made great advances in other directions including negotiations to open a library. I replied that the position of the United States on the matter of claims was very clear, that the existing laws which had been passed as a result of the failure of the Rumanians to reply to the U.S. Government requests under the peace treaty prevented us from settling individual claims at the present time, but that we were always ready to discuss the question of lump settlement. I suggested that Mr. Lazareanu review the record of the conferences that were held last OctoberThese meetings took place from October 15 to November 3, 1956; see footnote 2, Document 139. which very clearly set forth the position of the United States and that position had not changed. Mr. Lazareanu went on to discuss the question of claims at great length and it was apparent from this discussion that this is the one subject in which the Rumanian Government is most interested at the present time and which it will doubtless attempt to press to some conclusion at an early date. At the end of the discussion Mr. Lazareanu said he would be glad to report to his Government my point of view in the matter. I said I hoped we could get some specific reply on the question of the publication of the magazine or the opening of the reading room and he said I would be advised as soon as a reply was available. From this conference and other snatches of conversations I have had with Rumanian officials it is apparent to me that the Rumanian Government is still anxious to have a formal agreement of some kind with the United States as a matter of prestige. The Rumanian Government at the moment is preoccupied in attempting to build up its stature in the world as an active forceful country, taking a vigorous part in world affairs and completely free and independent of any outside influence, particularly that of the Soviet Union. Harrison Salisbury, of the New York Times, has reported the naive attempt of Rumanian officials to present all phases of Rumanian life as being free of Soviet influence or direction. (Legtel No. 152 of September 9, 1957.Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 766.13/9–3057) ) An agreement with the United States would go far to helping put over this idea. The facts in my opinion are of course directly opposite. I believe that the Soviets exert a far greater control and direction on Rumanian affairs than appears on the surface. I see no reason why the United States should assist the Rumanians in achieving their objective of presenting this false facade by dignifying them with a firm agreement on a question such as claims, unless such an agreement would bring a substantive advantage to U.S. citizens, the owners of such claims, and this I very much doubt would be the case. In any event, I do not believe that any negotiations should be started until the Rumanians have shown their good faith by granting some substantive requests such as the publication of a magazine or the opening of a reading room. Robert H. Thayer 269. Editorial Note At the 339th meeting of the National Security Council on October 10, Director of Central Intelligence Dulles made the following comments during his briefing on significant world developments affecting United States security: “The Director of Central Intelligence commented on the important developments in Poland, highlighted by the student riots and demonstrations. Although no concessions to the students had been made by the Gomulka regime, order had been restored and the riots put down without serious repercussions or any actual bloodshed. On this occasion, the working class had not come out into the streets to support the students. Moreover, the Cardinal had exercised a restraining influence. While, thus, Gomulka’s personal position in the short run had been strengthened, he still faced many long-term problems. Poland was still on the razor’s edge, and no one could confidently predict what would ultimately happen.” (Memorandum of discussion; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records) Dulles was speaking of the firm measures taken by the Gomulka regime to quell disturbances in Warsaw October 3–7 in protest of the regime’s banning of the journal Po Prostu. The reference to “the Cardinal” was to Stefan Cardinal Wyszynski. 270. Despatch From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.64/10–1157. Confidential. Drafted by John T. Rogers. Budapest October 11, 1957. No. 217 REF Legation Despatches No. 218 of Oct. 11, 1957In despatch 218, the Legation recommended that, instead of initiating formal cultural relations between the United States and Hungary, a more gradual step-by-step process beginning with encouragement of occasional visits by individual performers on a nongovernment level should be instituted.(Ibid.) and No. 219 of Oct. 11, 1957In despatch 219, the Legation recommended that the Department consider permitting travel by American citizens to Hungary so as to widen knowledge of Hungarian conditions in the West, to encourage pro-Western sentiment in Hungary, and to compound the Hungarian Government’s ideological problems. (Ibid.) SUBJECT Certain Aspects of US Policy Toward Hungary The Legation is of the opinion that now would be an appropriate time for certain aspects of current United States policy toward Hungary to be reviewed by the Department. Since last November, the United States has consistently followed a policy of strong condemnation of the present Hungarian Government and of minimum cultural and other contacts with it. Although the Legation believes that this policy has been correct and that no course substantially different would have been advisable or possible during this period, we are beginning to be concerned lest a continuation of this attitude in all of its aspects for too long might prove to be counterproductive. In particular the Legation believes that it would be appropriate at the present time to review the question of cultural relations between the United States and Hungary and the question of the travel of American citizens to Hungary. Separate despatches, No. 218 and No. 219, covering these two subjects in greater detail, are being transmitted by this pouch. Our attitude toward these two problems stems from the belief that a new phase has begun in the life of the post-revolutionary government of Hungary. This period may in one sense have begun in the late spring when the major problems of physical control were largely settled or in another sense the new period may begin after the anniversary of the October uprising. But in any case the physical consolidation of the new government is now largely accomplished, and a new phase has begun or is about to begin in which it would seem that the regime must attempt to solve its longer term problems of finding a political modus vivendi (although based ultimately on force, of course) with its population. Such a phase would seem to demand somewhat different policies on the part of the West than during the initial post-revolutionary period. At the same time the problem of relations between the Hungarian Government and the Western powers may also be thought of as entering a new phase after the United Nations discussion on Hungary in September. While it is true that United Nations interest in Hungary may well continue, it also seems likely that any future action of that body will be more along the line of persuasive tactics, as represented by the apparent tactics of Prince Wan,Prince Wan Waithaiakon was the Special Representative of the General Assembly on the Hungarian Problem. He was pursuing the following objectives: 1) humanitarian treatment of dissidents in Hungary, 2) return of deportees from the Soviet Union, 3) withdrawal of Soviet troops from Hungary, and 4) free elections in Hungary. As of October 10, Prince Wan had contacted the Governments of the Soviet Union and Hungary and appealed for humanitarian treatment and return of deportees, but without success. (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1957, p. 65) rather than limited primarily to the condemnatory tactics of the first few months after the revolution. This does not imply by any means that Western governments should now accept the Hungarian regime as legal and based on popular support, but it does suggest that governments should re-examine their attitudes toward the regime to see if they will stand the test of time. In so far as cultural contacts are concerned, it is a fact that United States cultural contacts with Hungary are now considerably less than those with the USSR; a continuation of this situation in the future would seem to be increasingly undesirable. With this background, it seems less appropriate for the United States to continue policies which, although aimed primarily at the Hungarian Government, do have as one effect the isolation of the Hungarian people from contacts. It is obvious from past experience in the question of contacts that the Hungarian thirst for knowledge of, and all types of association with, Western culture is great and continuing. This situation has not been altered by the national uprising. There remain, of course, serious problems of the nature and extent of any moves in the cultural field which the United States might make, as well as their timing, publicity treatment, and the question of some quid pro quo. These very important matters are discussed in more detail in the reference despatches. Despite the necessity of examining these as separate problems, however, the Legation considers that from the political point of view the pressures which argue for some change in present policy are similar and apply to both areas. The Legation recommends therefore that these political aspects be kept in mind in Departmental consideration of the more technical aspects of each problem. Distribution: The Department may wish to forward processed copies of this despatch to USIA. Garret G. Ackerson, Jr. 271. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 16, 1957Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.48/10–1657. Drafted by Glenn and Freers. Washington, October 16, 1957 SUBJECT U.S.-Polish RelationsIn a letter to Dulles, September 17, Ambassador Beam asked the Secretary to meet with Polish Foreign Minister Rapacki, who was attending the U.N. General Assembly in New York. Beam noted that it was 10 years since a Polish Foreign Minister and an American Secretary of State had met. Rapacki, who was making his first visit to the United States, was described by Beam as a young, “decent,” remnant of the Socialist Party, which he represented as a member of the Polish Politburo. Beam also suggested possible topics for discussion. (Ibid., 003.4811/9–1757) On October 8, the Polish Embassy in Washington officially requested such a meeting and Dulles approved. (Memorandum from Elbrick to Dulles, October 8; ibid., 748.13/10–1457) In another memorandum to Dulles, October 14, Elbrick briefed him on his forthcoming discussion with Rapacki stressing the need to encourage continued Polish independence from the Soviet Union, to take the Poles to task for some recent backsliding in this respect, and to promise broader U.S.-Polish economic relations. (Ibid.) PARTICIPANTS The Secretary W—Mr. Dillon EUR—Mr. Elbrick EE—Mr. Freers LS—Mr. Glenn The Polish Foreign Minister, Mr. Adam Rapacki The Polish Ambassador, Mr. Romuald Spasowski Mr. Zbigniew Janczewski (translactor) The Secretary greeted the visitors and mentioned his personal ties with Poland, in particular his work in Warsaw in 1926 and connection with the stabilization of the zloty and his work as counsel for the Polish Government in a suit involving the return of Polish gold stored with the French and looted by the Germans. Mr. Rapacki expressed his satisfaction with the present visit, which was his first to the United States. He said that, at the time of the Secretary’s visit to Poland, he was far from being active, at least in public life, but that it was probable that the Secretary had met his father, a Governor of the Bank of Poland. The Secretary said that he had indubitably met the Minister’s father. The Secretary expressed his happiness at the recent resumption of closer relationship between the two countries. He assured the Minister that the United States does not aim at impairing close and friendly relations between Poland and the Soviet Union nor at following a cordon sanitaire policy similar to that of France after the First World War. The Secretary had repeatedly assured various Soviet leaders that it was the hope of the United States that friendly relations would prevail between the Soviet Union and neighboring governments. The Secretary expressed, however, the opinion that genuine friendship must derive from the expression of their independent will. He feared that Poland and Hungary, which have a long tradition of independence, would not be able to be friendly towards the Soviet Union unless given full independence. A situation dangerous to Poland, to the Soviet Union and to world peace would result if their full independence were not recognized. The United States has no objection to any form of social organization in any country. It is hoped that there would be an evolution within Eastern Europe towards greater independence. Such an evolution, however, should take place within a general framework of friendship between the Soviet Union and the countries concerned. Mr. Rapacki expressed his agreement with ideas put forward by the Secretary. It is a fact that the relations between Poland and other countries, socialist as well as other, have improved. The further improvement of such relations is a basis of Polish policy. There is no contradiction between Poland’s friendship with her neighbor to the east or with socialist countries in general and Poland’s friendship with other countries. It is of great importance to Poland that the United States understands this. The situations of Poland and of Hungary are quite dissimilar. Events such as those in Hungary are impossible in Poland because in Poland measures were taken in time in order to bring together the people and the Government. The intention of the Polish Government to continue to do all it can in this direction guarantees this. Mr. Rapacki joined the Secretary in the expression of opinion that friendship must be based on freedom and equality. Mr. Rapacki expressed his satisfaction with the improvement in the relations between the United States and Poland in the economic as well as the political fields. He expressed the hope that the present meeting would be a contribution to the satisfactory development of such relations. The Secretary stated that in order to move toward closer economic cooperation, he had had to make a finding that Poland was independent from the Soviet Union. It was not easy for him to take this decision. He hoped that events would prove him right. The Secretary further stated that he was disturbed by the change in the Polish attitude towards the Hungarian question in the UN. He expressed the hope that this change does not mean that the Polish Government has lost the measure of independence shown earlier. Mr. Rapacki stated that the experience of mutual relationship is the best way to find out whether or not Poland is independent. In regard to the Hungarian question, he stated that the Polish position was not influenced by any external pressures and that, in fact, the position of Poland in regard to this position has not changed. There may be differences of opinion as to the causes of the events in Hungary. There may be such differences of opinion between Poland and the United States on the one hand, and Poland and Czechoslovakia or the Soviet Union on the other hand. The Secretary expressed his surprise at the statement that the Polish attitude in respect to the Hungarian question had not changed, since last November Poland abstained on resolutions dealing with Hungary whereas this time Poland had voted against the Hungarian resolution, thus siding with the Soviet Union. Mr. Rapacki stated that Poland had long-standing reservations concerning the UN action in regard to Hungary. It is the opinion of the Polish Government that, irrespective of the causes of the events in Hungary, the further presence of the Hungarian question on the UN agenda can only further complicate the international situation. This was the opinion of the Polish Government last year and it continues to be so now. The Secretary stated that it was, nevertheless, a fact that Poland voted differently now than it did a year ago. Mr. Rapacki stated that a vote does not necessarily represent the entire position of a country and should not be construed as a sign of dependency. Mr. Rapacki further stated that a clear understanding of the Polish foreign policy could be obtained only by appreciating the enormous importance for Poland of a general détente in the overall international situation. The economic situation of Poland depends on the international situation. At the present moment Poland is reorganizing her economy in such a way as to make possible a greater degree of individual initiative. The success of this reorganization depends on an international détente and on closer economic, technical and cultural relations with the United States. This shows what Poland’s interests are in international affairs. Speaking of disarmament, Mr. Rapacki stated that Poland viewed this question from the point of view of the danger of German rearmament. German rearmament would create not only an immediate and direct danger but also an indirect danger, a political threat arising from encouragement which rearmament would give to revisionist tendencies in Germany. Poland is not overestimating the importance of such tendencies today, as it realizes that the major part of German public opinion is in favor of good relations with Poland. Nevertheless German rearmament and the lack of clarity in respect to the position of many countries in regard to the question of the Polish-German borders may create an incentive for a political revival of militarism and revisionism. Mr. Rapacki had recently had his first talk with a German diplomat, the late Ambassador Pfleiderer. From this conversation Mr. Rapacki gained the understanding that no serious German politician thinks of a change in the Polish-German borders but that the German government’s attitude is influenced by the stand of refugees from Polish western territories. Mr. Rapacki’s own opinion is that stating the truth would be better, as it would prevent the fostering of dangerous illusions by the Germans. Another preoccupation of the Polish government is the banning of atomic weapons. Here again the question concerns nuclear weapons in German hands. This would create a new situation for Poland and might force even a change in Polish economic plans and hopes. This, in turn, would result in a hardening of East-West differences. In consequence, Poland had made a proposal for the elimination of nuclear weapons from Polish, East German and West German territories.During the U.N. General Assembly debate on disarmament on October 2, Foreign Minister Rapacki announced that, after consultation with other Warsaw Pact members, Poland was willing to accept prohibition of production and stockpiling of nuclear weapons on its territory provided West and East Germany simultaneously took the same action. (U.N. doc. A/PV.697) This proposal came to be known as the Rapacki Plan. In order to make that proposal, Poland needed an understanding with the other countries of the Warsaw pact and, in particular, with Czechoslovakia. This understanding had been reached. Mr. Rapacki was sure that West German public opinion would favor the Polish proposal. It would also be a first step towards full disarmament. Mr. Rapacki emphasized that the German question is the central preoccupation of Polish foreign policy. The situation in respect to Germany is the criterion by which the average Polish citizen judges foreign policy in general. Thus, the danger of German remilitarization is the most important mortgage weighing on the relations between Poland and the West. It is not, of course, the only question which remains. There are also some remaining traces of the cold war but they should be easier to settle. For instance, the Polish government is disturbed by Radio Free Europe broadcasts in Polish, which deal exclusively with questions of Polish internal politics. Mr. Rapacki stated that the Polish government would see nothing wrong with broadcasting of propaganda dealing with the achievements of the United States and defending American policies. He said that Poland stopped all jamming a year ago, including jamming of Radio Free Europe. The Secretary stated that he would check into the facts concerning RFE’s broadcasts. Mr. Rapacki repeated that he is in favor of an exchange of ideas but against a radio station broadcasting opinions on Polish internal affairs in the Polish language. He further stated that he did not wish to give the impression that the Polish attitude towards Germany is nationalistic. Polish public opinion has evolved and the majority of Poles understand that Poland can and should be friendly with Germany. That is why already two years ago the Polish government stated its willingness to normalize relations between the two countries. Although there have been some gestures and declarations by Germany, no practical steps were taken by it. Mr. Rapacki said that the Poles understand the necessity of German reunification but, of course, they would not outdo Adenauer on this matter. The time is not ripe for a purely mechanical solution which could only lead to an explosion fatal to both Germany and Europe in general. Only a general détente can make German reunification possible. Mr. Rapacki expressed his satisfaction with the economic agreement concluded earlier between the United States and PolandRegarding the Agreement signed on June 7, see Document 253. —not so much because of the sum involved, as because of the fact of the agreement itself. The assistance obtained from the United States had helped Poland in a transitional situation. Poland is changing her methods of economic administration. It is moving towards greater democracy. Such changes are, however, easier to propound than to implement. One thing that has been done is the conversion of a large part of the metal industry to production of consumer goods. In regard to economic cooperation between the United States and Poland, Mr. Rapacki said the Poles approached this from the long-run standpoint of their central interest in reserves and investments. Reserves would make possible liberalization in agriculture, with a suppression of compulsory deliveries. They would also make it possible to have more liberalization in industry, greater freedom given workers councils, greater emphasis made on consumer’s goods, and more development of small handicraft enterprises. Reserve stores are needed for the changes in agriculture and industry, and tools and equipment are needed for the handicraft industries. The second major aim is to obtain investments for the consumer goods industries. This is an urgent task since the Polish population is growing at a rate second only to that of China. Poland must develop foreign sources of investment capital. Otherwise, the investments have to be carried out at the expense of the standard of living. This would have disastrous political consequences. Poland would like to talk about long-term economic prospects. It would like to discuss possibilities for creating conditions favorable for an increase of private investment in Poland. It would like our support for Polish membership in the International Bank. Mr. Rapacki further stated that it was useless to talk of loans without talking about an increase in trade itself. In that respect Poland is handicapped by the lack of most-favored-nation treatment by the United States. Mr. Rapacki expressed his satisfaction with cultural exchanges and technical assistance. He mentioned agreements with the Ford and Rockefeller Foundations, CARE and the Joint Distribution Committee. Talks are taking place with other organizations. To sum up, Mr. Rapacki stated that both nations have clearly the same aims in international relations although their methods may differ. What Poland is seeking most of all is a feeling of security. The Secretary thanked Mr. Rapacki for his remarks. He observed that it is not possible to settle all of these questions right here at this meeting. The economic talks will be pursued with Mr. Dillon.Ambassador Spasowski and Dillon met on October 22. Spasowski officially expressed his government’s willingness to start new economic negotiations with the United States. He proposed they be conducted through established diplomatic channels and expressed hope that they would be concluded quickly. Dillon replied that the progress of talks would depend on the U.S. Congress and the stability of the present political situation in Poland. In conclusion, Spasowski and Dillon agreed that discussions would begin on October 31 and cover a broad range of economic matters including Poland’s acquisition of American agricultural commodities, the role of U.S. industry in Poland’s economy, the problem of legislative restrictions on U.S. exports to Poland, and the extension to Poland of most-favored-nation treatment. (Memorandum of conversation by Colbert, October 22; Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/10–2257) See also Document 274. In regard to political questions, the Secretary stated that the German situation was indeed of the highest importance. We recognize Polish concern about this after Poland’s experiences in two world wars. We also remembered these wars. A failure to obtain German reunification is bound to create very serious threats to peace. Even if it is not expected that these dangers may materialize within one or two years, they will certainly materialize within the next 20 years. It is impossible to keep divided a people as powerful and numerous as the Germans. A second aspect of the question is how to control German rearmament. The close relationship which exists between the United States and the German Federal Republic should not lead one to believe that the United States is not aware of the importance of this question. There are different theories as to the manner in which German remilitarization can be prevented. The Secretary himself participated in the work on the peace treaty at Versailles. Although the provisions of this treaty were worked out with great care by Marshal Foch and others, the experience of history has shown that this method failed because 20 years later nobody wanted to risk war to enforce the provisions of the treaty. The only way of controlling Germany is by making it a living part of a whole dominated by peaceful elements. This is the basic principle of the Brussels Treaty on European unity and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. They seek not to deny German rearmament but to place limits on it and to integrate German forces with others so as to render them ineffective when acting by themselves. We understand that this method is not favored by the Soviet leaders nor possibly by Foreign Minister Rapacki himself. Nevertheless, it is based on a sound historical experience and is bound to prove preferable in the long run. Thus, the aims of Poland and the United States are the same although their methods may differ. Mr. Rapacki expressed the view that it might not be too bad for Poland if German troops were controlled by France, but it would be disastrous if French troops were controlled by Germans. The Secretary stated that this might have been the case if France alone were concerned. In fact, however, the United Kingdom and the United States are also involved. He remarked that the Soviet Union asks for a withdrawal of American troops from Germany. The presence of American troops in Germany is the best guarantee of peace for Poland. The Poles should pray that these troops remain where they are. Mr. Rapacki stated that Poland would prefer to see the German army reduced to an internal police force. The Secretary said that this would be a return to the situation which prevailed after Versailles. 272. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, October 21, 1957, 9:25 a.m.Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Prepared in the Office of the President. Washington, October 21, 1957, 9:25 a.m. The President called the Secretary of State regarding proposed statement to be issued in his name on October 23rd, the anniversary of the Hungarian revolt of last year.The statement as released on October 23 reads: “A year ago today the Hungarian people attempted to establish a free government of their own choice. Their attempt was ruthlessly and brutally crushed by the armed forces of their Communist oppressors. “All Americans as well as free people the world over will remember this historic event not only with sorrow for the sacrifices of the Hungarian people but with feelings of deep respect for their outstanding courage.” (Department of State Bulletin, November 11, 1957, p. 748) Dulles sent a longer version of this statement to the President on October 9. The statement noted that the Hungarian people “rose against their oppressors” only to have their national independence “brutally crushed by Soviet armed force”. The statement continued that “the fierce love of freedom lives on” and indicated that the United States as well as other members of the United Nations had “constantly sought to relieve the suffering and rectify the injustice inflicted on the Hungarian people”. It concluded with the pledge to “continue to strive for the goal of a Hungarian nation that is as free as it is brave”. (Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/10–957) The President questioned the wisdom of issuing the statement, and Dulles said that he, too, had his doubts. However, he said that CIA was very strong for it. President could not see how it would help the Hungarian people—said it was nothing but an occasion when we would again say look out for the Communists. The President finally said he would call Allen Dulles in to ask why he thought it was important.No record of Eisenhower’s conversation with Allen Dulles has been found. Secretary Dulles did call Allen Dulles immediately after his call from the President. The memorandum of the conversation reads: “The Sec told him re the call from the Pres on the Hungarian statement. AWD said he thought we were trying to play it down and not stir things up. The Sec said he acted with CIA guidance and the Pres will be in touch.” (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations) 273. Despatch From the Legation in Hungary to the Department of StateSource: Department of State, Central Files, 611.64/10–2957. Secret. Budapest October 29, 1957. No. 250 SUBJECT Review of United States Policy Toward Hungary The Legation in its despatches Nos. 217,Document 270. 218, and 219See footnotes 2 and 3, Ibid. of October 11, 1957, has suggested a review of United States policy toward the Kadar regime, with particular reference to cultural exchange and the travel of United States citizens to Hungary. The purpose of the present despatch is to carry this thinking somewhat further, into the field of political relations with the existing Hungarian Government. As a result of the initial success of the revolution of October 1956 and the inability of internal Communist forces to subdue this revolt and to maintain in power a Communist government linked with and subordinate to Moscow, the Kremlin took overt action to suffocate the revolution and to set up a puppet regime under Janos Kadar. It was the fact that foreign troops were fighting in Hungary and violently repressing the rights of the Hungarian people which led to various resolutions condemning the USSR being passed by the United Nations, caused the United States (with certain other countries) not to enter into “normal” relationships with the Kadar regime, resulted in the preparation of the “Report of the Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary”, and led to the designation of Prince Wan as Special Representative of the General Assembly to achieve the objectives of the United Nations’ resolutions. There have been indications in the press and in the Department’s telegram No. 135 of September 28, 1957,Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 320.5764/9–2657) that Prince Wan has seen the Soviet and Hungarian Foreign Ministers at the United Nations. The Press Officer at the Hungarian Foreign Ministry, at a press conference on October 12, 1957, stated, in connection with a question concerning the possibility of a visit of Prince Wan to Hungary: “Prince Wan did not want to come to Hungary as a private person. He called, at his own request, on Imre Horvath, Hungarian Minister of Foreign Affairs, and asked him to be allowed to travel to Hungary and to carry on investigations there on the basis of the instructions received from the General Assembly of the United Nations. Imre Horvath, Minister of Foreign Affairs, told him in his reply that—as the Hungarian Government had also in the past regarded the sending of a United Nations observer to Hungary as interference in the domestic affairs of the country—Hungary, for the same reason, being an independent and free country, would not be able to grant him an entrance visa.” The Legation has no information as to what further action may be contemplated by Prince Wan. So far as the Legation has been able to observe, there has been no indication of any softening on the part of the Kremlin toward Hungary and, equally, no sign of any softening on the part of the Kadar regime toward those who participated in the revolution or toward those who may be considered unsympathetic to the present regime and its dependence upon the USSR. A wave of arrests, running into the many thousands, occurred in August and September. Violent attacks on the United Nations Report and on the General Assembly were made by the regime during the final session of the XI General Assembly. Press reports of trials were reduced during this period, but they are again appearing regularly and political arrests have once more become routine. Speeches by high officials of the regime have taken a consistently “tough” line, the latest being a long harangue by the Prime Minister at a conference of party activists on October 11, shortly after his return from Peking and Moscow. As for the policy of the Kremlin, the Legation’s reading of the international news is that the Russians have again adopted a harsh line in their dealings with the West and are apparently taking the view that any liberalization in program of a Socialist-oriented country inevitably dooms that country’s Socialist efforts. The Kremlin appears fully preoccupied with the situation in the Middle East and in the earth-satellite and ballistic fields and is, therefore, disinclined even to consider the possibility of a change in policy toward Hungary or its other East European satellites at the present time. The probability that any easing of the internal pressures in these countries would be tantamount to the opening of a Pandora’s box and would require military dispensations and the exercise of constant political attention and supervision which the Kremlin cannot afford in the light of its present preoccupation elsewhere has probably been more than confirmed by recent developments in Warsaw. The filling out of the Russian divisions in Hungary, their being supplied with modern T–54 tanks and other similar weapons, and the maintenance of troops and equipment at a high point of efficiency are a further indication that the USSR is not prepared to countenance any changes or untoward events in this country at the present juncture. In any event, the Legation’s scanning of the Eastern political horizon has thus far revealed no patch of light, indicating the possibility of an early easing of the pressure on Communist nerve-centers and, in particular, on the policy being pursued by the Kremlin in Hungary both directly and through its local instrument, the Kadar regime. The possibility that the Kremlin might make some change in the top command of the present regime in Hungary has been suggested, particularly prior to the final debate of the Hungarian question in the XI General Assembly. Since such action was not taken at that time, when it might have had some effect (favorable to the Russians) in the voting at the General Assembly, and since Kadar’s authority appears to be on the increase, there seems little reason to think that any significant changes will be made in the near future. The concomitant question also arises: Who could be selected as a replacement for Kadar, who might be as acceptable to the Russians and at the same time might have some appeal for those nations and peoples who have been and continue to be strongly critical of Russia’s bald intervention in the internal affairs of Hungary? The Legation is unable to find such a person in the present political firmament in Hungary. The prospects for an early success of Prince Wan’s mission and of some change in the Russian position in and policy toward Hungary would, therefore, appear to be not particularly encouraging. If this analysis of the existing situation and of the probable outcome of the latest efforts by the United Nations is accurate, it would seem not inappropriate for the Department and the Legation to consider what changes, if any, in our policy toward the present regime in Hungary might be appropriate. The Legation, in the three despatches under reference, has already made certain very limited recommendations. It would seem advisable, however, to consider the broader field—of our diplomatic relations with the existing government in Hungary—in order to determine whether there should be any changes on our part, despite the fact that early changes on the part of the Russians seem improbable. There has already been a slight easing of the tension between the regime and the Western diplomatic missions in Budapest. In the case of the American Legation, this tendency was initiated with the departure of Mr. Wailes (who had never presented his credentials to any Hungarian Chief of State) and the arrival of a new officer (“uncontaminated”, in the eyes of the regime, by direct contact with and knowledge of the revolution) to assume the duties of Chargé d’Affaires a.i. It was further determined that the Chiefs of most of the Western missions should accept the invitation of the Foreign Minister to a non-propaganda film showing and reception on July 2 and that the Foreign Minister and a few other officials of the Foreign Office should be invited to the Fourth of July reception and other National Day receptions. There has also been some slight increase in official contact between the Western missions and the Foreign Office, but this has been minimal and has been limited strictly to business representation regarding specific problems between the regime and the respective missions. The Foreign Minister did not attend the Fourth of July reception and the regime has not made great efforts to take advantage of or to expand this slight rapprochement on the part of the West, except that invitations to cultural affairs have been more frequent, as have contacts between the Hungarian General Staff and the Service Attachés of the NATO missions. However, the continuance of the virulent attacks on the West by the press and by the highest officials of the regime and the arrest of Hungarian members of the staffs of Western missions, on the one hand, and the publication of the United Nations Report on Hungary and the resolution passed by the XI General Assembly at its final session, on the other hand, have reaffirmed the rigidity of position between the Western diplomatic missions and the Kadar regime and have made it unlikely that any tendency toward a thawing of this situation will develop without a definite policy change on one side or the other. Since situations of this kind seldom remain static for long periods, there exists, therefore, the possibility that the relationships between the two sides will deteriorate still further unless remedial steps are taken. The only change on the part of the West which would satisfy the Kadar regime would be the application of “normal diplomatic relationships” to it by the West. This would mean, for us, the designation of a Minister to this Legation. It would, likewise, mean the entering into regular official and social relations with the Government here and the attempt to settle outstanding problems through the usual diplomatic procedures. It would mean, as well, the recognition of the credentials of the Hungarian Delegation at the United Nations and, presumably, would entail some means of cancelling action contemplated by the various resolutions of censorship against Hungary and the USSR adopted by the XI General Assembly. It would also mean an easing of economic restrictions which have been placed on trade between Hungary and the West, although it is probable that this would not be made a sine qua non and that time, tide, and developments in other fields (political, cultural, travel, etc.) would be permitted to work their corroding effect on economic restrictions. What quid pro quo might the Russians (as the ultimate masters of policy in Hungary) be prepared to give in return for some (and ultimately, all) of these concessions on the part of the West? Insofar as the United States is concerned, the changes to be effected would include (1) the trial or release of Legation Hungarian personnel at present in prison and a cessation of the molestation of our personnel; (2) the lifting of the limitation on the size of the Legation’s staff; (3) a liberalization in cultural exchanges and travel restrictions; and (4) a satisfactory arrangement with respect to Cardinal Mindszenty. However, insofar as the Western powers generally are concerned, any easing of relations would have to go at least some way to meet the condemnations expressed in the various resolutions of the United Nations and would necessitate a decided change in Russian policy toward this country. As indicated above, the Legation sees no sign that the Kremlin is disposed at the present time to make appreciable changes in Hungary or in its policy toward Hungary. Any easing of its present pressure, even in return for some or all of the above-listed concessions from the West, might run the risk of giving encouragement to the Hungarian people, the vast majority of whom (in the Legation’s considered opinion) are fundamentally anti-Russian, violently anti-Communist, and deeply dissatisfied with the situation of their country under Communist administration and Russian domination. The prospect, therefore, would seem to be that, in order to accomplish some normalization of our relations with Hungary at the present time and under existing East-West tensions, an almost complete backdown on the part of the West and of the other countries which have censored Russian action in Hungary by their votes at the United Nations would become necessary. There are, of course, deficiencies in the existing situation for the West. The lack of normal official contact with the government makes it extremely difficult for the Western capitals to be properly informed with respect to the thinking and policies of an important segment of the Communist world. There is no opportunity for an exchange of ideas and the possible exercise (admittedly a remote possibility) of some moderating influence. The very absence of such contact, despite the presence of the Western missions in Budapest, is an irritation in itself and undoubtedly causes the regime to take positions and actions which it might otherwise not take. Finally, the “affront” to the regime results in its taking annoying, but effectively crippling, action against the Western missions, such as pressure on or arrest of its local staff members and limitations on the size and activities of the missions. For the United States, these limitations are administered to the fullest degree, since we are considered the leaders in the attack on the regime in the United Nations. Our contact with any Hungarians—official or non-official—is now reduced almost to the vanishing point. Our staff—both American and Hungarian—has been severely cut and there is constant interference with and pressure on the remaining Hungarians. In addition, we have the question of Cardinal Mindszenty, whose refuge in the Chancery is a point of periodic attack and a source of deep irritation to the Kadar regime. In face of these deficiencies for us, it is obviously desirable that every possibility of improvement in the situation be explored. As indicated above, however, the Legation is unable to suggest any program which would be likely to meet the desired objective at the present time. The fact of the matter is that the Communist policy for Budapest is determined in Moscow and no change in that policy seems probable in the light of existing international preoccupations and the Kremlin’s seeming determination to retain as much of the status quo in Eastern Europe—and particularly in Hungary—as possible. The only possibility for improvement would be a complete back-down on our part and, even if such a step were effected, there is serious doubt that it would result in any appreciable improvement in our relations with Hungary—or with the USSR—under existing international tensions. The Legation, therefore, recommends that our policy toward the Kadar regime and toward the USSR (so far as its relations with Hungary are concerned) not be altered at the present time. It is suggested that we await developments in connection with Prince Wan’s assignment, in the hope (admittedly not great) that his efforts will result in some slight easing of the situation in Hungary. If such easing should occur, we should, of course, be prepared to take prompt advantage thereof by seeking—together with the other NATO powers—to improve relations with whatever government may then exist in Budapest. The Legation regrets to see a continuation of the present rigidity of positions between the two sides, but it is believed that overall international factors outside Hungary are determining at the present time and that no useful purpose would be served by seeking to alter the local situation in the face of these broader and presently more important international considerations. Garret G. Ackerson, Jr. 274. Editorial Note On October 31, representatives of the United States and Poland began a series of economic negotiations at the Department of State. These talks grew out of the earlier agreement of June 7 between the two countries for the sale and credits for $95 million worth of wheat, cotton, and other commodities. Text of the agreement is printed in Department of State Bulletin, June 24, 1957, pages 1005–1008. See also Document 253. The Polish delegation for the October 31 negotiations was headed by Tadeusz Lychowski, Economic Minister at the Polish Embassy in Washington. W.T.M. Beale, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, headed the American delegation. The meetings continued through November. By the end of the month the Polish delegation submitted an extensive list of credits and agricultural and other commodities needed from the United States to fulfill Poland’s 1958 requirements, a total program amounting to $97.3 million. In addition, the Polish delegation requested extension to Poland of most-favored-nation treatment and relaxation of United States export controls. They also made clear their intention to present a case for encouragement of American investment in Poland. (Soviet Affairs, December 1957, page 28; Department of State, INR Files) In a memorandum to Dillon, December 2, Beale concluded that the requirements submitted by the Polish delegation were reasonable. He noted that such American assistance would have an appreciable effect on the Polish economy at a critical time, and would strengthen those elements in Poland favoring stronger economic ties with the West. Beale recommended agreeing to the $97.3 million program. For maximum economic, political, and psychological impact, he believed that the agreement should be signed before the end of the year. (Ibid., Central Files, 848.00/12–257) The negotiations, however, were not concluded until February 15, 1958. A comprehensive collection of records on these talks is ibid., EE Files: Lot 67 D 238, U.S.-Polish Talks. 275. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Office of Eastern European Affairs (Leverich) to the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Elbrick)Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.64/11–857. Confidential. Drafted by Sutterlin. Washington, November 8, 1957. SUBJECT Future US Policy Toward Hungary Background: A year has now passed since the outbreak of the Hungarian Revolution. During this period US policy on the Hungarian question has been aimed primarily at: (a) exerting pressure through the UN and world public opinion on the Soviet Union to bring about some amelioration of the repressive situation in Hungary; (b) circulating as widely as possible a true picture of events in Hungary so that the nature of Soviet imperialism and the failure of Communist ideology may be widely understood, particularly in the non-committed areas; (c) making clear to the world at large and to the Hungarian people that the US views the present Hungarian regime as unrepresentative and as completely subservient to the Soviet Union. We have achieved considerable success in publicizing the lessons of the Hungarian Revolution and by now we have established beyond any doubt our attitude toward the Kadar regime. We have not been successful, however, in forcing the Soviets to yield to public pressure and adopt a more liberal and humane policy in Hungary. The Kadar regime, in the words of our Legation in Budapest, has “now largely accomplished its physical consolidation”; the position of Kadar, himself, following his recent return from Communist China appears to be stronger than ever before; a terroristic policy of suppression has been maintained; and Soviet troops continue to occupy Hungary actually in increased rather than decreased numbers. Meanwhile, there are signs that our potential for exerting pressure through world public opinion is decreasing as the Revolution itself fades into the past. We are thus faced with the likelihood that our aim of bringing about in the immediate future any real liberalization in Hungary largely through the pressure of world opinion is not attainable. It would appear then that we should henceforth pursue somewhat more flexible and realistic objectives. We would define these as sustaining the morale and aspirations of the Hungarian people to the extent possible, encouraging whatever liberal forces and tendencies may appear in Hungary, and making clear to the people and to the regime, itself, the advantages of a “national” orientation as opposed to total Soviet domination. The pursuit of these objectives may well require some modifications in our current tactical policy toward the Hungarian regime. This has been the subject of three recent despatches from Budapest, copies of which are attached,Despatches 217, 218, and 219 from Budapest, all dated October 11. Despatch 217 is Document 270. Despatches 218 and 219 are not printed, but see footnotes 2 and 3 to despatch 217. in which the Legation suggests that the time may be approaching when increased travel of American citizens to Hungary and some cultural exchanges would prove beneficial to our own interests and to the Hungarian people. Naturally as long as the Hungarian regime is pursuing its present policy of terror, the US cannot make any large gesture which might redound to the direct benefit of this regime. Like the Legation, however, we feel that considerable advantage might accrue from a quiet and gradual modification of some aspects of our current policy, particularly since we fear that our present extremely rigid tactics may lead to a dead end from which retreat will become increasingly difficult. The moderations which we would suggest pertain to travel and cultural exchanges, as suggested by the Legation, and, in addition, to social contacts with diplomatic representatives of the existing Hungarian regime. In considering our policy in these fields it may be useful to review briefly the present status quo: a. Travel of American citizens to Hungary—Even prior to the Hungarian Revolution the travel of American citizens to Hungary was restricted and most passports were stamped not valid for travel in Hungary. During the summer of 1956, in recognition of the somewhat improved political situation in Hungary and the more cooperative attitude of the Government toward our Legation, travel to Hungary was being permitted with increased liberality and a number of businessmen’s passports were validated in addition to journalists and persons with compassionate reasons for visiting Hungary. When the Revolution broke out the passport restriction was again rigidly enforced and in the post-Revolutionary period we have thus far validated the passports only of accredited journalists, persons with extremely compassionate reasons for travel to Hungary and individuals connected with the American relief effort there. Requests of businessmen and persons desiring to visit relatives have been consistently denied. Since the Hungarian regime in turn has granted only a few visas to American journalists, the number of American citizens entering Hungary has been sparse indeed. b. Cultural exchanges—There have been no cultural exchanges with Hungary since the Revolution although a number of Hungarian scientists nave been permitted to come to the US within the East-West Contacts Program to attend scientific conferences. This past summer Mr. Yehudi Menuhin was extremely anxious to give concerts in Hungary but, as you will recall, was dissuaded from doing so by the Department. c. Social contacts with representatives of the Hungarian regime—At the present time the situation with regard to social contacts with representatives of the Hungarian regime is as follows: (1) In Budapest the Legation is under instructions to keep social contacts with Hungarian officials to a minimum. The Legation has been told that Hungarian officials should not be invited to other than the Fourth of July party and invitations from the regime should be accepted “only when the Chief of Mission feels that non-attendance would be definitely harmful to the effective operation of the mission.” (2) Posts other than Budapest are under instructions to avoid social contacts with Hungarian representatives but to observe the minimum requirements of diplomatic protocol as far as official contacts are concerned. (3) In Washington representatives of the Hungarian Legation staff are not included on any official US invitation lists and informal social contacts with the Hungarian Chargé or other Legation personnel is avoided. By maintaining our current policy in these fields we continue to illustrate our unyielding opposition to the present regime of Hungary. By exerting a strong lead in these matters, we, to a limited extent at least, prevent the Kadar regime from achieving the position of an accepted government in the international community and we help to perpetuate the opprobrium in which the regime is generally held. By limiting travel to Hungary we also prevent the Hungarian regime from obtaining any appreciable amount of dollar currency from tourist trade and hinder somewhat their business contacts. Finally by refusing to deal more than absolutely necessary with representatives of the Kadar regime we are acting in harmony with the UN position of neither accepting nor rejecting the credentials of the Hungarian representatives. On the other hand our present policy severely restricts the possibilities of contact between the Hungarian people (as opposed to the regime) and our own. As the Legation points out, US cultural contacts with Hungary are now considerably less than those with the Soviet Union notwithstanding the fact that the Hungarian people have made abundantly clear their thirst for all types of association with Western culture. The reasons for this are clear but it does in a sense penalize the wrong party. The travel of more US citizens to Hungary would inevitably give more Hungarians an opportunity of learning of life in America and would probably contribute to their understanding of American policy during the Revolution. Increased cultural exchanges would be impressive evidence that the US continues to be interested in Hungary while at the same time illustrating to the Hungarian people our cultural accomplishments and giving to them further justification for feeling that they remain within the main stream of Western civilization. Moreover, these increased contacts would pose an additional problem for the regime in its efforts to achieve political domination over the population since in this struggle the regime’s most potent ally next to the presence of Soviet forces could be a feeling of desperation and isolation among the people. Any marked change in our policy toward social relations with the representatives of the existing regime would probably be unwise in view of the status of the Hungarian question in the UN and misleading concerning our own attitude toward the regime. But some slight moderation which would give our Chargé in Budapest somewhat more discretion in this field might increase the information which we obtain concerning developments in Hungary and render somewhat more stable the position of our mission in Budapest. Moreover, it would put us in a more favorable position to encourage any liberal trends which might become apparent within the Hungarian leadership. Such a moderation in Budapest to be effective at all would have to be reflected to a small extent in our policy in other posts throughout the world. On the whole we believe that the advantages of modifying our policy in the three fields under discussion outweigh by a considerable margin the disadvantages particularly in the light of our long range aims. It can be argued, of course, that we should await some improvement in the situation in Hungary or at least some conciliatory gesture on the part of the existing regime before we institute even minor relaxations in our policy. This, it is believed, would only be logical if the relaxations would work in favor of the Hungarian Communists and the Soviets. Actually the relaxations, in our view, would serve our aims primarily and to delay their implementation would, in effect, be to work against our own purposes. At the same time it is clear that we must proceed slowly in order to avoid any impression of a basic revision in our attitude toward the existing regime and to enable us to take into consideration any changes that occur in Hungary whether they be for the better or for the worse. Recommendations:These recommendations were forwarded to Murphy in a separate memorandum from Elbrick, also dated November 8. Elbrick briefly summarized Leverich’s arguments and Murphy approved the recommendations. Attached to Elbrick’s memorandum is Leverich’s memorandum to Elbrick and copies of despatches 217, 218, and 219 from Budapest. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.64/11–857) In a subsequent memorandum to Murphy, dated November 14, Berding expressed “hearty agreement” with these recommendations, but noted that as the modification of policy got underway it would become apparent to newspaper reporters, particularly those in Budapest. Berding stated that the Department of State would have to ensure that the modification not be interpreted as a resignation by United States to the suppression of the Hungarian uprising. A marginal note by Loy Henderson on Berding’s memorandum reads: “I also agree, LWH (O)” (Ibid., USIA/IAE/E Files: Lot 64 A 536, Hungary Political Reports, 1957) a. That beginning immediately the restrictions on travel to Hungary be more liberally interpreted to permit the travel of (a) reputable businessmen to Hungary who have legitimate business to complete there, (b) US citizens who have close relatives in Hungary whom they have not seen for a good many years, and (c) certain other Americans whose travel to Hungary would appear beneficial to US interests. We would review this policy in another six months and if no untoward incidents had occurred we would then give consideration to lifting all restrictions on travel to Hungary and at the same time informing the Hungarian regime that because of this we will be increasing our staff in Budapest; b. that Hungary be included in the cultural exchange program planned for other East European countries. We understand that a tour of Eastern Europe is currently under consideration for the Harlem Globe Trotters. We believe that their appearance in Hungary would have considerable impact and consider that this might be an appropriate attraction with which to initiate a new program; c. that our Chargé d’Affaires in Budapest be authorized henceforth to use his discretion in accepting Hungarian invitations and inviting Hungarian representatives to American affairs keeping in mind, of course, our continuing attitude toward the Kadar regime; and that elsewhere throughout the world, Hungarians henceforth be included, as are the Soviets, on invitation lists when representatives of all other diplomatic missions are to be invited. This would probably include only the Fourth of July parties abroad plus a few standard functions in Washington. 276. Operations Coordinating Board ReportSource: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 5608 Series. Secret. This progress report was discussed and concurred in by the OCB at its meeting of November 20. (Notes of OCB Meeting, November 20; ibid., OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430, OCB Notes) The NSC “noted” this report at its 349th meeting, December 24. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records) Washington, November 20, 1957. PROGRESS REPORT ON SOVIET SATELLITES IN EASTERN EUROPE (NSC 5608/1, approved July 13, 1956 and NSC 5616/2, approved November 19, 1956)Documents 80 and 169. (Period Covered: From July 18, 1956 through November 20, 1957) A. Summary of Operating Progress in Relation to Major NSC Objectives 1. Summary Evaluation. a. Poland. Significant progress toward the weakening of Soviet domination of Poland has occurred since the establishment last October of the Gomulka regime. The trend toward internal freedom in Poland has been far more significant than anywhere else in Eastern Europe, including Yugoslavia. This is manifested particularly by the freedom of the Catholic Church to exist without serious government interference and the resultant prestige and powerful influence of Cardinal Wyszynski; the relative freedom of personal expression; the elimination of a number of barriers to communication with the West, including informal U.S. information and cultural activities; the substantial decollectivization in agriculture; limited experimentation with non-Marxist ideas in economic planning and management; and, perhaps most important, the elimination of the terror and diminution of the influence of the secret police. Poland has become an example of evolutionary progress which has had a great impact throughout Eastern Europe reaching into the USSR itself. This progress, toward both our general interim objectives outlined in paragraph 14 of NSC 5608/1 and our courses of action with respect to Poland outlined in paragraphs 11 through 14 of NSC 5616/2, was primarily due to internal factors, although U.S. official postures and programs have undoubtedly had some influence. The initial liberalization trend in Poland has been checked, and it has been made clear that the regime will not tolerate freedom of expression, public assembly, strikes, or other activity on a scale which might catalyze disaffected elements into actions which would ultimately threaten the regime. Initial popular enthusiasm for the Gomulka regime has apparently declined as evidenced by a growing attitude of indifference punctuated by an increasing number of indications of unrest and open manifestations of discontent. The economic situation in Poland remains critical. The ability of the Gomulka regime to maintain itself in power depends, to a major extent, upon whether it can effect any significant improvement in economic conditions; such improvement cannot be achieved without substantial foreign assistance or substantially increased trade with the Free World. To date there has been only limited success in reorienting Polish trade toward the West and in inducing other countries of Western Europe, particularly Great Britain and West Germany, to offer economic assistance and trade inducements (see Annex A.);Annex A, not printed, contains a table depicting foreign credits to Poland, November 1, 1956–November 1, 1957, and a table depicting Polish trade with the West, 1956. but diplomatic efforts along these lines will be continued. The West German Republic has not yet extended aid to the Gomulka regime, and the possibilities of closer relations with Poland have been postponed due to Yugoslav recognition of East Germany. Unless the Poles have real hope for continuing economic assistance from sources other than the Soviet bloc, it is difficult for them to take the additional steps necessary to reorient their trade toward the West and to give them an alternative to complete dependence on Moscow. The problem is to determine, and make available, the U.S. and Free World assistance required to provide a justifiable basis for this hope. b. Czechoslovakia. Little or no progress was registered in the achievement of U.S. objectives in Czechoslovakia in the period under review. Certain developments in Czechoslovakia in the last year have probably been in a direction favorable to long-run U.S. interests. Czechoslovakia is now open to American tourists, several thousand of whom have visited the country in the last year, and more Czechoslovak citizens are now being allowed to travel to the West on conducted tours and as participants in scientific and other international congresses. Our efforts to have more American artists perform in Czechoslovakia were hampered by the fingerprinting dispute, which gave the Czechs an excuse to cancel plans for a U.S. tour by the Czech Philharmonic and thereby to withhold Czechoslovak visas for the Cleveland Symphony’s trip to Czechoslovakia. The Czechoslovak authorities still jam our broadcasts and still forbid the importation and distribution of American newspapers, books, and films. The Czechoslovak secret police still are alert to suppress any such open displays of pro-Western views by writers, students and others as those now common in Poland. c. Hungary. Progress in Hungary has, of course, been frustrated by forcible reassertion by the Soviets of their political and military control of the country, and by the resulting hard line taken by the Kadar regime toward the Hungarian population and toward the activities of the U.S. mission in Budapest. d. Rumania. Little progress was registered in the achievement of U.S. objectives in Rumania in the period under review. Supply of hybrid seed corn to Rumania by an American firm had a telling effect on many Rumanians; visits of some 600 Rumanian-Americans as tourists also had a beneficial impact; and recently the Rumanians have accepted USIA’s Built in USA architectural exhibit. In general, however, the regime in Rumania, as in Czechoslovakia, still follows a generally Stalinist domestic line, but seeks to reduce discontent by a program of economic reorganization which aims to raise the standard of living. e. Bulgaria and Albania. There has likewise been no significant progress in the achievement of our national objectives with respect to Bulgaria and Albania. The regimes of both countries continue to resist penetration by pro-Western or pro-American cultural influences. As with the regimes of Czechoslovakia and Rumania, they have followed Soviet policy very closely in making an occasional gesture favorable to increased East-West contacts and an end of the cold war, but they have not modified their Iron Curtain policies of jamming our broadcasts and keeping out American newspapers, books, and films. It may be desirable now to consider the advantages and disadvantages of the resumption of diplomatic relations with Bulgaria, and possibly also with Albania. f. East-West Exchanges. Lifting of the fingerprinting requirement by Congress is an important step in facilitating East-West exchanges; there are indications that our opportunities in this field may now increase in most or all of the satellite countries. The number of Americans visiting Eastern Europe as members of official or unofficial exchange delegations and as tourists is increasing. The impact of these visits is a very beneficial one, and more such visits should be encouraged. g. Policy Review. It is noted that the NSC Planning Board has scheduled a review early in 1958 of NSC 5608/1 and NSC 5616/2, pursuant to paragraph 24 of NSC 5616/2, which calls for such a review in the light of developments in the area as soon as these developments can be adequately assessed. OCB agrees that this review should be undertaken as soon as possible. B. Major Operating Problems or Difficulties Facing the United States 2. Problems of Mounting Operations Under Existing Policy.According to a memorandum from Manning H. Williams of USIA to Frederick M. Dearborn, Jr., Consultant to the President, December 16, the language in this paragraph “was contributed chiefly . . . on the basis of actual operating difficulties” which were not spelled out in the report. Williams went on to state that paragraph 2 was meant to assure that new policy resulting from any review of policy provides an adequate base for the preparation of effective operational plans. (Eisenhower Library, Sp. Asst. for Nat. Sec. Affairs Records, Soviet Dominated Nations) a. While progress was made during this period in the orientation of U.S. psychological and political operations in accordance with national security policy (for example, the adoption of a series of radio policy papers on Eastern Europe), policy difficulties still exist for operating agencies. The central difficulty results from the problem of trying to straddle the contradiction between the traditional anticommunist posture of the United States and the interim NSC objective of encouraging the development of “national communism” as a positive first step in the evolution away from Soviet domination. A great deal has been learned about “national communism” during the past year. Developments in Poland, Hungary and Yugoslavia all have a bearing on determining a more precise definition of what is meant by this expression. b. U.S. policy as presently conceived calls for a change within Eastern Europe through evolutionary means. The policy of evolution needs to be more precisely defined to prevent misinterpretation of the intent of NSC policy and to avoid contradictory operations. c. Present policy does not give adequate consideration to the impact which the free countries of Western Europe could have on the evolutionary process of Eastern Europe, or to what the U.S. might do to increase this impact, including greater coordinated action within NATO. As a result, the scope and variety of operations which can be undertaken in this very important field are limited. d. Some operating agencies have found that NSC 5608/1 and NSC 5616/2, and other NSC policies, do not give sufficient policy guidance for the development of operations involving Eastern Europe as they relate to the USSR, Yugoslavia and East Germany. e. Some operating agencies have found U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe too diffuse. There are at least four different policy papers related to Eastern Europe, all of which have differing emphasis, differing objectives and sometimes even a different policy approach. It is recommended that consideration be given to developing a single policy paper for Eastern Europe which would include policy to guide diplomatic action, political action, psychological action, and economic action—in fact, all aspects of U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe. This would mean incorporating pertinent policies now found in separate papers. In view of the fact that conditions vary from country to country in Eastern Europe much more now than they did when NSC 5608/1 was approved, it is further recommended that consideration be given to developing separate policy papers for each of the East European countries in addition to the overall policy paper for the area as a whole. 3. Economic Aid to Poland. The granting of $95 million U.S. credits and PL 480 sales for local currency, plus loans from other Free World countries amounting to approximately $80 million, had a psychological influence by concretely demonstrating Free World interest in and concern for the welfare of the Polish people. It also added to Poland’s relatively independent status in the eyes of world public opinion. All these positive factors were circumscribed in the Polish mind, however, by what they felt was a limited quantity of aid and by the delays and difficulties surrounding the negotiations with the U.S. Economic aid has been of importance so far principally to assist in warding off the collapse of the Polish economy. The continuation of Gomulka’s middle-of-the-road policies depends in large part upon his acceptability to the Polish population, who, in turn, will be more willing to support him if there remains hope for improvement in the economic situation. Available information on economic conditions in Poland indicates that Polish needs for imports of grain and cotton cannot be entirely financed by the Poles themselves from the resources likely to be available to them within the next year or so without a severe readjustment of their import program and an increased dependence on the Soviet bloc. Despite a great effort the present housing construction program of the Gomulka regime cannot keep pace with the growing need in this area. There has been only a small improvement in availability of agricultural commodities, consumer goods and services. Without substantial outside financial assistance, this situation is unlikely to improve except in agricultural production which may be stimulated by increased private initiative. Advancement toward U.S. policy objectives in Poland is closely linked to an improvement in the Polish economic situation and its reorientation toward the West. It is not necessary for the U.S. to match the level of Soviet bloc economic aid to Poland to advance our objectives there; but rather to insure that our aid is timely and effective. The Polish requirements (presented in quantities) have not yet been fully evaluated. It is estimated that, in any event, their equivalent value will be considerably in excess of the amount which has tentatively been programmed under Title I of PL 480, namely, $100 million at CCC cost ($60 to $70 million at export market value), plus the maximum amount available under Section 401 of the Mutual Security Act, namely, $30 million. The tentative program, therefore, is of approximately the same magnitude as that provided under the earlier agreements. The Department of State has not yet requested allocation of the latter amount under Section 401 of the MSA pending further examination of the Polish request. The figures indicated above reflect the present limitations, as far as the U.S. is concerned, for two principal reasons: (1) Under PL 480, any amounts additional to those already reserved for Poland could only be obtained by disregarding high priority requirements of other countries or by securing additional PL 480 authority from the Congress, and (2) Section 401 of the Mutual Security Act stipulates that not more than $30 million of the funds available under this section may be allocated to any one nation in any one fiscal year. 4. Legislative Limitations on Economic Assistance to Communist Countries. Legal provisions limiting the source of funds available for loans to Poland seriously complicated and delayed the recent loan and PL 480 negotiations. The present negotiations with the Polish representatives are subject to the same legal limitations. The achievement of important policy objectives in Eastern Europe, through the provision under certain conditions of assistance to Communist countries, is restricted by the Battle Act and by sections of the Surplus Disposal Act and the Mutual Security Act. A bill has been proposed by Senator Kennedy (S. 2828) to authorize the President under certain conditions to permit loans, grants or other aid agreements with satellite countries, such as Poland, which are moving in the direction of increasing independence of [from] the Soviet Union. Possession by the Executive Branch of such discretionary authority would be useful not only in negotiations with Poland but in meeting new Polish-type developments in other Eastern European countries. The Department of State and other interested agencies are presently preparing comments on the Kennedy bill. 5. Restoration of Most-Favored-Nation Customs Rates to Polish Exports to the U.S. The Polish delegation to the recent economic talks requested the restoration of Most-Favored-Nation privileges for Polish exports to the U.S. The Council on Foreign Economic Policy (CFEP), in reviewing the question, reacted favorably to the Department’s proposal that MFN treatment be extended to Polish trade. Pursuant to the request of the CFEP, Congressional consultations were undertaken by the Department of State. It is desirable that the privileges should be granted to Poland. In the negotiations for repayment of our nationalization claims, the Czechs are also pressing for restoration of MFN treatment; their request is under review, but will probably be refused. Nevertheless, a continuing problem exists as a result of the restrictions on the President’s authority to determine when MFN rights may be restored. 7. Relations with the Kadar Regime in Hungary. a. The U.S. considers that the Kadar regime was forcibly imposed on the Hungarian people by the Soviet Union and that it has followed a policy of terror and repression against the Hungarian population. We withdrew our newly-appointed Minister when the regime demanded that he either present his credentials or leave Hungary. We have limited social contacts with Hungarian representatives, and in the UN have supported a policy of neither accepting nor rejecting the credentials of the Hungarian delegation. We have successfully sponsored action in the UN for a condemnation of the repressive measures of the Kadar regime and of the role of the Soviets in suppressing Hungarian freedom. The UN Special Committee on Hungary completed an exhaustive report on the Hungarian revolution, which authoritatively described the course of events in Hungary. The Eleventh General Assembly, which was reconvened at our initiative to consider this document, endorsed it by an overwhelming majority and at the same time, again at our initiative, appointed Prince Wan of Thailand as Special UN Representative to take such steps as he deems appropriate to achieve the objectives of the UN in Hungary. We are continuing to support Prince Wan’s efforts to this end and expect further discussion of the Hungarian question during the current Twelfth General Assembly, on the provisional agenda of which the Hungarian item has already been entered. b. The Hungarian regime has required that the staff of our Legation in Budapest be severely reduced and has continued to harass the operation of the Legation in other ways, including the arrest and imprisonment of local employees. It has also continued to attack us for having given refuge to Cardinal Mindszenty. The presence of the Cardinal in our Legation and the evident unwillingness of the Kadar regime to drop its charges against him are factors which complicate our relations with Hungary. No satisfactory solution to the problem raised by the Cardinal’s presence in the American Legation is apparent. 8. Possible Opening of New Diplomatic and Consular Offices in Eastern Europe. a. The governments of Bulgaria and Albania have put out feelers for a resumption of diplomatic relations with the U.S. and appear ready to launch a propaganda campaign to show that obstructionism in the matter arises only from the American side. Resumptions of diplomatic relations would be in accord with NSC policy on the countries in question. Consequently, it would be desirable for the U.S. to arrive at a firm decision on the question in the near future. The Department of State would perhaps not need additional funds this fiscal year for this purpose, even if a favorable decision on the matter is taken in the near future, but the costs of running any new diplomatic missions in this area would have to be budgeted for in the FY 1959 budget now being prepared. b. The same may be said for the costs of reopening a small consulate at Bratislava, Czechoslovakia, and perhaps one or more consulates in Poland. The Czechoslovak government asked us more than a year ago for permission to reopen Czechoslovak consulates in the United States, in exchange for which we would be allowed to reopen our Bratislava office, which has been closed since 1949. Embassy Prague has recommended that consideration be given to the reopening of the Bratislava office so that our coverage of developments in Slovakia might be increased. This matter has been shelved pending conclusion of economic negotiations currently in progress. It is complicated by the fact that the Czechoslovaks, when making the offer, desired to return to the situation existing prior to the time the consulates were closed rather than reopening offices on a one-to-one basis. When the consulates were closed the Czechoslovaks had offices in New York, Chicago, Cleveland, and Pittsburgh, whereas we had only the one office at Bratislava. c. The Poles have given some indication that they may shortly approach us with an offer to open one or more consulates in Poland in exchange for permission from us to reopen Polish consulates here. Consular offices in Poland would be of great value in taking advantage of the new opportunities for cultural penetration now opening up to us in Poland. They would also be very useful in relieving Embassy Warsaw of some of the burden of the great increases in consular work resulting from the easing of Polish restrictions on emigration of Polish citizens and on repatriation of the sizeable body of our dual-nationals in Poland. There are indications that the Polish-American community would oppose the reestablishment of consulates much less strongly than before. 9. Negotiations for Settlement of Nationalization Claims in Eastern Europe. a. Our efforts to induce the Czechoslovak Government to agree to a lump sum settlement of the compensation claims of American citizens who have lost property as a result of Czechoslovakia’s nationalization laws have not been successful. The negotiations have nevertheless been useful in narrowing the area of disagreement in this matter. The talks are still continuing. There is a strong possibility that at its next session Congress will pass legislation seizing $9 million in Czechoslovak frozen assets in the U.S. to compensate American claimants. The administration has withdrawn its opposition to the passage of a bill on this subject. Lawyers of the interested agencies are now preparing an administration bill to replace a private bill which has already been introduced. Passage of the bill would probably result in a breaking off of the negotiations with the Czechs for an agreed settlement and could worsen somewhat our overall relations with Czechoslovakia. In the meantime, however, we are anxious to continue the talks. b. Exploratory talks with the Rumanians in October 1956 on the subject of war damage and nationalization claims have been without result. At present the U.S. holds about $23 million in Rumanian assets seized in accordance with PL 285.P.L. 285 (69 Stat. 562), approved August 9, 1955. This sum is not expected to be sufficiently large to cover the valid claims. c. On June 7, 1957, the Poles agreed in principle on the procedures to be followed in settling outstanding U.S. property claims against Poland. The agreement provided for eventual negotiations for a lump sum settlement with Poland. The U.S. Foreign Claims Settlement Commission is presently engaged in processing these claims. Note: The latest pertinent National Intelligence Estimate is NIE 12–57 “Stability of the Soviet Satellite Structure,” dated Feb. 19, 1957.Document 234. Preparation of a new estimate is scheduled to begin in January 1958. It is hoped this work can be expedited. 277. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Counselor of the Polish Embassy (Jaroszek) and the Director of the Office of Eastern European Affairs (Freers), Department of State, Washington, December 2, 1957Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.69/12–257. Confidential. Drafted by Freers and Sherer. Washington, December 2, 1957 SUBJECT Resumption of U.S.-Bulgarian Diplomatic Relations Mr. Jaroszek called at his request to inquire about the United States attitude toward the resumption of U.S.-Bulgarian diplomatic relations. With a reminder that Poland was charged with the care of Bulgarian interests in the United States, he referred to conversations concerning the resumption of relations which have taken place in Paris and at the United Nations,The Bulgarian Permanent Representative at the United Nations called on Lodge on April 23, 1956, and expressed several times Bulgaria’s desire to resume relations with the United States. (Telegram 879 from USUN, April 23, 1956; ibid., 611.69/4–2356) and stated that the Bulgarian Government had asked the Poles to approach the State Department officially to inquire about our position on this matter. Mr. Jaroszek further stated that since considerable time had elapsed since the question was first raised, the Bulgarians would like to receive some official answer. Mr. Freers stated that there has been no change in our official position, that we had no relations with Bulgaria, and have made no decision to work toward resumption of relations. He said that some change had been made in our passport validation policy, as Mr. Jaroszek was aware. He said that the question of our relations with Bulgaria was under continuous review. The Polish approach on behalf of the Bulgarians would be considered, and an appropriate response made in due course. 278. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Polish Ambassador (Spasowski) and the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon), Department of State, Washington, December 9, 1957Source: Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/12–957. Confidential. Drafted by Jandrey. Washington, December 9, 1957 SUBJECT Significance of Moscow Declaration with Respect to U.S. Aid to Poland Mr. Dillon opened the conversation by saying that he wished to express frankly his feeling of surprise if not shock to the Moscow Declaration,The Moscow declaration of November 21 was signed by the leaders of all 12 “Sino-Soviet bloc” parties. In regard to international relations, the declaration scored the “war danger” created by an allegedly reactionary United States and called for opposition by the the Communist world, socialists, and neutralists. A specific assessment of Poland’s role is in a memorandum from Elbrick to Murphy, November 27. (Ibid., 811.0048/11–2757) signed by the Polish Government, which imputed a false motive of domination to our economic aid programs. He said that it was not clear to us just how far this Declaration represented Polish policy, but he assumed that it did not or Poland would not be negotiating to improve economic relations at this time.See Document 274. Secondly, as the Ambassador was aware, it was necessary last spring for the Secretary to make a determination that Poland was an independent country not under the domination of Soviet Russia.The determination that Poland was a “friendly nation” under the terms of section 107 of P.L. 480 was made within the U.S. Government as early as December 18, 1956. See Document 215. Statements such as those in the Moscow Declaration, therefore, raised difficulties of a legal character. Mr. Dillon said that he had called the Ambassador in to see what he might have to say or what he might obtain from his Government to interpret the Moscow Declaration. The Ambassador said that he was not authorized to make a statement on the Moscow Declaration. However, he could say that this Declaration did not represent any change in the policy of the Polish Government. Polish relations with other socialist countries and with the West was unchanged from what it has been since the events of October 1956. He said that he felt those who were aware of the development of Polish affairs should not attach undue importance to this Declaration but should judge the facts. The facts were that cultural relations with the West had expanded and that their objective was that half the trade of Poland would be with the West and half with the Soviet Union and the socialist countries. He referred to the Secretary’s talk with the Polish Foreign MinisterSee Document 271. in which the Secretary had expressed a hope for better relations with the Soviet Union. Mr. Dillon agreed that improved relations with the Soviet Union were desirable but that when the Polish Government signed a declaration which might be expected from the U.S.S.R. but not from Poland, we naturally were concerned as to its meaning. He reiterated that he felt it was best to put our problem frankly and that the statements made by the Ambassador were along helpful lines; it would be of further help if the Ambassador could also obtain additional information from his Government concerning this matter. The Ambassador said he would do so, but he wanted to make it clear that he would personally be very disappointed if the Moscow Declaration did anything to obstruct the progress of improved economic relations with the United States, and he felt that this was also his Government’s view. At this point he made a guarded reference to the difficulties the Polish Government and Mr. Gomulka faced. He asked Mr. Dillon if it would be possible to bring the negotiations to a conclusion before the end of the year, as he wondered whether there might be some problem with Congress should the talks continue into January. Mr. Dillon said that he had not put any time limit on the negotiations. He said we had now obtained about all the information needed in order to make our decision. He said that he would be leaving for the Paris meetingApparent reference to the NATO Heads of Government meeting in Paris, December 16–19. in a few days and when he returned toward the 20th of December the Ambassador might wish to discuss the matter again on the basis of what information he had obtained from Warsaw. However, as funds did not have to be requested of Congress this time, there should not be any great delay in our coming to a decision in January. 279. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Polish Ambassador (Spasowski) and the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon), Department of State, Washington, December 24, 1957Source: Department of State, Central Files, 748.5–MSP/12–2457. Confidential. Drafted by Jandrey. Washington, December 24, 1957 SUBJECT Polish Economic Aid and The Moscow Declaration The Polish Ambassador referred to his previous conversationSee the memorandum of conversation, supra. in which he stated that the foreign policy of Poland and its attitude toward the United States had not changed since the events of October 1956. He said that now he spoke with the full authority of his government and had been instructed to confirm officially that the foreign policy of Poland had not changed. In support of this statement he mentioned the remarks of Foreign Minister Rapacki on December 15 to the Polish Parliament. The Foreign Minister explained at that time that Poland was seeking peaceful solutions to world problems and desired cooperation of Poland with countries having different social systems. The Ambassador added that Poland was worried by recent international developments and wanted to avoid a division of the world into two camps. So far as Polish-American relations were concerned, the present economic negotiations constituted an expression of Polish desire. These negotiations were being conducted in a straightforward manner and all questions were being answered frankly in order to bring about a better understanding of the Polish economic situation. When an agreement is reached after a full exploration of Poland’s needs, this would have a tremendous effect on Poland and on other Eastern European countries as well. In addition to the general changes which have taken place in Polish foreign policy there have been extensive technical exchanges. These exchanges constitute a good beginning and are very helpful in overcoming misunderstandings. During the past year it is worthy of note that agreements have been entered into between Poland and such American organizations as ING, The Joint Distribution, and CARE. These agreements concluded during 1957 indicate clearly the intention of the Poles to establish closer relations with the United States. As to the Moscow Declaration, the Ambassador said it was important to note the difference between a Party declaration and a document signed by the Polish Government. The language in the Moscow Declaration is a Party expression. Moreover the language of some of the Parties was different from that used by the Polish Party. Mr. Gomulka has pointed out that there were differences in meaning and in shades of meaning. The true interpretation of the Moscow Declaration from Poland’s point of view was given by Gomulka when he said that there were no strings attached to the Polish negotiations with the US for economic assistance. Mr. Gomulka had found it necessary to emphasize this interpretation and it would be helpful therefore not to draw erroneous conclusions from the Moscow Declaration. Mr. Dillon said that the statements of the Ambassador had been helpful and what he had said was what we had hoped would be the case. However, it was difficult for us and for the American public to draw a line of distinction between statements of the Party and of the Government in Socialist countries. The same relationship did not exist in the US. Mr. Dillon added that he hoped Poland would have this difficulty in mind in making statements such as those in the Moscow Declaration. However he saw no reason now why we could not proceed with the negotiations. The Ambassador said that the delay in the current negotiation was causing questions to be asked of the Embassy and he therefore wondered if it would be possible to speed up the present talks. He felt that there was some danger in waiting until Congress reconvened in January. Mr. Dillon expressed the opinion that there was no reason for concern on these grounds. The Ambassador then asked if Mr. Dillon felt it would be desirable to make further contacts with Members of Congress. Mr. Dillon replied that he did not feel that this was particularly required but that on a general basis it certainly would do no harm for the Embassy to maintain its contacts with the members of the Congress. 280. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United NationsSource: Department of State, Central Files, 764.00/12–2757. Confidental. Drafted by Elizabeth A. Brown (IO/UNP) and cleared by Sisco, Hanes (IO), and Robert M. McKisson. Washington, December 27, 1957—6:47 p.m. 516. Re Hungary. 1. Dept believes important find additional means of focusing attention on current situation in Hungary, particularly because of likelihood new trials and executions may be announced at any time.The Legation in Budapest received reliable reports that former Nagy government officials prominent in the 1956 uprising were being secretly tried and that death sentences were probable. Those on trial were General Pal Meleter, General Istvan Kovacs, and Sandor Kopacsi. (Telegram 330 from Budapest, December 14; ibid., 764.00/12–1457) This report came soon after recent trials and sentences (including executions) of participants in the 1956 uprising. (Telegram 116 to USUN, December 14; Ibid.) In these circumstances we have been considering possible steps that will produce further publicity. 2. While Hungarian UN representative summarily rejected communication from Special Committee,On December 20, the Special Committee on Hungary approved a letter for transmission to the Hungarian Foreign Minister expressing concern about reports of trials of participants in the 1956 uprising and asking for information and assurances that those accused would be treated humanely. (U.N. doc. A/AC.88/1) On December 21, the Hungarian Permanent Representative returned the letter without transmitting it to his government on the grounds that Hungary did not recognize the Special Committee. (U.N. Yearbook, 1957, p. 66) his earlier statement of willingness to provide correct information presumably still stands.Reference is to an assurance given Prince Wan Waithaiakon by Foreign Minister Rapacki on October 10 that Hungary would provide information on treatment of prisoners awaiting trial if the request was submitted to the Hungarian Government in the form of a memorandum of questions. This offer was subsequently revoked by the Hungarian Representative on November 15 and December 2 on the grounds that it was an intrusion into Hungarian internal affairs. (Ibid., p. 65, and U.N. doc. A/3774) We believe it could be used as basis for individual communications from permanent UN representatives. LA states have of course already sent joint communications; we would be interested know whether Hungarian delegation acknowledged LA letter in any way. 3. USUN authorized discuss current situation with key permanent representatives, including particularly those of UK, France, Australia, Netherlands, India and any others who might be receptive to idea of further initiatives, and might have suggestions of their own. For example, most SC members might be approached. 4. Without placing US in forefront of campaign, our idea would be to stimulate as many UN members as possible to communicate their official concern to the Hungarian UN representative and express their hope that he will, pursuant to his own commitment, inform them regarding true facts of trials, etc. Such correspondence could be released to press at appropriate time together with whatever answer, if any, Hungarians might provide. We would hope Asian and African states particularly might be induced on strictly humanitarian grounds to join in sending such communications. 5. Text of draft US communication will be sent you separately.Reference is to a draft of a letter from Acting Representative at the United Nations, Ambassador James J. Wadsworth, to the Hungarian Representative, Ambassador Peter Mod, February 18, 1958; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, April 7, 1958, pp. 581–582. Dulles Finland United States Policy Toward FinlandContinued from Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. VIII, pp. 755 ff. 281. Editorial Note During the period 1955–1957, Finland’s political and economic stability and its relations with the Soviet Union continued to be of interest to the United States. From September 16 to 19, 1955, President Juho Paasikivi and Prime Minister Urho Kekkonen, along with other officials, visited the Soviet Union. The visit resulted in the signing on September 19 by Kekkonen and Soviet Premier Bulganin of (1) a protocol extending for 20 years the Finnish-Soviet treaty of friendship and mutual assistance that had been concluded in 1948, and (2) an agreement whereby the Soviet Union undertook to evacuate, and to return to Finland, the naval base of Porkkala (12 miles southwest of Helsinki) which had been leased to the Soviet Union under the terms of the Finnish Peace Treaty signed in 1947. An analysis of the significance of these developments is in Soviet Affairs, October 1955, pages 11–12. (Department of State, INR Files) A memorandum of a conversation on September 21 between Assistant Secretary of State Livingston T. Merchant and Finnish Ambassador Nykopp about the return of Porkkala is ibid., Central Files, 660E.61/9–2155. The agreements were ratified by the Finnish Government on October 7 and by the Soviet Government on October 11. On February 15, 1956, Prime Minister Kekkonen was elected President for a 6-year term to succeed Paasikivi. The election results were discussed in despatch 381 from Helsinki, February 20. (Ibid., 760E.11/2–2056) Following Kekkonen’s inauguration as President on March 1, a new government headed by Karl-August Fagerholm was formed on March 2. The formation of the Fagerholm government was discussed in despatch 409 from Helsinki, March 5. (Ibid., 760E.13/3–556) On November 28, 1956, a Finnish-Soviet trade agreement was signed, and from January 30 to February 3, 1957, Prime Minister Fagerholm and Minister of Commerce Kleemola visited Moscow for discussions with the Soviet Government. The Fagerholm government resigned on April 25, 1957, and a new government headed by V.J. Sukselainen was formed on May 27. From June 6 to 13, 1957, Soviet Communist Party Chairman Khrushchev and Premier Bulganin visited Finland. Documentation on their visit, consisting mostly of telegrams from Moscow and Helsinki, is ibid., 033.6160E. An analysis of their visit is in despatch 564 from Helsinki, June 21. (Ibid., 033.6160E/6–2157) The visit was also discussed in Soviet Affairs, July 1957, pages 4–5. (Ibid., INR Files) On October 18, 1957, the Sukselainen government resigned, and it was not until November that a new government, headed by the President of the Bank of Finland, Rainer von Fieandt, was formed. The 6-week period during which Finland was without a government constituted the longest political crisis since the end of World War II. Reports from the Embassy in Finland during the crisis are ibid., Central File 760E.13. No new policy papers on Finland were adopted by the National Security Council during this period. The policy paper in effect continued to be NSC 5403, “United States Policy Toward Finland,” January 25, 1954. For text, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, volume VIII, page 773. However, the Operations Coordinating Board did prepare and submit to the NSC various Progress Reports on NSC 5403. These Progress Reports, dated April 25, 1955; November 23, 1955; July 3, 1956; and June 12, 1957 are in Department of State, S–S/NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 5403 Series. Index Ackerson, Garret G., Jr., 648–650, 657–659, 663, 669–671, 679–684 Acs, Lajos, 162, 169 Ad Hoc Committee on Retaliatory Measures Against the U.S.S.R., 396 Adams, Sherman, 579 Adamski, Marian, 582 Adenauer, Konrad, 37n, 79, 80n, 161, 399–400, 558, 675 Advisory Committee on Export Policy (ACEP), 207n, 627 Afghanistan, 104n, 404 Africa, 144 Agriculture, U.S. Department of, 137, 505, 582, 606, 617 Air Force, U.S. Department of the, 621n Albania, 35, 110, 115–116, 199–200, 202, 204, 332, 367 United States, relations with, 11–12, 121, 207, 692, 696–697 Aldrich, Winthrop W., 303–304, 308 Algeria, 545 Alphand, Hervé, 372–373 American Federation of Labor (A.F. of L.), 69 American Relief for Poland, 634 Amory, Robert, Jr., 259, 461n Anderson, Dillon, 6, 23, 47, 48n, 79–80, 163, 212, 214 Anderson, Robert B., 47–48 Andropov, Ambassador, 234 Anschuetz, Norbert L., 660n Apro, Antal, 382 Arab states (see also individual countries), 394, 405, 440 Argentina, 140, 456 Armstrong, W. Park, Jr., 182n, 253n, 613 Army, U.S. Department of the, 57, 621n Arnold, Henry, 322 Asbjornson, Mildred, 305n Asia, Soviet policy toward, 488 Assembly of Captive European Nations (ACEN), 109–114, 124, 205–206, 248 Atomic energy, 42, 103n Atomic weapons, 42, 100, 335, 674 Australia, 273n, 309, 376n, 384, 537, 552, 637, 639n Austria (see also Austria and Austrian subheadings under other subjects): Hungarian revolution, 319, 352–353, 361–362, 390, 496–497 Refugees, 301, 309–310, 326–327, 357, 362, 428–429, 448, 457–458, 534n, 535–539 Neutrality, 151 Soviet bloc escapees, 91–92, 111, 113, 149, 151–152 Soviet troop withdrawal, 191, 217 State Treaty, 37, 42, 47, 91, 100 U.S. propaganda, 319 Austrian State Treaty, 37, 42, 47, 91, 100 Bain, Leslie, 320 Balkan Pact, 1, 35 Bandung Conference, 523 Bane, D.M., 533n, 543n Barber, Willard F., 230–231, 406–415 Barbour, Walworth, 81–82 Barnes, N. Spencer, 3, 115n, 522n, 556n Hungarian revolution, 261–265, 281–285, 310–313, 319–320, 329, 340–341, 349–350, 363–364 Hungary: Political situation, 12–14, 231–241, 248–250 United States, relations with, 15, 23, 52–53, 239, 503n, 504n, 583, 620n U.S. propaganda, 14–15, 262–263, 591–593 Beale, W.T.M., 684–685 Beam, Jacob D., 106n, 108n, 109, 121n, 138n, 294n, 313, 344n, 418n, 459n, 481n, 658n Destalinization, 167, 170, 189 Geneva Conference, 82 Hungarian revolution, 285, 376, 378, 385, 395, 400, 436, 461, 490, 495 Indian position, 398, 509 Refugees, 491–493, 546 Suez crisis and, 439 U.N. General Assembly actions, 402–403, 496–498, 502–503, 543–544, 638n U.N. observers, 438–439, 462, 493–494, 496–497, 508, 530, 543–545 U.N. Security Council appeal, 279, 322–323, 359–361 U.S. complicity allegations, 531, 533, 545–546 U.S. economic aid and, 326, 364 U.S.-Indian relations and, 440 U.S. policy, 301–303, 380, 386–387, 396 U.S. propaganda, 277, 279–280, 300–301, 324–325, 401–403, 416–418, 438, 531 U.S.-Soviet relations and, 396, 401, 418, 504 Hungary, 397, 432–433, 439, 503, 620–622 Poland, 256, 259, 622n Political situation, 189, 221–222, 227n, 251 United States, relations with, 257n, 404, 504, 529, 546, 593n, 605n, 671n, 671n Romania, 461–462 Soviet bloc, U.S. policy toward, 532 Soviet bloc escapees, 397 Bebrits, Lajos, 309n Belgium, 152, 251, 385, 407 Belgrade Accord. See Yugoslavia: Soviet Union, relations with. Bennett, W. Tapley, 141n, 256, 313, 327n, 373, 416 Benson, Ezra Taft, 541, 630 Bentley, Alvin M., 634 Berding, Andrew H., 553n, 660, 689n Bergus, Donald C., 260n Beria, Lavrentiy Pavlovich, 34 Berlin (see also Germany, Federal Republic of), 129–130 Berman, Jakub, 173, 252 Bernau, Phyllis D., 182n, 184n, 209n, 258, 268n, 273n, 290n, 305n, 306n, 346n, 365n, 638n, 641n Bernbaum, Maurice M., 140n Bessenyey, George, 109 Bibo, István, 377, 649 Bishop, Max W., 6–7, 12n Blake, Robert O., 278–280, 301, 366n Hungarian revolution, 277, 300, 322, 360, 396, 400, 436, 495, 502, 543 Arab statement, 440 Soviet military intervention, 280 U.N. General Assembly actions, 439, 496–498, 508–509 U.N. Security Council discussion, 361 U.S. complicity allegations, 496, 545 U.S. policy, 301, 362–363, 398, 401, 438–439 Blood, Archer, 416n Bodnares, Gen. Emil, 196 Boerner, Alfred V., 170, 546 Hungarian revolution, 277–278, 301, 303, 362, 395, 398, 491–492, 494, 543–544 U.S. complicity allegations, 436–438, 481n, 492, 495, 508, 532–533 U.S. humanitarian aid, 397, 402–403, 545 U.S. propaganda, 278, 280, 301, 360, 363, 440 Bohlen, Charles E., 34–36, 297, 335, 446–447 Hungarian revolution, 308n, 336–338, 346–349, 370–371, 391n, 394n, 426n, 445–446, 540–541 Boldiszar, Ivan, 236 Boldoczki, 81, 162n Bor-Komorowski, Gen., 227n Boros, Laszlo, 479 Bowie, Robert R., 182n, 259, 266, 390n, 461n, 622n Bray, William H., 541n, 558n, 571n Brentano, Heinrich von, 399–400 Breugl, Gordon, 375, 381 British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), 135, 532, 591 Brussels Treaty, 677 Brown, Constantine, 504 Brown, Elizabeth A., 197n, 639n, 655n, 703n Brown, Emmons, 436, 438–439 Brownell, Herbert, Jr., 164, 166, 216, 297, 421, 537, 579–580 Bruce, David K.E., 3 Bulganin, Nikolai Aleksandrovich, 34, 36, 128, 242–243, 245, 255, 297, 335, 706 Geneva Conference, 49, 53, 68 Hungary, 249, 370n, 390–391, 419, 424–426, 431, 440, 459, 465 Bulgaria, 34–35, 140, 143–145, 205, 332, 462 Soviet Union, relations with, 34, 199, 203, 333 U.N. membership, 110, 139, 141–143, 200 United States, relations with, 138–146, 207, 692, 696–699 Bunker, Ellsworth, 309n, 426n Burgess, William Randolph, 526n Burke, Adm. Arleigh A., 461n Burma, 104, 404, 462n Burris, Philip, 170, 529–530 Hungarian revolution, 300, 322, 360, 396, 401, 436, 491, 495, 502, 543 Humanitarian aid, 326 Refugees, 546 U.S. complicity allegations, 438, 508, 545 U.S. propaganda, 531 Button, Robert E., 274n, 276, 476–479 Butz, Earl L., 606n, 630–631 Buzek, Romana, 582 Cabell, Gen. Charles P., 242–243, 461n Campbell, Laughlin, 438, 499, 529–530 Hungarian revolution, 300, 322, 359, 395, 400, 436, 490, 495, 502, 543 International labor boycott, 403 Refugees, 491–492, 546 U.N. General Assembly actions, 497–498 U.N. Security Council appeal, 278 U.S. complicity allegations, 437, 496, 508, 531, 545 U.S. policy, 325, 362 U.S. propaganda, 279–280, 301, 323, 326, 363, 397, 531 Yugoslav position, 361 Canada, 222, 309, 443–444, 616, 618–620, 630, 639n CARE, 634, 676 Carpenter, Isaac White, Jr., 381 Catholic Charities, 539 Cefaratti, A.J., 634n Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 7, 72n, 85n, 89n, 243, 593, 605 Hungarian revolution, 518n, 531, 545, 645, 650n, 678 Cepicka, Alexei, 38–39, 332n Ceylon, 404, 428, 460, 462n, 503n, 552, 637, 643 Chamoun, Camille, 440 Chapin, Selden, 147–148 Cherne, Leo, 401 Chervenkov, Vulko, 142, 205, 332n Chiefs of Mission Conference, May 10–11, 1957, 2–3 China, People’s Republic of, 36, 164, 296–297, 450, 497, 587, 644 China, Republic of, 73, 93–94, 385 Chisinevschi, Iosif, 102, 196 Cionca, Vasile Charles, 600 Clark, Robert A., 491, 494–495 Clark, William L., 3, 281 Clarke, Eric T., 270n Clay, Gen. Lucius D., 302 COCOM (Coordinating Committee of the Paris Consultative Group). See Strategic controls under East-West trade. Colbert, James L., 558n, 571n Collins, Ralph S., 322, 396, 436, 476n, 491, 495, 502, 508, 543, 553 Commerce, U.S. Department of, 106, 505, 546, 560, 582 Committee for Free Europe, 118, 121, 151, 279, 403, 420 Committee on Radio Broadcasting Policy, 2 Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC), 527, 573, 575, 606–607, 615–616, 630, 633, 694 Commonwealth, 537 Compton, Arthur, 360, 362 Comstock, Paul B., 277–280, 300–303, 322–326, 359–363, 395–398, 400–404 Hungarian revolution, 436, 481n, 490, 492–495, 498, 502, 508, 543 Conant, James B., 79n, 161, 399–400, 556 Condon, Col. Reynolds, 557 Congress, U.S.: Acts of: Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act, 1954 (P.L. 480), 127, 182–183, 213 Hungary, 364, 449, 469, 575 Poland, 213, 259, 448–449, 469, 504, 527, 529, 542, 559–561, 593, 605–607, 615–618, 626, 630, 633–634, 694–695 Alien Enlistment Act (Lodge Bill), 1950, 56, 62, 94, 150, 586 Battle Act, 413, 414n, 468–469, 498, 504, 526–528, 560, 615, 695 Immigration and Nationality Act, 1953, 652n Kersten Amendment, 55, 57, 62, 64, 468, 512, 531, 575 Poland, 468, 526–527, 560–561, 605–607, 615, 618, 626, 695 Lodge Bill. See Alien Enlistment Act above. Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act, 1951. See Battle Act above. Mutual Security Act, 1951, 469, 526, 528, 695 Mutual Security Act, 1951, Sec. 401(a). See Kersten Amendment above. Refugee Relief Act, 1953, 91 Surplus Disposal Act, 695 Tariff Act of 1930, 449 Trade Agreements Act, 208, 527 Trade Agreements Extension Act, 1951, 127, 449, 628 Watkins Bill, 91 Bulgaria, 139–140, 142 East-West contacts, 692 East-West trade, 208, 212–214, 695 Hungarian revolution, 421, 533, 536–539, 580–581, 639n, 642n Poland, 197–198, 210, 408, 529n, 530, 616–617, 634, 702 Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 617 Soviet bloc: Escapees, 114, 536–539, 580–581 U.S. economic aid to, 120, 268n Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO), 69 Cooper, John Sherman, 426n Corbett, Jack C., 582 Cornut-Gentille, Bernard, 292, 308n, 315–316, 393 Costa, Brutus, 109 Cotarla, Georgeta, 600 Council of Europe, 304 Council on Foreign Economic Policy (CFEP), 504, 526, 529–530, 542, 546, 634, 695 Council of Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA), 199–201, 407 Cox, Arthur M., 279 Hungarian revolution, 277, 300, 322, 360, 396, 436, 491, 502, 543 Refugees, 492, 494 U.N. General Assembly actions, 361, 397, 493, 496–499, 503, 544 U.N. Security Council appeal, 323 U.S. complicity allegations, 495–496, 508, 545 U.S. policy, 301–302, 324–325, 362, 401–404 Crittenberger, Gen. Willis D., 24, 54, 56n, 58–59 Crusade for Freedom, 123, 279 Cuba, 383–384, 422, 460–461 Cullen, Paul H., 447n Cutler, Robert, 6–7, 23–24, 579 Cyprus, 1, 545 Cyrankiewicz, Josef, 548 Czechoslovakia (see also Czech and Czechoslovakia subheadings under other subjects): Austrian State Treaty, 37 Economic situation, 37, 333 German reunification, 332, 366 Nationalism, 332 Political situation, 37–39, 202, 367, 487 Soviet Union, relations with, 199, 203 United States, relations with, 8, 127, 177–180, 206–207, 251n, 691–692, 695, 697–698 U.S. propaganda, 51, 98, 118, 438, 692 Czerny-Stefanska, Halina, 97, 138 D’Alessandro, Aldo, 274–277 Dallam, Col., 381 David, Vacláv, 176 Davis, Nathaniel J., 529 Davis, Richard R., 3, 190n, 259 De Guiringaud, Louis, 368 De Seynes, Philippe, 501 Dearborn, Frederick M., Jr., 693n Defense, U.S. Department of, 85n, 211, 357n, 532, 607, 618n Soviet bloc escapees, 55, 57, 64, 89 Delaney, Robert F., 10–11, 274 Delargy, Hugh, 132 Denmark, 422, 444, 552, 637 Dery, Tibor, 478 Dillon, C. Douglas, 390, 571n, 593n Dimitrov, G.M., 109, 112, 143 Disarmament, 73, 161, 174, 511, 647, 674 Dixon, Ben R., 308n, 315–316, 368–369, 372, 638, 639n Dobi, István, 382n, 383n, 432 Dogei, Imre, 382 Dosti, Hasan, 109 Dowling, Walter C., 80n Downs, Donald, 25–33 Drummond, Roscoe, 530 Dulles, Allen, 33, 163–165, 297 Hungarian revolution, 290n, 295–297, 358–359, 391n, 418–421, 423, 473–475, 479–480, 678 Poland, 181, 183–185, 258, 268n, 295–296, 298, 590–591, 611–615, 668 Soviet bloc, U.S. policy toward, 7, 65, 66n, 72n, 85n, 129 Dulles, John Foster, 115n Assembly of Captive European Nations, 109–110, 112–114 Bulgaria, 138, 141n East-West trade, 634n Geneva Conference, 49, 51, 71, 83 Hungarian revolution, 326, 344–345, 391n, 424–425, 535n, 580 Public statements, 274n, 317–318, 321, 328 U.N. General Assembly actions, 402, 502n, 503n, 638–639, 641–642, 645n, 655–656, 660–661, 703–704 U.N. Security Council appeal, 273, 290–293, 297–298, 306–307, 308n, 309, 345, 365, 369n U.S. policy, 305–307, 320n, 321–322, 401n, 425–426, 533–534, 678 Hungary, 309–310, 345, 373–374, 432, 474 India, 395n Poland, 131–138, 296, 298, 317–318, 671–677 Poznań riots, 181–185, 189, 197n, 209–210, 247–248 U.S. economic aid to, 182–185, 268, 269n, 270n, 527, 541–542, 608n, 630, 633, 673 Amount of, 558, 559n, 560n, 561n, 607n, 614, 618–620 Congressional opinion, 529n, 589 Polish political situation and, 611, 613n Romania, 106, 108n, 338–340, 561, 565n Soviet bloc: Escapees, 79n, 160–161, 163–166, 326 Geneva Conference discussion, 49, 71 Soviet Union, relations with, 112–114, 366–367 Public statements, 40, 71, 83, 101n, 109–110, 129, 132 U.S. economic aid to, 119–120 U.S. policy toward, 211, 243–244, 532 U.S. propaganda, 72n, 182, 243n, 244 Soviet Union, 163, 700 Suez crisis, 346, 365, 402 East-West contacts (see also East-West trade; Soviet bloc; Soviet Union), 46, 111, 121, 126–127 Hungarian revolution and, 394, 396, 398, 418 U.S. position, 47, 74–75, 78, 113, 171, 209, 692 East-West trade (see also Soviet bloc; Soviet Union; U.S. trade with under specific countries), 111, 117–118, 120, 126–127, 298 Strategic controls, 122, 127, 207–208, 288, 403, 513 U.S. economic aid to Poland and, 414, 442, 450, 528, 530, 624, 627–628, 684–685 Eastern Europe. See Soviet bloc. Economic and Social Council, U.N., 222 Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), 415, 499 Economic Defense Advisory Committee (EDAC), 207n Eden, Anthony, 308, 346 Edman, George W., 270–271 Egypt (see also Suez crisis), 394n, 456 Eisenhower, Dwight D., 11–12, 298, 346, 358, 364, 421, 474, 510 Geneva Conference, 46, 49, 51, 67–68, 71, 83, 112 Hungarian revolution, 299, 321–322, 390–392, 394–395, 404n, 419, 421, 423–424, 440n, 463 Public statements, 274–275, 277, 297, 310, 317n, 328n, 347n, 350–352, 436–438, 496, 518–519, 678 Refugees, 534–539, 580 U.N. Security Council appeal, 290–291, 306–307, 309, 369n U.S. complicity allegations, 424–426, 435–438, 470, 473, 480, 518–519 U.S. policy, 305–307, 321–322, 386–387, 390, 420, 424–426, 431, 465 Poland, 247, 248n, 256n, 265, 287, 298, 317n U.S. economic aid to, 268, 269n, 505, 541, 633n Soviet bloc: Escapees, 24, 54, 57–59, 80, 149, 163–166, 584n Soviet domination of, 46, 49, 71, 77, 83, 109, 113, 129, 132, 210 U.S. economic aid to, 119–120, 635–636 U.S. policy toward, 65n, 121, 129, 216, 243, 347 Eisenhower Doctrine, 562, 570 Eisler, Gerhart, 630n Elbrick, C. Burke, 2–3, 182n, 184, 211–212, 268–270, 294, 459n, 671, 699n Hungary, 320n, 321n, 401n, 657–660, 685, 689n Entezam, Nasrollah, 372 Ernst, Roger, 532 Hungarian revolution, 277, 322, 325, 359–360, 395, 400, 436, 490, 495, 502, 543 Refugees, 491 U.N. General Assembly actions, 361, 496–499 U.S. policy, 325, 362 Erskine, Gen. Graves B., 620 Escapees. See Soviet bloc escapees and political exiles. European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), 415 European Defense Community (EDC), 54, 59 Export-Import Bank, 259, 441, 449, 527–528, 607, 615, 630, 633, 635 Fagerholm, Karl-August, 705–706 Farkas, Mihaly, 261–262 Finland, 43, 705–706 Finn, Richard B., 461n FitzGerald, Dennis A., 574 Flemming, Arthur S., 213 Ford Foundation, 676 France (see also U.N. General Assembly appeals and U.N Security Council appeals under Hungarian revolution; Suez crisis; France, French, and Tripartite subheadings under other subjects), 46, 127–128, 140, 152, 170, 444 Hungarian revolution, 273, 293, 308–309, 311, 368–369, 373, 444, 545, 639n, 641 Poland, 42–43, 210, 407, 504, 530, 550 Volunteer Freedom Corps, 24, 54–55, 62 Frantescu, Caius, 595–598, 604 Free Europe Committee. See Committee for Free Europe. Freers, Edward L., 3, 344n, 366n, 373n, 481n, 499, 529, 546, 698–699 Hungarian revolution, 285, 300, 302, 322–323, 326, 360–361, 378, 396, 400, 491, 495, 502, 543 U.N. General Assembly actions, 493, 497–499, 503 U.N. Security Council appeal, 277 U.S. complicity allegations, 436–438, 494, 508, 533 U.S. policy, 278, 302, 362, 402, 531 Poland, 259, 279, 494, 671 Friedman, Richard, 553n Frohlich, William, 627n Fry, Leslie, 304 Fryer, Peter, 546n Fuller, Leon, 259 Fulton, James G., 634 Gabor, Andrew G., 270n, 598, 600 Garst, Roswell, 99, 102, 108, 379, 455, 665 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), 447n, 450 Geneva Conference, 35–36, 45–46, 51, 73 Atmosphere of conciliation, 52–53, 65–79, 82–83, 88 German reunification, discussion of, 113, 124–125, 193, 219–220 Hungarian position, 99–100 Soviet bloc, discussion of, 46–47, 49, 71, 74, 100, 112–113, 124–125, 193, 219–220 U.S. propaganda, 53, 65–70, 72–79, 100–101 Volunteer Freedom Corps and, 55, 62, 160 George, Walter F., 399 Germany: NATO membership, 77–78 Neutrality, 44, 125 Reunification, 40–41, 43, 129, 328, 332, 366, 409 Geneva Conference discussion of, 113, 124–125, 193, 219–220 Polish position, 41, 43, 45, 332, 355, 366, 464, 674–675 Polish-Soviet relations and, 367, 548, 551 Soviet position, 113, 116, 125, 193, 219–220, 488, 578 U.S. position, 47, 71, 77–78, 409, 676–677 Germany, Democratic Republic of (see also Germany; German Democratic Republic subheadings under other subjects), 5–6, 8–9, 193, 219–220, 332–333, 568, 691 Hungarian revolution, 326, 367, 399–400 Poland, relations with, 43, 45, 86, 201, 409 Soviet Union, relations with, 46–47, 199, 202–203, 333–334, 355, 367, 464 U.S. propaganda, 400, 417, 438 Germany, Federal Republic of (see also Germany; German Federal Republic subheadings under other subjects): Hungarian revolution, 399–400, 436–437, 444, 536, 556–558 Labor Service Organization, 47n, 54, 56, 59–61, 63, 491–493 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, 191, 217, 399 Paris Agreements, 14, 24 Rearmament, 13–14, 22, 41, 160n Soviet bloc escapees in, 111, 113, 151–152, 444, 536 Soviet Union, relations with, 37, 39, 40–41, 43, 79 Suez crisis, 399–400 West Berlin, U.S. economic aid to, 129 Gërö, Ërno, 223–227, 232–237, 240, 242, 248–249, 261n, 264, 278, 282, 284 Gheorgiu-Dej, Gheorghe, 102–103, 106, 174–175, 195–196, 205, 462, 525 Gleason, S. Everett, 72n, 79–80, 120, 128–130, 163–167, 190, 212–216, 461n, 584n, 587n Hungary, 295–299, 358–359, 418–421 Gleason, Capt. Thomas R., 620 Gomulka, Wladyslaw (see also Political situation under Poland), 258, 288, 331, 408–410, 548, 594n, 611–612 Personal position of, 547, 551, 553, 668 Restoration to power, 230, 245, 252–255, 257n, 266 Speech, Oct. 20, 1956, 258, 270, 278–280, 287 Goodpaster, Col. Andrew J., 309–310, 347n, 390n, 394n, 435, 535 Gordon, Thomas S., 634 Greece, 1, 35, 92, 140, 143, 145, 152, 204 Greene, Joseph, 395n, 639n, 642n Grew, Joseph, 480, 519 Grewe, Wilhelm, 557 Grosz, Joseph, 159, 169 Gruber, Karl, 326–327, 457n Gundersen, Oscar, 434, 544n Hagerty, James C., 11–12, 51, 243n, 391n, 424, 518 Halleck, Charles A., 424 Hallstein, Walter, 557 Hammarskjöld, Dag, 210 Hungary, 360n, 368n, 404, 417, 429, 434, 501, 514, 543–545, 638 U.N. observers, 422, 429, 434, 461, 493, 530 Hanes, John W., Jr., 71, 703n Hanke, Hugo, 82n Hansen, Col. Kenneth K., 300–301, 502, 504, 529, 531, 533, 543 Harben, William, 170 Harlem Globetrotters, 689 Hatoyama, Ichiro, 254n Hay, Gyula, 260–262 Hayter, William, 335, 338 Hearst, William Randolph, Jr., 514 Higgs, L. Randolph, 343, 396, 398, 401–403, 482 Hill, Robert B., 138n, 182, 529n Holland, Henry F., 139–140 Hollister, John B., 534–535, 538–539, 559–561, 607, 618n, 633n Hoover, Herbert C., Jr., 23, 79–80, 121n, 418n, 432n, 514n Hungarian revolution, 386, 390–392, 394, 395n, 404–405, 419–420, 423–426, 459–460, 506–507 U.N. Security Council appeal, 309, 369n U.S. complicity allegations, 435, 481–482, 518–519 Hungary, 15–16, 310, 364, 447, 571 Poland, 182, 183n, 189, 197, 278, 447 U.S. economic aid to, 269n, 270n, 287–288, 293–294, 504n, 526n, 558n, 559, 605n Soviet bloc, U.S. policy toward, 4, 5n, 6–7, 84, 85n, 128–130, 278, 506–507 Horner, John E., 3, 322, 360, 396, 401, 436, 481n, 491, 495, 502 Horváth, Imre, 223, 284, 309n, 434, 493n, 679 Horváth, Marton, 233, 237, 238, 460, 501, 502n Howe, Fisher, 141n, 182n, 375, 416n Hoxha, Enver, 202, 205 Hughes, Rowland R., 119–120 Humphrey, George M., 164, 182, 212–214, 218 Humphrey, Hubert H., 533, 509–514, 616–617 Hungarian revolution (see also Hungary), 263–264, 309–310, 313–314, 344–345, 352, 464–465 Austrian position, 319 British position, 384, 543–544 Budapest strike, 459, 461 Chinese People’s Republic position, 296–297 Congressional briefing, 421, 423–424 Destalinization and, 333–334 Economic situation and, 352 European responses to, 309 Global war, possibility of, 299, 335, 356, 463, 465 Humanitarian aid (see also U.S. humanitarian aid below), 388, 393, 397, 404–405, 417, 427, 428–429, 434, 443, 497, 576 Indian reactions, 321–322, 404, 419–420, 428, 462, 509 Bulganin-Nehru note, 440, 459 U.N. abstention, 394, 403–404 U.N. draft resolutions, 460–461, 486, 503 U.S. approaches to India, 290n, 321–322, 394–395, 404–405, 426, 440, 459 International labor boycott of Soviet Union, 403, 418, 439, 525 Nagy role in, 262–264, 283–284, 300, 311–312, 323, 329n, 331, 336, 341–345, 355, 359 U.N. Special Committee report, 637 NATO involvement, 390, 443–444 Negotiations, 312–313, 320–322, 340–343, 353, 370, 384, 391 U.S. official statements, 328, 347–348, 390–392, 424–426, 431 U.S. role, 302, 305–307, 325, 439, 445–446, 459, 515–517, 533–534, 540–541 Polish political situation and, 296, 548, 551 Polish position, 345, 428, 486, 488, 534, 594, 672–673 Provisional government policy, 310–311, 319–320 Public meetings, Oct. 16 and 22, 1956, 260–263 Refugees, 402, 427, 438, 535–539, 546 Austrian admission of, 301, 309–310, 326–327, 357, 362, 448, 457–458, 467, 533 Labor Service Organization enrollment, 491–493 President’s Committee for Hungarian Refugee Relief, 534n U.N. General Assembly Resolution 1007 (ES-II), 428–429 U.S. admission of, 417, 444, 494, 537–538, 651–652 U.S. aid for, 357, 362, 417, 429, 444, 448, 467, 533, 538–539 U.S. propaganda, 402, 417, 532 Western countries admission of, 327, 357, 417, 443–444, 458, 536–538 Yugoslav admission of, 467, 579–581, 651–652 Romanian role in, 454 Soviet bloc countries positions, 345 Soviet bloc escapee policies and, 397, 401 Soviet bloc political situations and, 296, 326, 332, 367, 399–400, 461, 487, 548, 551, 561–563 Soviet deportations, 439, 459–462, 484, 493n, 494 Soviet military intervention, 273, 280–286, 295, 320, 323, 329, 334, 354–355, 396n Hungarian position, 314 Reoccupation, 360, 371–372, 375–386, 418–419, 391 Suez crisis and, 363, 367, 370–371, 378, 399–400, 419–420 U.S. responses, 364, 396–398, 401 Yugoslav position, 376n Soviet position, 336–338, 342, 345, 388, 465 Troop withdrawal, 312, 323, 329n, 331, 336, 341–342, 345–351, 353, 358, 366–367 U.N. Special Committee report, 637 U.S. position, 272, 311, 345, 356–357 U.S. propaganda, 280, 401 Soviet-Soviet bloc relations and, 482–490 Soviet Union, international sanctions against, 403, 418, 439, 443–444, 466, 498, 525, 632 Soviet Union, U.S. sanctions against, 390, 394, 396, 398, 403, 418–419, 467, 504 Exchange programs, 396, 418, 443 Moscow Agricultural Fair, 396, 401–402, 443 Suez crisis and, 365, 388, 394, 397–399, 402, 404, 425, 439, 631–632 Turkish position, 444 U.N. General Assembly actions (see also Humanitarian aid above; U.N. observers and U.N. Special Committee below), 392, 427–429, 486, 497–498, 501, 534, 538, 543–544 Hungarian position, 422, 434, 500, 552, 631, 703–704 Indian position, 460, 641n Kádár government credentials, 402, 422, 433, 462, 496–499, 502–503, 544, 583, 642–644, 650n, 654–655 Kéthly appearance, 396–397, 401, 405, 417, 440, 444, 531–532, 544 Neutral countries abstention, 393–395, 398, 403–405, 417, 439–440 Prince Wan mission, 662, 679–681, 684, 696, 703 Resolution 1004 (ES-II), 393, 394n, 404, 417, 422, 429, 434, 466, 486, 662 Resolution 1005 (ES-II) (Five-power draft resolution), 422, 428, 662 Resolution 1006 (ES-II) (U.S. draft resolution), 423–425, 427–429 Resolution 1007 (ES-II) (Austrian draft resolution), 428–429, 538n Resolution 1008 (ES-II) (U.S. draft resolution), 429 Resolution 1127 (XI) (Cuban draft resolution), 460–461, 1127 Resolution 1128 (XI) (Asian draft resolution), 460–461, 486 Resolution 1130 (XI) (14-power draft resolution), 500–501 Resolution 1131 (XI) (U.S. draft resolution), 496–497, 502n, 503, 662 Resolution 1132 (XI), 552, 638, 661–662 Resolution 1133, 660–662 Soviet deportations, 460–461 Suez crisis and, 439, 493, 641 U.N. police force proposals, 391n, 402, 417, 631 U.S.-Hungarian relations, 658, 670 U.S. position, 463, 466, 534, 648–650 Yugoslav position, 534 U.N. General Assembly appeals (see also U.N. General Assembly actions below), 360–362, 389–390, 392–393, 638–645, 652–655 British position, 303–304, 306, 368, 638n, 639n U.N. observers, 352–353, 393, 397–398, 402–403, 422, 425, 429, 434, 460, 500 British position, 353, 543–545 Europe canvassing proposal (reword), 493, 496–497, 530 Hammarskjöld aides-mémoire to Hungary, 422, 429, 461, 493 Indian position, 503 Resolution 1130 (XI) (14-power draft resolution), 500–501 U.S. messages to Soviet Union, 425 U.S. position, 404, 438–439, 508 U.N. Security Council appeal, 297–298, 302, 315–316, 323, 355, 361–362, 371–373, 383–385, 388, 399 Australian position, 273n, 309, 376n British participation, 273, 292–293, 311 British position, 303–304, 308–309, 368–369 French participation, 273, 293, 308, 311 Letter proposal, 290–293, 309 Soviet position, 316, 388 Suez crisis and, 394 Tripartite discussions, 315–316 U.S. position, 273, 277, 307, 325, 345, 360–362, 368 Yugoslav participation, 292, 298, 361 U.N. Special Committee, 530, 543–544, 552, 643, 648, 650n, 655–656, 696, 703–704 Report, 637–638, 642–644, 652–655, 661, 679 Resolution 1132 (XI), 552, 638 U.S. complicity allegations, 324, 345n, 388, 436–438, 445, 473n, 481, 496, 531, 533, 556–558 Hungarian position, 460, 472, 494–495, 552 Indian position, 438 Kéthly testimony, 405, 440n, 471, 495 Labor Service Organization and, 492 Radio Free Europe analyses, 473–475, 520–522, 557–558 Refugee surveys (Operation Lookout), 481–482 Romanian position, 596 Soviet draft resolution, 508–509, 531, 545–546, 557 Soviet position, 512 U.N. position, 424–426 U.S. public opinion, 398 U.S. public statements, 436–438, 518–519, 532 Voice of America analyses, 460, 470–471, 476–479, 520–521 Western European allegations, 430, 435–437, 556–558 U.S. economic aid to Poland and, 407–408, 413 U.S. humanitarian aid, 345, 352, 364, 417, 467, 502, 571–572, 575 International Red Cross role, 279, 302, 314–315, 325–326, 398, 401, 545, 572–574, 577 U.S. propaganda, 280, 326, 350–352, 403 U.S. intelligence, 364 U.S. material support (see also U.S. complicity allegations above), 301–303, 311–312, 325, 362, 631 Asylum requests, 382–383, 396, 472–473 Mindszenty asylum, 379, 386–387, 394, 396, 433, 554–556, 657–660, 663–664, 682–683, 696 Romanian position, 456–457 U.S. propaganda (see also U.S. complicity allegations above), 262–263, 274–278, 280, 300–301, 310, 324–325, 357, 440, 462, 468 Deportations, 462 German Federal Republic position, 400 Humanitarian aid, 350–352, 403, 525 Mongol troops, 438 Movie footage, 420–421, 424, 426 Neutralist countries as targets, 398, 418, 426 Post-revolution, 522–525, 685 Refugees, 402, 417, 532 Russian Revolution photographs, 531 Soviet troops as target, 363, 401, 417, 462, 474 U.S. policy explanations, 506–507 White book, 398, 403, 417, 420, 493, 546 U.S. public statements, 272, 274–275, 278, 284–286, 297, 310, 317–318, 321, 350–352, 416, 431–432 Anniversary, 678 Complicity allegations, 436–438 Human Rights Day, 496 U.S.-Soviet relations and, 509–514 Western European reactions, 419, 423, 430 Yugoslav position, 296, 316, 345, 388, 396n, 438, 462, 488–489 Hungary (see also Hungarian revolution; Soviet bloc; Hungary and Hungarian subheadings under other subjects): Austrian State Treaty, 100 British economic aid to, 467 Economic situation, 12, 14, 17–19, 22, 25–27, 29, 30–31, 153–155, 238, 333, 359 Foreign policy, 241 France, relations with, 170 German Federal Republic economic aid to, 467 International economic organization membership, 450–451 Italy, relations with, 170 Kádár government (post-revolution) (see also Political situation below), 376n, 382–383, 389, 392, 419, 444, 461, 566–569, 637, 686 U.N. credentials, 402, 422, 433, 462, 496–499, 502–503, 544, 583, 642–644, 650n, 654–655 U.S. recognition question, 405, 432–433, 439, 446, 461, 583, 679–684, 696 Military capabilities, 17, 20–22 Neutrality, 264, 302, 305–307, 360n, 366, 368n, 431, 439, 467, 499 Austrian position, 353 Political situation (see also Kádár government above): Christianity, 262, 359 Communist Party, 13, 20, 25–28, 31 Destalinization and, 155–156, 240, 261 Farkas trial, 261–262 Geneva Conference and, 52 German Federal Republic rearmament and, 13–14, 22 Grosz trial, 159, 169 Kádár, influence of, 232–234 Liberalization, 13, 28, 31–33, 225, 232, 237–241, 248–250 Mindszenty trial, 147, 158–159, 262 Nagy, influence of, 232, 234–236, 249–250, 262, 284, 309 Nationalism, 13, 28–29, 261–262, 330 “New Course,” 13, 19–22, 29 People’s Patriotic Front (PPF), 234–236 Petófi Club, 223, 224–225, 237, 478 Popular resentment toward Communist regime, 14, 16–17, 19–20, 147 Post-revolution, 524, 569–571, 591–593 Poznań riots and, 225 Rajk rehabuitation, 147–148, 154–157, 169–170, 249 Rákosi, role of, 12–14, 20, 25–32, 147, 153–155, 168–170, 222–227, 231–241, 478 Soviet-Hungarian relations and, 25, 28–29 Soviet influence on, 13, 22, 29, 32, 154–155, 222–224, 234, 241, 249 Writers’ Congress, 154, 202 Yugoslav influence, 231n Yugoslav position, 248–250 Yugoslav-Soviet relations and, 52, 156 Soviet economic aid to, 333, 609–610 Soviet forces in (see also Hungarian revolution), 46–47, 101, 199, 202–203, 262–263, 649, 686 Soviet Union, relations with (see also Political situation above), 17, 22–23, 203, 242, 261–262, 330, 484–485, 515, 517, 568 Strategic importance of, 23 U.N. economic aid to, 499 U.N. membership, 81–82, 110, 200, 497 United States, relations with, 14–15, 206–207, 232, 239–240, 251n, 620–622, 658, 670, 692 Cultural exchanges, 467, 669–670, 679, 682, 686–690 Employee arrest incidents, 52–53, 147–148, 158, 162, 170 Hungarian position, 81, 162 Kádár government recognition question, 405, 432–433, 439, 446, 461, 583, 679–684 Kéthly action, 396–397, 401 Mindszenty asylum, 657–660, 682–683, 696 Nagy government, 373–374 Rajk trial, 147–148, 156–159, 169–170 Rákosi speech, May 18, 1956, 168–170 U.S. post-revolution sanctions, 396–397, 401, 497–499, 503 Yugoslav position, 250 U.S. economic aid to (see also U.S. humanitarian aid under Hungarian revolution; Western economic aid to below), 15, 333, 350, 431, 446–448, 499, 515, 517, 545 U.S. propaganda (see also U.S. complicity allegations under Hungarian revolution), 15–16, 100–101, 104–105, 148, 156, 227, 478, 571n Austrian position, 319 Post-revolution revolt, possible, 569–571, 591–593 Soviet position, 424n U.S. trade with, 127, 447–452 Yugoslavia, relations with, 34, 52, 155, 234, 242, 248, 250, 261–262 West, relations with, 14, 333, 467 Western economic aid to, 431, 439, 459, 467, 576–577 Iceland, 403 India (see also India and Indian subheadings under other subjects), 44–45, 104, 394–395, 440, 513, 537, 625 Indonesia, 404, 428, 460, 462n, 503n Intelligence Advisory Committee (IAC), 396n Interagency Committee on Agricultural Surplus Disposal, 526 Interdepartmental Escapee Committee, 89–95 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 447n, 450–451, 676 International Cooperation Administration (ICA), 89n, 90–94, 408, 538, 574 Poland, 468, 559–561, 582, 606–607, 615n, 633n International Coordinating Committee (COCOM). See Strategic controls under East-West trade. International Court of Justice (ICJ), 121 International Development Agency, 415 International Finance Corporation, 450–451 International Labour Organization (ILO), 544 International Monetary Fund (IMF), 451 International Peasant Union, 229 International Red Cross: Hungary, 309–310, 405, 417, 434, 440n, 443–444, 467n, 537–538 U.S. aid and, 279, 302, 314–315, 325–326, 398, 401, 545, 572–574, 577 Poland, 184–185, 406, 414–415 Iraq (see also Arab states), 394n Ireland, 422 Ismay, Baron Hastings Lionel, 443–444 Israel (see also Suez crisis), 456 Italy, 92, 140, 152, 170, 204, 444, 456 Hungarian revolution, 309, 362, 422, 428, 439, 444, 537, 639n Romania, relations with, 456 Iwaszkiewicz, Edward, 582 Jackson, C.D., 24, 463 Jackson, William H., 164, 189, 447, 479 Jacobs, Joseph E., 3, 39–41 Poland: Economic situation, 296 Political situation, 40, 42–45, 131n, 172–174, 185–188, 244–247, 547–551 United States, relations with, 42–43, 49–50, 131n, 168 U.S. economic aid to, 269n, 287–289, 293, 415–416, 441–443, 504n, 525 Janczewski, Zbigniew, 671 Jandrey, Fred W., 660, 699n, 701 Janza, Lt. Gen. Karoly, 309n Japan, 254n, 255 Jaroszek, Henry, 256, 448n, 698–699 Jedrychowski, Stefan, 257n Jerdaman, Jean, 437n Jernegan, John D., 554 Johnson, Charles E., 171n, 622n Johnson, Lyndon B., 424 Johnson, Richard G., 3 Johnson, U. Alexis, 3, 37–39, 51, 176–180, 259 Johnson, Valdemar N.L., 627n Joint Chiefs of Staff, 47–48, 215, 357n, 461–462 Joint Distribution Committee, 676 Jozwiak-Witold, Franciszek, 257n Justice, U.S. Department of, 89n, 538, 580 Kádár, János, 223, 225–226, 232–237, 278n, 282, 342 Post-revolution government, 376n, 382–383, 389, 392, 419, 461, 637 U.N. recognition appeal, 402, 422, 433, 462, 496–499, 502–503, 544, 583, 642–644, 650n, 654–655 U.S. recognition question, 405, 432–433, 439, 446, 461, 583, 679–684, 696 Kalijarvi, Thorsten V., 571–577, 617n, 619n Poland, 504n, 506, 541n, 558–561, 582, 589n, 606n, 610n, 630, 633–634 Karpinski, Zygmunt, 582 Kekkonen, Urho, 705 Kelsey, Warren A., 505, 529–533, 546 Hungary, 396, 401, 436–440, 490–499, 502–504, 508–509, 543–546 Kennedy, John F., 589–590, 695 Keppel, John, 481 Kéthly, Anna, 235n, 342, 353, 396–397, 401, 417, 440, 471, 495, 531, 544 Khan, Mohammed Mir, 403 Khrushchev, Nikita S., 36, 53, 69–70, 110n, 128, 254, 335, 706 Destalinization, 119, 163, 333 Hungary, 249, 370n, 376n Political situation, 36, 297, 333 Yugoslavia, 34, 37–38, 173, 242–243 King, Spenser Matthews, 15n Király, Maj. Gen. Béla, 544 Kirkpatrick, Ivone A., 304, 308 Kiss, Arpád, 223, 309n Klay, Andor, 437n Kleemola, Kauno, 705–706 Klieforth, Alexander A., 476n Kliszko, Zenon, 230n, 245, 253n Klosson, Boris, 170, 253–255, 259, 360, 502, 504, 543 Knowland, William F., 589n, 617 Kohn, Helene Clepcea, 600 Komor, Imre, 236 Kopacsi, Sandor, 703n Korbonski, Stefan, 109, 111–112 Korea, Republic of, 73 Korean war, 410 Kós, Péter, 313, 397 Kossa, István, 309n, 382 Kossuth, Louis, 262 Kostov, Traicho, 141–143, 332n Kotlicki, Henryk, 582, 619 Kovacs, Béla, 235n, 300–301, 324, 341–342, 353, 383–384, 398, 472–473 Kovács, István, 384n, 703n Kreisky, Bruno, 352, 373n Krekeler, Heinz L., 606 Kuznetsov, Vasiliy Vasiliyevich, 424n, 509–514, 534, 541 Labor Service Organization (LSO), 47n, 54, 56, 59–61, 63, 491–493, 586 Lacy, William S.B., 398 Lall, Arthur S., 403, 434, 544n Larson, Thomas B., 3 Latin America, 140, 144, 460, 537 Lay, James S., Jr., 53n, 85n, 121n, 128, 216–217, 354n, 584n Lazareanu, Alexandru, 338, 646, 665–668 League of Red Cross Societies, 11–12, 302 Lebanon, 440 Leddy, John M., 614n, 615n, 633n Leddy, Raymond, 582 Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich, 70 Less-developed countries (see also Near East): Soviet bloc trade with, 118 Soviet Union, relations with, 104–105, 116, 182–183 U.S. economic aid to, 119, 408 Leverich, Henry P., 286, 323n, 378, 386, 400, 402–403, 663, 685–690 Libya (see also Arab states), 394n Lightner, E. Allen, 2, 518n, 531 Lipski, Josef, 227n Lister, George T., 82–83, 85–88, 96n, 131n, 227n, 228, 553 Lleras Camargo, Alberto, 434, 544n Lloyd, Selwyn, 307–308 Lobel, Evzen, 332n Lodge, Henry Cabot, Jr., 23–25, 79n, 80, 114, 160, 209–210, 222, 514n, 669 Hungarian revolution, 424, 439, 460, 541n U.N. General Assembly actions, 391n, 392–393, 422, 427, 429, 500, 502n, 638–639, 641–642, 661–662 U.N. Security Council appeal, 273, 291, 308n, 315–316, 365, 368–369, 371–372, 381, 383, 388–389 Loga-Sowinski, Ignacy, 253n, 257n London, Artur, 332n Looram, Matthew, 641 Losonczy, Geza, 236–237, 342 Luce, Clare Booth, 390 Lybrand, Sgt. Henry, 157n Lychowski, Tadeusz, 684 Lyon, S.C., 634n MacArthur, Douglas, II, 72n, 435, 479–480 McCardle, Carl W., 130–140, 182n, 211n, 243n, 343n MacCormac, John, 233 McFadden, William A., 543 Machrowitz, Thaddeus M., 634 McKisson, Robert M., 81n, 366n, 373n, 529, 533, 703n Hungarian revolution, 282–286, 300–302, 310n, 322, 324–326, 360, 378, 396–397, 543–545, 555, 556n McLeod, R.W. Scott, 397 Macomber, William B., 115n, 181n, 435n Macone, A.J., 571n Malenkov, Georgiy Maksimilianovich, 70 Mansfield, Mike, 617 Marjai, Jozsef, 433 Mark, David, 581 Marosan, Gyorgy, 223, 225, 233, 235, 382 Marshall, John, 71 Marshall Plan, 408 Marton, Endra, 382–383 Masens, Vilis, 109–110, 114 Mates, Leo, 580–581 Matsch, Franz, 428 Mazur, Franciszek, 257n Meany, George, 166 Meeker, Leonard C., 281, 386 Mehta, G.L., 459n Melbourne, Roy M., 401 Meléter, Gen. Pál, 384n, 703n Menuhin, Yehudi, 687 Merchant, Livingston T., 4–5, 49, 72n, 106–108, 616, 620n, 705 Merrill, Frederick, 3 Meso, Imre, 223 Mészáros, Károly, 621n Meyer, Cord, Jr., 396–398, 436–437, 439, 473n Michalowski, 608–610, 619 Micolajczyk, Stanislaw, 494 Mićunović, Veljko, 248n, 376n Middle East. See Near East. Mikolajczyk, Stanislaw, 227–229 Mikoyan, Anastas Ivanovich, 34, 36, 223, 226, 243, 342 Millikan, Max F., 11 Minc, Hilary, 251–252 Mindszenty, József Cardinal, 147, 158–159, 262, 316, 359, 380, 631–632 Asylum, 379, 386–387, 394, 396, 433, 554–556, 657–660, 663–664, 682–683, 696 Mod, Peter, 704n Moghioros, Alexandru, 196, 645–647 Mollet, Guy, 400 Molnar, Erik, 309n Molotov, Vyacheslav Mikhailovich, 36, 66, 347–348 Morawski, Jerzy, 230, 257n Moscow Declaration, Nov. 21, 1957, 699–700, 702 Mouser, Grant E., 506n Mrozinski, Roman V., 170–171 Múnnich, Ferenc, 309n, 376n, 382 Murphy, Robert D., 182n, 294n, 323n, 432n, 459n, 481n, 620n, 621n, 642n, 658n, 699n Bulgaria, 138–141 Geneva Conference, 71 Hungarian revolution, 313–315, 364, 372–373, 383–384, 390n, 398–399, 435n, 461 Mindszenty asylum, 387, 554, 556n Refugees, 326–327, 580–581 U.N. General Assembly actions, 440n, 657, 660, 663–664 Hungary, 309n, 314–315, 401n, 433n, 462, 698n Poland, 96–97, 197n, 227–229, 256–258, 260n, 610n Soviet bloc, 71, 72n Nabokoff, Catherine, 340 Nagy, Imre, 225, 232, 234–236, 249–250, 353, 359, 373n, 377, 383 Hungarian economic policy, 25–27, 154, 239 Neutrality, 360n, 368n, 371–372 Political controls under, 153–154, 240 Rákosi, conflict with, 13, 20, 25–30, 32 Hungarian revolution, 262–264, 284, 300–301, 308n, 312, 361n, 363, 637 Soviet troop withdrawal, 283, 312, 323, 329n, 331, 336, 341–342, 345, 347, 350 Nanos, Maria, 600 National Intelligence Estimates (see also Special National Intelligence Estimates): NIE 10-55, 117n NIE 12-54, 62 NIE 12.5-55, 16–23 NIE 12-56, 115–118, 124 NIE 12-57, 578–579, 698 National Security Council: Actions: No. 724, 58 No. 1349-c, 84 No. 1426-b, 65 No. 1434, 80 No. 1530, 130, 190, 211, 215, 216 No. 1553, 167 No. 1575, 217 No. 1580, 215 No. 1623, 299 No. 1628, 359 No. 1671, 580 Documents: NSC 86/1, 89, 93–94, 149–151, 163–167 NSC 143, 48, 57 NSC 143/1, 58 NSC 143/2, 48n, 53–59, 63–64, 79–80 NSC 174, 4, 8, 10, 84–85, 121–128, 130, 190, 211–212, 216 NSC 5435, 56, 63 NSC 5435/1, 60 NSC 5501/1, 84–85, 124, 126, 211, 212 NSC 5505, 11 NSC 5505/1, 84–88, 128, 130 NSC 5523, 48 NSC 5524/1, 46–47 NSC 5601, 124, 468 NSC 5602, 119 NSC 5602/1, 130 NSC 5607, 357, 466–467, 625 NSC 5608, 190–194, 198–209, 211–212, 215, 217 NSC 5608/1, 215, 216–222, 356, 468, 623, 690–694 NSC 5616, 354–358 NSC 5616/2, 463–469, 497–499, 526–528, 541–542, 622, 691–693 NSC 5705/1, 622 NSC 5706, 579–580, 584–588 Hungarian revolution, 295–299, 358–359, 418–421 Meetings: 234th, Jan. 27, 1955, 11 251st, June 9, 1955, 33 254th, July 7, 1955, 46–47 258th, Sept. 8, 1955, 79–80 277th, Feb. 27, 1956, 119–120 280th, Mar. 22, 1956, 128–130 285th, May. 17, 1956, 163–167 290th, July 12, 1956, 212–216 297th, Sept. 20, 1956, 242 298th, Sept. 28, 1956, 242–243 301st, Oct. 26, 1956, 295–299 302d, Nov. 1, 1956, 358–359 303d, Nov. 8, 1956, 418–421 313th, Feb. 21, 1957, 579–580 316th, Mar. 14, 1957, 590–591 339th, Oct. 10, 1957, 668 National Security Council Intelligence Directives (NSCID) 13 and 14, 149n Poland, 295–299, 413, 668 Soviet bloc: U.S. economic aid to, 413 U.S. policy toward, 84–88, 128–130, 190–194, 212–221 U.S. propaganda, 65, 72, 79–80 Soviet bloc escapees, 24, 48, 53–59, 63–64, 163–167 Near East (see also Suez crisis): Eisenhower Doctrine, 562, 570 Soviet policy toward, 104–105, 113, 488 Nehru, Jawaharlal, 44–45 Hungarian revolution, 290n, 321–322, 394–395, 403–404, 419–420, 440, 459, 509 Nepal, 404 Netherlands, 407, 443–444, 536 Newbegin, Robert, 140n Nickels, Horace J., 481 Nixon, Richard M., 79–80, 212, 214, 394–395, 419–421, 534–539 Noble, Andrew, 49–50, 131–133, 138, 244n North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 191, 217, 222, 327, 399, 409, 443–444, 624–625, 677 Norway, 43, 444 Novak, Zenon, 594, 624 Novomesky, Laco, 332n Novotný, Antonín, 38–39 Nový, Vilém, 332n Nowak, Roman, 245 Nowak, Zenon, 257n Nuclear weapons. See Atomic weapons. Nunley, William T., 495–496 Nyerges, Anton, 3, 281, 520n, 591n Nykopp, Johan A., 705 Oatis, William N., 178 Ochab, Edward, 188, 230, 245–246, 254 Olympic Games, 403, 438, 443–444 Operations Coordinating Board (OCB), 4–10, 12n, 84–85, 121–128, 167, 171, 215, 690–698 Escapees, 89, 92–93, 149–152, 163 Hungary, 401, 479–480, 518, 645, 652–655, 692, 696 NSC 174, 84–85, 121–128 Poland, 221–222, 278, 504–506, 529n, 530, 622–630, 690–691, 694–696 U.S. propaganda, 72–79, 118, 126, 128, 171, 221–226 Volunteer Freedom Corps, 24n, 48, 53–64 Ordonneau, Pierre, 369 Organization for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC), 415 Paasikivi, Juho, 705 Page, Edward, Jr., 3, 343–344 Pakistan, 402–403, 417, 422 Palmer, Joseph, II, 160n Panama Canal, 403 Pate, Gen. Randolph McC., 461n Pauls, Rolf F., 326 Peaslee, Amos J., 216 Pedersen, Richard, 509 Perkins, George W., 3, 443–445 Peru, 385, 422 Phleger, Herman, 369n, 390n, 394, 433n, 459n Piasecki, Boleslaw, 132 Pinkus, Leo J., 270n Placa, Sylvia, 340 Poland: Atomic energy and weapons, 42, 674 Austrian State Treaty, 42 Bulgaria, 140 Canada, trade with, 407 Chinese People’s Republic, relations with, 550 Economic situation, 44, 88, 296, 298, 333, 359, 485 Gomulka government policy, 259, 266–268, 331, 547–548, 551, 623 U.S. economic aid and, 288, 590, 609, 633, 675–676 Poznań riots and, 185, 187–188, 266, 406, 410 Soviet control, 173, 246, 270, 407, 410, 609 France, relations with, 42–43, 407, 504, 530, 550 Geneva Conference, 45, 82–83 German Democratic Republic, relations with, 86, 367, 409, 530, 548, 674–675, 691 Boundary questions, 43, 45, 201, 246, 674 India, relations with, 44, 246, 550 International economic organization membership, 447n, 450–451, 676 Military capabilities, 44 Political situation, 44–45, 251, 296, 364, 485, 549, 553, 668 Anti-Communism, 548, 551, 623 Catholic Church, 86, 88, 504, 546–548, 551, 623, 626, 690 Destalinization and, 132, 163, 172, 188, 230–231, 246–247, 258, 271, 333, 412 Gomulka restoration, 230–231, 245, 252, 254, 266, 331 Gomulka speech, Oct. 20, 1956, 258, 270, 278–280, 287, 298 Hungarian political situation and, 568 Hungarian revolution and, 296, 548, 551 Liberalization, 43–44, 131–133, 172–174, 188, 244–247, 331, 367, 550, 590–591, 593–594, 623–624, 690–691 Nationalism, 50, 86, 230–231, 259, 271, 330, 354, 464 Natolin group, 609, 623–624 Romanian political situation and, 561–562 Soviet bloc political situation and, 267, 550, 579, 623 Soviet-Yugoslav relations and, 40, 42, 132, 173, 271 U.S. public statements, 265, 287, 317–318, 351–352 Writers’ Congress, 202 Yugoslav position, 488 Poznań riots, 181–189, 209–210, 224–225, 250–251, 258–259, 412 Economic situation and, 185, 187–188, 266, 406, 410 Liberalization and, 244, 246 U.N. discussion proposals, 189, 197–198, 210, 222, 227–229 U.S. complicity allegations, 198, 209–210, 243n, 258, 270 U.S. economic aid offers and, 182–185, 269 U.S. propaganda and, 182–183, 189, 221–222, 357 U.S. public statements, 182, 189, 247–248 Yugoslav position, 194–195, 296 Repatriation program, 82, 96–97, 173 Soviet economic aid to, 267–268, 333, 442–443, 591, 609 Soviet forces in (see also Soviet military intervention below), 245, 254, 257, 331, 409, 411, 532, 550, 605 Polish position, 355, 409, 412, 464 U.S. position, 46–47, 173, 199, 202–203 Soviet military intervention, possible, 259–260, 268, 273, 280, 337–338, 486, 579 Soviet Union, relations with, 43–44, 259, 367, 408–412, 486, 548, 551, 594 Economic relations, 407, 410–411, 609 Gomulka appointment and, 231, 253–255, 259 Liberalization and, 245–247, 255–256, 258 Polish-German Federal Republic relations and, 367, 548, 551 Polish position, 50, 168, 288, 331, 355, 412, 464 Popular antipathy, 254, 259, 330, 464, 485, 548, 623 Soviet-Yugoslav relations and, 39–40, 45 U.S. position, 131–134, 259–260, 550, 623 United Kingdom, relations with, 42–43, 407, 530, 550, 691 United States, relations with (see also U.S. subheadings below, 42, 49–50, 88, 206–207, 251, 356, 466, 550, 626–627, 633, 697 Cultural exchanges, 137–138, 288–289, 414–416, 466, 629–630, 676, 700 Election observation, 251, 407 German Democratic Republic-Polish relations and, 43, 86 Information exchange, 135–137, 357, 411 Moscow Declaration and, 699–700, 702 Official visits, 626, 671–678 Outstanding U.S. claims, 411, 452, 624, 627, 633, 698 Polish émigrés, 82, 86, 96–97 Polish position, 168, 288, 700–702 Private U.S. aid, 414, 441, 628 Republic of China ship interceptions, 93n U.S. citizens, 411 U.S. economic aid to, 333, 355, 406–416, 446, 505–506, 528–529, 624, 631, 633–636 Amount of, 558–561, 605–610, 614–618, 694–695 Canadian position, 616, 618–620, 630 Congressional opinion, 589–590 Export-Import Bank loans, 441, 449, 615, 630, 633, 635 “Friendly nation” determination, 527, 529–530, 542, 593, 673, 700 German Federal Republic role in, 528, 606–607, 611, 615 Gomulka appointment and, 259–260, 268–270, 287, 407 Moscow Declaration and, 700 NSC 5616/2, 463–469, 497–499, 526–528, 541–542 Polish political situation and, 590, 611–614 Polish position, 257, 288–289, 407, 441–443, 494, 675 Polish-Soviet relations and, 408–413, 609, 613 Poznań riots and, 182–185, 269, 406 Publicity, 293–294, 408, 605 Soviet bloc political situations and, 613–614 Soviet position, 612–614 Strategic trade controls and, 442, 684–685 Surplus agricultural commodities, 406–407, 441–442, 448–449, 452n, 464, 469, 504, 526–529, 542, 546, 593n, 626 U.S.-Polish talks, 558, 561, 582, 684–685, 701 U.S. military aid to, 469 U.S. policy toward, 86, 131–134, 268, 622–630 U.S. propaganda, 86–88, 133–135, 270–271, 278–280, 404, 468, 553, 625, 628–629, 634–636 Polish position, 82, 118, 675 U.S. trade relations with (see also East-West trade), 356, 414, 466, 624 Most-favored nation treatment, 447n, 449, 628, 634n, 676, 684–685, 695–696 Polish position, 413, 416, 676, 684–685 Strategic trade controls and, 447n, 450, 464 Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation, 450–452 Warsaw Pact membership, 408, 623 West, relations with, 131–132, 138, 623 West, trade with, 45, 333, 355, 407, 464, 528, 530, 551, 594, 624, 691, 700 Western economic aid to, 407, 415, 551, 594, 691 Yugoslavia, relations with, 35, 246, 486, 550, 594 Polish National Democratic Committee, 227–229 Popiel, Karol, 227–229 Popović, Koća, 292n Portugal, 444 Potrubach, M.M., 509, 514 Preoteasa, Grigore, 98, 102, 103n, 195, 595–597, 598–599, 601–604 President’s Committee for Hungarian Refugee Relief, 534n Prica, Srdja, 140–141, 534n Prochnow, Herbert V., 182n, 269n, 447–452 Propaganda. See under Soviet bloc and specific countries. Protitch, Dragon, 501 Psychological warfare. See Propaganda headings under other subjects. Puhan, Alfred, 3 Raczkowski, Stanislaw, 582 Radford, Adm. Arthur M., 297, 421, 461–462 Radhakrishman, 176 Radio Free Europe (RFE), 3, 68, 123, 344 Hungarian revolution, 301, 436–437, 493 Soviet troops as target, 363, 401, 417, 474 U.S. complicity allegations, 319, 424, 436–437, 460, 472–475, 479–480, 495–496, 508, 518–522, 552, 557–558 Hungary, 591–592 Poland, 82, 134–135, 675 Romania, 103n, 106–107, 195 Radio Liberation, 3, 151, 343–344 Radkiewicz, Stanislaw, 173 Rajk, Laszlo, 147–148, 154–158, 169–170, 249 Rákosi, Mátyás, 13–15, 20, 25–30, 32, 148, 156, 168–170 Hungarian economic situation, 14, 153, 437 Influence of, 14, 20, 16–17, 20, 52, 147, 153–156, 205 Nagy, conflict with, 13, 20, 25–30, 32 Resignation of, 226–230, 233–241, 478 Ramsbotham, Peter E., 369 Randall, Clarence B., 2–3, 447, 452n, 506n Rapacki, Adam, 245, 287n, 504n, 671–677, 700, 703n Ravndal, C.M., 99, 105, 156–157, 374 Hungary: Political situation, 147, 153–155, 226–230 United States, relations with, 100–101, 104–105, 147–148, 156–159, 162, 169–170, 470, 476 Recknagel, Thomas M., 481 Refugees. See Soviet bloc escapees and political exiles. Reinstein, Jacques J., 606 Revey, E. Louis, 277–278, 476n Hungarian revolution, 300, 322, 325, 360, 362, 396, 401, 436, 491, 495, 502, 543 Refugees, 492 U.S. complicity allegations, 323 U.S. propaganda, 301–302, 529–532 Richards, Arthur L., 167, 189n, 221n, 504n, 505n, 642n Richards, James P., 529n Riddleberger, James W., 3, 36, 298, 534n Ritzau, Col. Erik W., 529, 543 Roberts, Chalmers, 532 Robertson, Walter S., 51, 85n Rockefeller, Nelson A., 65–66, 84–85, 128n Rockefeller Foundation, 676 Rogers, John T., 153n, 231n, 285–286, 323n, 631–632, 669n Rogers, William P., 534–535, 537 Rokossovskiy, Konstantin, 210, 253n, 257, 411, 551, 623 Romania, 456 Atomic energy, 103n Disarmament, 174, 647 Economic situation, 563, 692 Political situation, 106, 332, 367, 454–455, 461–462, 487, 561–564, 692 Soviet forces in, 46–47, 101, 199, 202–203, 367 Soviet Union, relations with, 34, 99, 106, 203, 564, 667–668 U.N. membership, 102, 110, 200 United Kingdom, relations with, 456 United States, relations with, 106–107, 175, 206–207, 251n, 338–340, 411, 563, 595–604, 645–647, 665–666 Agricultural information exchanges, 195–196, 453, 645, 665, 692 Cultural exchanges, 453–456, 563–565, 599, 601–602, 645, 692 Hungarian revolution and, 454, 562, 598–599 Outstanding U.S. claims, 411, 601–602, 668, 698 Romanian position, 98–99, 103, 106, 175, 453–454, 456, 601–604, 645–647, 666–668 Soviet position, 103 Trade relations, 102, 103n, 106–109, 175, 453–455, 564, 596, 602, 645, 665–667 U.S. propaganda, 103n, 106–107, 109, 195–196, 411, 646, 666, 668 Yugoslavia, relations with, 34–35, 194 Ronai, Sandor, 382 Rountree, William M., 309, 391n Rusk, Dean, 502 Salajan, Col. Gen. Leotin, 196 Salt, Barbara, 543n, 544n Samuelli, Nora, 340 Satterthwaite, Livingston, 53n Saudi Arabia (see also Arab states), 394n Saunders, William, 501 Savage, Carlton, 259 Scandinavia, 544 Schaaf, Col. Oscar R., 277, 279 Hungarian revolution, 300, 322, 324–325, 359, 362, 395, 400, 436, 490, 495 Refugees, 301, 492 U.N. General Assembly actions, 361, 439, 497–499 U.S. complicity allegations, 495–496 U.S. propaganda, 302, 438 Sebald, William Joseph, 139–140 Segall, Edward E., 3 Sekaninova, Gertruda, 176 Serov, Gen., 384n Shawcross, Hartley, 316 Shehu, Mehmut, 205 Shepilov, Dmitrii Trofimovich, 337 Sherer, Albert W., 37n, 698n Sidzikauskas, Vaclovas, 109, 111 Siegfried, Sgt. Jennings, 157n Sik, 28, 162, 284 Simon, Lajos, 261 Široký, Viliam, 176, 525 Sisco, J.J., 533n, 642n, 703 Siscoe, Frank G., 277–279 Slavik, Juraj, 109 Smith, Gen. Dale O., 24 Sobolev, Arkady N., 316, 371–372, 388, 392 Sobotka, C.J., 651n Sokolovsky, Vasili Danilovich, 370, 401n Soldatić, 248–250 Soviet bloc (see also Albania; Bulgaria; Czechoslovakia; East-West contacts; East-West trade; Germany, Democratic Republic of; Hungary; Poland; Romania; Soviet Union): British propaganda, 532 Economic situations, 73, 105, 117–118, 122, 199–201, 267, 332–333 German Federal Republic, relations with, 41 Mutual security pacts within (see also Warsaw Pact), 203 Nationalism (see also Political situations below), 112, 192–193, 200–201, 219 Polish position, 50 Soviet acceptance of, 342, 356, 358–359, 366, 465 Soviet measures against, 203–204, 242, 334, 578 U.S. position, 114, 116, 122, 124, 171, 191–192, 200, 204, 219, 446–447, 464, 693 Neutrality, 41, 302, 305–307 Polish position, 44–45 Political situations (see also Nationalism above), 73, 105, 113, 116–117, 123, 200, 217–218 Destalinization and, 192–194, 201–202, 218–219, 221–222 Hungarian revolution and, 332 Polish political situation and, 267, 550, 579, 623 Soviet-Yugoslav relations and, 193–194, 201–202, 205, 211, 219 U.S. economic aid to Poland and, 613–614 Yugoslav independence and, 205, 219 Soviet domination of (see also Political situations above), 8, 40, 115, 122–123, 127–128, 199, 202–203, 210 Geneva Conference discussion of, 46–47, 49, 71, 74, 100, 110–113, 124–125, 127, 193, 219–220 German reunification and, 125, 193, 219–220, 578 U.S. position (see also U.S. propaganda below), 66–67, 71, 112, 115–116, 122, 129, 191–192, 199, 218–222 Soviet economic aid to, 334 Soviet forces in, 334–335, 488 Soviet policy toward, 2–3, 35–36, 334 Soviet Union, relations with (see also Political situations and Soviet domination of above), 52n, 482–490 Destalinization and, 201–202, 483–484, 487, 568, 578 Soviet-Yugoslav relations and, 192–193, 201–202, 219, 484 U.N. membership, 114, 125–126 U.S. citizens imprisoned in, 121 U.S. economic aid to (see also U.S trade with below), 3, 105, 119–121, 208, 212, 635–636, 695 U.S. policy toward (see also East-West contacts; U.S. propaganda below), 84–88, 128–130, 206–207, 211–212, 243–244, 358, 532, 690–698 Destalinization and, 167, 170–171 Satellite detachment proposal, 4–11, 410 U.S. propaganda (see also under specific countries), 2–3, 84–85, 121, 123, 129, 208–209, 227, 243n, 244, 343–344 Destalinization and, 171 East-West contacts, 127 Economic passive resistance, 105, 122 Free Europe balloon operation, 98, 118, 319 Geneva Conference and, 53, 65–70, 72–79, 100–101 Hungarian revolution, U.S. reactions to, 506–507 Repatriation programs, 95, 121, 149 Soviet aid to less-developed countries and, 104–105, 182–183 Soviet bloc countries positions, 123 Soviet bloc escapees, 95, 121, 149–150, 206, 585, 588 U.S. economic aid to Poland, 634–636 U.S. trade with. See East-West trade; U.S. economic aid to above. Warsaw Pact, 33–34 West, relations with. See East-West contacts; East-West trade. Soviet bloc escapees and political exiles (see also Labor Service Organization; Refugees under Hungarian revolution; Volunteer Freedom Corps): Africa, 144 Alien Enlistment Program, 56, 62, 94, 150, 586 Assembly of Captive European Nations (ACEN), 109–114, 124, 205–206, 248 Austrian State Treaty and, 90, 149 Chiefs of Mission Conference, 3 Destalinization and, 152 Far East, 94, 150, 587 Refugee Relief Act, 91, 149–150, 152 Repatriation programs, 82, 111–112, 121, 149, 160n, 163–166, 585, 587 Polish position, 96–97 Soviet anti-emigration campaign, 151 Soviet bloc propaganda, 89–90, 151 Soviet escapees, U.S. assistance to, 93, 150 U.S. admission of, 91, 93, 114, 149, 397, 586 U.S. aid for, 111–113, 123–124, 150, 586, 588 U.S. propaganda, 95, 121, 149–150, 206, 585, 588 Western countries admission of, 584–586, 588 Yugoslavia, 92–93, 150, 152, 587–588 Soviet Union (see also Soviet bloc; Soviet Union and Soviet subheadings under other subjects), 35–36, 49–50, 100, 104n, 128, 132, 254n, 255, 443–444, 705–706 Destalinization (see also German Federal Republic and Yugoslavia: Soviet Union, relations with), 119, 152, 154–155, 160, 167, 170–171, 179, 333 Hungarian political situation and, 155–156, 239–240, 261, 333, 568 Polish political situation and, 132, 163, 172, 188, 230–231, 246–247, 258, 271, 333, 412 Soviet bloc political situations and, 192–194, 201–202, 219, 225 Soviet-Soviet bloc relations and, 201–202, 483–484, 487, 568, 578 U.S. propaganda, 156–157, 473–474, 478, 635 Political situation (see also Destalinization above), 36, 132, 255, 297, 321–322, 329, 336, 482–483, 487 Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party. See Destalinization above. United States, relations with, 93n, 251n, 328, 347–348, 398, 509–510, 513 Hungarian revolution and, 390, 394, 396, 398, 401–403, 418, 439, 443–444 Spain, 309, 631 Sparkman, John, 617, 634 Spasowski, Romuald, 96–97, 256–258, 610n, 615n, 619, 671, 676n, 699–702 Special Committee on Soviet and Related Problems: Hungarian revolution, 277–278, 300–303, 322–326, 359–363, 395–398, 400–404, 416–418, 436–440, 490–495, 502–504, 508–509, 530–533, 543–546 Poland, 221–222, 494, 504, 529–530, 546 Special National Intelligence Estimates (see also National Intelligence Estimates): SNIE 12-2-56, 330–335 SNIE 12-3-56, 482–490 Special Working Group on Stalinism, 170–171 Spender, Percy, 273n Sprecher, Daniel, 565n Spychalski, Marian, 230n, 253n Squire, Christopher A., 520n, 524n Staats, Elmer B., 6, 8n, 85n, 121n, 506, 526n Stalin, Iosif Vissarionovich (see also Destalinization under Soviet Union), 36, 70, 142, 203, 494 Starr, Harold, 183n Stassen, Harold E., 165–166, 298–299, 305–306, 505 Stelle, Charles C., 259 Stephens, Oren M., 277, 300, 322, 360, 363, 395, 436, 490 Stevens, Francis B., 10, 12n, 106n, 108n, 109, 138n, 170, 211n, 227n Stevenson, Adlai, 243, 248, 474 Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., 3 Stoica, Chivu, 98–99, 102, 196, 596, 598, 600–601 Strauss, Adm. Lewis L., 165–166 Streibert, Theodore C., 66n, 72n, 76n, 343n, 436 Sudan (see also Arab states), 394n Suez crisis (see also under Hungarian revolution), 329–330, 346, 364, 399–400, 421 Sukselainen, V.J., 706 Suslov, Mikhail Andreyevich, 342 Sutterlin, James S., 251n, 289n, 386, 491, 494, 554n, 620n, 657n, 685n Sweden, 43, 444, 459 Swiatlo, Jozef, 87 Switzerland, 459 Syria (see also Arab states), 394n, 420 Szabá, János, 361n, 371–372, 389, 422 Szúcs, Col. Miklás, 384n Tardos, Tibor, 478 Taylor, Lt. Col. Kenneth G., 595 Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D., 461n, 535 Thayer, Robert E., 3, 174, 194–195 Romania, 102, 561–563 United States, relations with, 98–99, 102–103, 106, 108–109, 175, 194–197, 338n, 453–457, 563–565, 595–604, 645–647, 665–668 Thompson, Llewellyn E., 3, 49 Hungarian revolution, 319, 352–354, 430–432, 439, 445, 446n, 516n, 534n, 535 Thompson, Tyler, 457n Thomson, David R., 3 Tiedtke, Fred, 158, 169–170 Tildy, Zoltán, 341–342, 353, 377 Timmons, Benson E.L., 3 Tito, Josip Broz (see also Yugoslavia), 143, 147n, 202, 205 Hungary, 242, 248, 292n, 376n, 462, 489 Soviet Union, 52, 101n, 192, 242–243, 248, 488–489 Titoism. See Nationalism headings under individual countries. Todd, Col. J.C., 620n Torbert, Horace G., Jr., 326n, 457n Treasury, U.S. Department of the, 207n, 208n, 211–213, 505, 627, 633 Treaty of Bled, Aug. 9, 1954, 1 Tresize, Philip H., 259, 266–268 Trimble, William C., 399–400 Trivers, Howard, 85, 170, 294n, 366n, 593n, 610n Hungarian revolution, 300–301, 322, 360, 396–397, 400, 491, 495, 498, 502, 508, 543 Poland, 251–252, 259, 277–280, 504, 506 Trueheart, William C., 3 Tuck, William Hallam, 534n Tunisia, 552, 637 Turchányi, Egon, 386–387 Turkey, 1, 35, 140 Twining, Gen. Nathan F., 194, 461n, 462 United Kingdom (see also U.N. General Assembly appeals and U.N. Security Council appeals under Hungarian revolution; Suez crisis; British, Tripartite, and United Kingdom subheadings under other subjects), 46, 50, 127–128, 140, 444, 537 Poland, 42–43, 131–132, 138, 210, 251, 407, 530, 550, 691 United Nations (see also U.N. subheadings under Hungarian revolution): Albanian membership, 110, 200 Bulgarian membership, 110, 139, 141–143, 200 Chinese People’s Republic membership, 36, 497, 644 Disarmament Subcommittee, 73 Hungarian membership, 81–82, 110, 200, 497 Poland, 189, 197–198, 210, 222, 227–229, 260, 273, 626 Romanian membership, 102, 110, 200 Soviet bloc countries membership, 114, 125–126 Uruguay, 552, 637 U.S. Escapee Program (USEP), 90–95, 149–151 U.S. Information Agency, 68, 72n, 89n, 90, 95, 182–183, 182–183, 343n, 532 Czechoslovakia, 179 Hungary, 224, 241, 278, 301, 310, 420, 424, 492, 506–507, 518n, 531, 533, 571 Poland, 137, 222, 628 Valdes, Philip H., 481 Vanter, Leonhard, 109 Vatican, 554, 657, 659, 663–664 Vedeler, Harold C., 3 Vejvoda, Ivo, 38–39, 109–111 Visoianu, Constantin, 109–111 Voice of America (VOA), 2–3, 15–16, 123, 151, 243n, 244 Czechoslovakia, 51 Hungary, 275–276, 323, 375, 591 U.S. complicity allegations, 424n, 436–437, 460, 470–472, 476–479, 520–521, 533, 552 Poland, 82, 134–135, 553 Romania, 103n, 106–107, 195, 646 Volunteer Freedom Corps (VFC), 23–24, 47–48, 53–64, 59, 160–161 British involvement, 24, 48, 54–55, 62 Geneva Conference and, 55, 62, 79, 160 German Federal Republic involvement, 54, 59, 62–64, 79–80, 161 Von Fieandt, Rainer, 706 Voorhees, Tracy S., 492, 534, 539 Vosahlo, Gen., 176 Wadsworth, James J., 429, 501, 704n Wailes, Edward T., 349n Hungarian revolution, 375–386, 472–473, 520–522, 555–556 Hungary, 515–517, 565–571 United States, relations with, 373n, 432–433, 503, 583, 681 Wainhouse, David W., 3 Walker, E. Ronald, 376n Wallinger, Geoffrey A., 353 Walmsley, Walter N., Jr., 292n, 459n, 543n, 544n, 639–641, 650 Walter, Francis E., 538 Wan Waithaiakon, Prince, 662, 679–681, 684, 696, 703n Warsaw Pact (see also Soviet bloc; Soviet Union), 33–36, 41, 191, 199–200, 217, 408–409, 623 Hungarian revolution and, 316, 335–337, 346, 355, 366, 373, 388, 465 Washburn, Abbott, 470–471, 476 Waugh, Samuel C., 633n Weeks, Sinclair, 452n Wenmohs, John R., 441 White, Lincoln, 183n, 184, 189n, 378 Whitman, Ann C., 534n Wilcox, Francis O., 197–198, 210, 514n, 533n, 642–645, 660 Wiley, Alexander, 634 Williams, Manning H., 693 Williamson, Francis G., 400, 436 Wilson, Charles E., 165–166, 213 Winiewicz, 49–50, 132, 168, 287–289, 293–294, 441–443 Wyszynski, Stefan Cardinal, 411, 414, 548, 551, 668 Yalta Conference, 632 Yemen (see also Arab states), 394n Young, Kenneth T., 608–610 Yugoslavia: Albania, relations with, 204 Balkan Pact, 1, 35 Bulgaria, 34–35, 140, 143 Czechoslovakia, relations with, 34 Escapees from, 92–93, 150, 587–588 German Democratic Republic, relations with, 691 Hungary, relations with, 34, 52, 155, 234, 242, 248, 261–262 Poland, relations with, 35, 230, 246 Romania, relations with, 34–35 Soviet bloc escapees in, 92, 152, 467, 651–652 Soviet Union, relations with (see also Nationalism under Soviet bloc), 1, 34, 41, 92, 112, 202–203, 205, 242–243, 248, 262–262 Bulgarian reactions, 143 Chinese People’s Republic position, 36 Czech reactions to, 37–38 French position, 40 Hungarian reactions, 100 Polish political situation, 40, 42, 132, 173, 271 Polish reactions, 40–41 Soviet bloc political situations, effects on, 73, 122, 192–193–194, 201–202, 205, 211, 218–222 Soviet-Soviet bloc relations and, 192–193, 201–202, 218–219, 484 U.S. position, 211 Western Communist parties, effects on, 36 Yugoslav position, 38 United States, relations with, 205, 271, 408, 462 West, relations with, 205 Zador, Tibor, 313–315 Zhukov, Marshal Georgiy Konstantinovich, 70, 254, 255n, 297, 333, 335 Hungarian revolution, 336–338, 346–349, 370, 401n, 462, 536 U.S.-Soviet relations, 347–348, 401n Zorthian, Barry, 270, 274, 276n